#+title: Sb4


%%% parte 4


TEXT 6



yad ādiṣṭaṁ bhagavatā

śivenādhokṣajena ca

tad gṛheṣu prasaktānāṁ

prāyaśaḥ kṣapitaṁ prabho

SYNONYMS



yat-what; ādiṣṭam-was instructed; bhagavatā-by the exalted personality; śivena-Lord Śiva; adhokṣajena-by Lord Viṣṇu; ca-also; tat-that; gṛheṣu-to family affairs; prasaktānām-by us who were too much attached; prāyaśaḥ-almost; kṣapitam-forgotten; prabho-O master.





O master, may we inform you that because of our being overly attached to family affairs, we almost forgot the instructions we received from Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu.





Remaining in family life is a kind of concession for sense enjoyment. One should know that sense enjoyment is not required, but one has to accept sense enjoyment inasmuch as one has to live. As confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.10): kāmasya nendriya-prītiḥ. One has to become a gosvāmī and control his senses. One should not simply use his senses for sense gratification; rather, the senses should be employed just as much as required for maintaining body and soul together. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī recommends: anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. One should not be attached to sense objects, but should accept sense enjoyment as much as required, no more. If one wishes to enjoy the senses more than required, he becomes attached to family life, which means bondage. All the Pracetās admitted their fault in remaining in household life.





TEXT 7



tan naḥ pradyotayādhyātma-

jñānaṁ tattvārtha-darśanam

yenāñjasā tariṣyāmo

dustaraṁ bhava-sāgaram

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; naḥ-for us; pradyotaya-kindly awaken; adhyātma-transcendental; jñānam-knowledge; tattva-Absolute Truth; artha-for the purpose of; darśanam-philosophy; yena-by which; añjasā-easily; tariṣyāmaḥ-we can cross over; dustaram-formidable; bhava-sāgaram-the ocean of nescience.





Dear master, kindly enlighten us in transcendental knowledge, which may act as a torchlight by which we may cross the dark nescience of material existence.





The Pracetās requested Nārada to enlighten them in transcendental knowledge. Generally when a common man meets a saintly person, he wishes to get some material benediction. However, the Pracetās were not interested in material benefit, for they had enjoyed all this sufficiently. Nor did they want the fulfillment of their material desires. They were simply interested in crossing the ocean of nescience. Everyone should be interested in getting out of these material clutches. Everyone should approach a saintly person in order to be enlightened in this connection. One should not bother a saintly person to get blessings for material enjoyment. Generally, householders receive saintly persons to get their blessings, but their real aim is to become happy in the material world. Asking such material benedictions is not recommended in the śāstras.





TEXT 8



maitreya uvāca

iti pracetasāṁ pṛṣṭo

bhagavān nārado muniḥ

bhagavaty uttama-śloka

āviṣṭātmābravīn nṛpān

SYNONYMS



maitreyaḥ uvāca-Maitreya said; iti-thus; pracetasām-by the Pracetās; pṛṣṭaḥ-being asked; bhagavān-the great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nāradaḥ-Nārada; muniḥ-very thoughtful; bhagavati-in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-śloke-possessing excellent renown; āviṣṭa-absorbed; ātmā-whose mind; abravīt-replied; nṛpān-to the Kings.





The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, being thus petitioned by the Pracetās, the supreme devotee Nārada, who is always absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, began to reply.





In this verse bhagavān nāradaḥ indicates that Nārada is always absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhagavaty uttama-śloka āviṣṭātmā. Nārada has no other business than thinking of Kṛṣṇa, talking of Kṛṣṇa and preaching about Kṛṣṇa; therefore he is sometimes called bhagavān. Bhagavān means "one who possesses all opulences." When a person possesses Bhagavān within his heart, he is also sometimes called bhagavān. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura said, sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ: in every śāstra the spiritual master is accepted directly as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This does not mean that the spiritual master or a saintly person like Nārada has actually become the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but he is accepted in this way because he possesses the Supreme Personality of Godhead within his heart constantly. As described here (āviṣṭātmā), when one is simply absorbed in the thought of Kṛṣṇa, one is also called bhagavān. Bhagavān possesses all opulence. If one possesses Bhagavān within his heart always, does he not automatically possess all opulence also? In that sense a great devotee like Nārada can be called bhagavān. However, we cannot tolerate when a rascal or imposter is called bhagavān. One must possess either all opulences or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān, who possesses all opulences.





TEXT 9



nārada uvāca

taj janma tāni karmāṇi

tad āyus tan mano vacaḥ

nṛṇāṁ yena hi viśvātmā

sevyate harir īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



nāradaḥ uvāca-Nārada said; tat janma-that birth; tāni-those; karmāṇi-fruitive activities; tat-that; āyuḥ-span of life; tat-that; manaḥ-mind; vacaḥ-words; nṛṇām-of human beings; yena-by which; hi-certainly; viśva-ātmā-the Supersoul; sevyate-is served; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller.





The great sage Nārada said: When a living entity is born to engage in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the supreme controller, his birth, all his fruitive activities, his life-span, his mind and his words are all factually perfect.





In this verse the word nṛṇām is very important. There are many other births besides human birth, but Nārada Muni is herein especially speaking of human birth. Among human beings there are different types of men. Of these, those who are advanced in spiritual consciousness, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, are called Āryans. Among Āryans, one who engages in the devotional service of the Lord is most successful in life. The word nṛṇām indicates that lower animals are not expected to engage in the devotional service of the Lord. But in perfect human society everyone should engage in the devotional service of the Lord. It does not matter whether one is born poor or rich, black or white. There may be so many material distinctions for one who takes birth in human society, but everyone should engage in the Lord's devotional service. At the present moment civilized nations have given up God consciousness for economic development. They are actually no longer interested in advancing in God consciousness. Formerly their forefathers were engaged in executing religious principles. Whether one is Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, Jewish or whatever, everyone has some religious institution. Real religion, however, means becoming God conscious. It is particularly mentioned herein that birth is successful if an interest in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is taken. Activity is successful if it results in serving the Lord. Philosophical speculation or mental speculation is successful when engaged in understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The senses are worth possessing when engaged in the service of the Lord. Actually, devotional service means engaging the senses in the service of the Lord. At the present moment our senses are not purified; therefore our senses are engaged in the service of society, friendship, love, politics, sociology and so on. However, when the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, one attains bhakti, or devotional service. In the next verse these matters will be more clearly explained.



When one great devotee of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw the Lord, he said that all his desires were fulfilled. He said, "Today everything is auspicious. Today my birthplace and neighborhood are completely glorified. Today my senses, from my eyes down to my toes, are fortunate. Today my life is successful because I have been able to see the lotus feet that are worshiped by the goddess of fortune."





TEXT 10



kiṁ janmabhis tribhir veha

śaukra-sāvitra-yājñikaiḥ

karmabhir vā trayī-proktaiḥ

puṁso 'pi vibudhāyuṣā

SYNONYMS



kim-what is the use; janmabhiḥ-of births; tribhiḥ-three; vā-or; iha-in this world; śaukra-by semen; sāvitra-by initiation; yājñikaiḥ-by becoming a perfect brāhmaṇa; karmabhiḥ-by activities; vā-or; trayī-in the Vedas; proktaiḥ-instructed; puṁsaḥ-of a human being; api-even; vibudha-of the demigods; āyuṣā-with a duration of life.





A civilized human being has three kinds of births. The first birth is by a pure father and mother, and this birth is called birth by semen. The next birth takes place when one is initiated by the spiritual master, and this birth is called sāvitra. The third birth, called yājñika, takes place when one is given the opportunity to worship Lord Viṣṇu. Despite the opportunities for attaining such births, even if one gets the life-span of a demigod, if one does not actually engage in the service of the Lord, everything is useless. Similarly, one's activities may be mundane or spiritual, but they are useless if they are not meant for satisfying the Lord.





The word śaukra janma means "taking birth by seminal discharge." Animals can take their birth in this way too. However, a human being can be reformed from the śaukra janma, as recommended in the Vedic civilization. Before the birth takes place, or before father and mother unite, there is a ceremony called garbhādhāna-saṁskāra, which must be adopted. This garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is especially recommended for higher castes, especially the brāhmaṇa caste. It is said in the śāstras that if the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is not practiced among the higher castes, the entire family becomes śūdra. It is also stated that in this age of Kali, everyone is śūdra due to the absence of the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra. This is the Vedic system. According to the pāñcarātrika system, however, even though everyone is a śūdra due to the absence of the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra, if a person has but a little tendency to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, he should be given the chance to elevate himself to the transcendental platform of devotional service. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement adopts this pāñcarātrika-vidhi, as advised by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, who says:



yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāti

kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena

dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām





"As bell metal, when mixed with mercury, is transformed to gold, a person, even though not golden pure, can be transformed into a brāhmaṇa, or dvija, simply by the initiation process." (Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 2.12) Thus if one is initiated by a proper person, he can be accepted as twice-born immediately. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we therefore offer the student his first initiation and allow him to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. By chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra regularly and following the regulative principles, one becomes qualified to be initiated as a brāhmaṇa, because unless one is a qualified brāhmaṇa he cannot be allowed to worship Lord Viṣṇu. This is called yājñika janma. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness society, unless one is twice initiated-first by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and second by the Gāyatrī mantra-he is not allowed to enter the kitchen or Deity room to execute duties. However, when one is elevated to the platform on which he can worship the Deity, his previous birth does not matter.



caṇḍālo 'pi dvija-śreṣṭho

hari-bhakti-parāyaṇaḥ

hari-bhakti-vihīnaś ca

dvijo 'pi śvapacādhamaḥ





"Even if one is born in the family of a caṇḍāla, if one engages in the devotional service of the Lord, he becomes the best of brāhmaṇas. But even a brāhmaṇa who is devoid of devotional service is on the level of the lowest dog-eater." If a person is advanced in devotional service, it does not matter whether he was born in a caṇḍāla family. He becomes purified. As Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja said:



viprād dviṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha-

pādāravinda-vimukhāc chvapacaṁ variṣṭham





(Bhāg. 7.9.10)



Even if one is a brāhmaṇa and is qualified with all the brahminical qualifications, he is considered degraded if he is averse to worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But if a person is attached to the service of the Lord, he becomes glorified even if he is born in a caṇḍāla family. Indeed, such a caṇḍāla can deliver not only himself but all his family predecessors. Without devotional service, even a proud brāhmaṇa cannot deliver himself, and what to speak of his family. In many instances in the śāstras it is seen that even a brāhmaṇa has become a kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, mleccha or non-brāhmaṇa. And there are many instances of one's being born a kṣatriya or vaiśya or even lower and, in the eighteenth year, attaining elevation to the brahminical platform by the process of initiation. Therefore Nārada Muni says:



yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ

puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta

tat tenaiva vinirdiśet





(Bhāg. 7.11.35)



It is not a fact that because one is born in a brāhmaṇa family he is automatically a brāhmaṇa. He has a better chance to become a brāhmaṇa, but unless he meets all the brahminical qualifications, he cannot be accepted as such. On the other hand, if the brahminical qualifications are found in the person of a śūdra, he should immediately be accepted as a brāhmaṇa. To substantiate this there are many quotations from Bhāgavatam, Mahābhārata, Bharadvāja-saṁhitā and the pañcarātra, as well as many other scriptures.



As far as the duration of life of the demigods, concerning Lord Brahmā it is said:



sahasra-yuga-paryantam

ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ

rātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ

te 'ho-rātra-vido janāḥ





(Bg. 8.17)



The duration of one day of Brahmā is one thousand times greater than the four yugas, aggregating 4,320,000 years. Similarly, Brahmā's one night. Brahmā lives for one hundred years of such days and nights. The word vibudhāyuṣā indicates that even if one gets a long life-span, his life-span is useless if he is not a devotee. A living entity is the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord, and unless he comes to the platform of devotional service, his life-span, good birth, glorious activities and everything else are null and void.





TEXT 11



śrutena tapasā vā kiṁ

vacobhiś citta-vṛttibhiḥ

buddhyā vā kiṁ nipuṇayā

balenendriya-rādhasā

SYNONYMS



śrutena-by Vedic education; tapasā-by austerities; vā-or; kim-what is the meaning; vacobhiḥ-by words; citta-of consciousness; vṛttibhiḥ-by the occupations; buddhyā-by intelligence; vā-or; kim-what is the use; nipuṇayā-expert; balena-by bodily strength; indriya-rādhasā-by power of the senses.





Without devotional service, what is the meaning of severe austerities, the process of hearing, the power of speech, the power of mental speculation, elevated intelligence, strength, and the power of the senses?





From the Upaniṣads (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.2.3) we learn:



nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo

na medhayā na bahunā śrutena

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas

tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām





Our relationship with the Supreme Lord is never advanced by simple study of the Vedas. There are many Māyāvādī sannyāsīs fully engaged in studying the Vedas, Vedānta-sūtra and Upaniṣads, but unfortunately they cannot grasp the real essence of knowledge. In other words, they do not know the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What, then, is the use in studying all the Vedas if one cannot grasp the essence of the Vedas, Kṛṣṇa? The Lord confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: "By all the Vedas, I am to be known."



There are many religious systems wherein penances and austerities are greatly stressed, but at the end no one understands Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is therefore no point in such penance (tapasya). If one has actually approached the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he does not need to undergo severe austerities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is understood through the process of devotional service. In the Ninth Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā devotional service is explained as rāja-guhyam, the king of all confidential knowledge. There are many good reciters of Vedic literatures, and they recite works such as the Rāmāyaṇa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā. Sometimes these professional readers manifest very good scholarship and exhibit word jugglery. Unfortunately they are never devotees of the Supreme Lord. Consequently, they cannot impress upon the audience the real essence of knowledge, Kṛṣṇa. There are also many thoughtful writers and creative philosophers, but despite all their learning, if they cannot approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are simply useless mental speculators. There are many sharply intelligent people in this material world, and they discover so many things for sense gratification. They also analytically study all the material elements, but despite their expert knowledge and expert scientific analysis of the whole cosmic manifestation, their endeavors are useless because they cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



As far as our senses are concerned, there are many animals, both beasts and birds, who are very expert in exercising their senses more keenly than human beings. For example, vultures or hawks can go very high in the sky, but can see a small body on the ground very clearly. This means that their eyesight is so keen that they can find an eatable corpse from a great distance. Certainly their eyesight is much keener than human beings', but this does not mean that their existence is more important than that of a human being. Similarly, dogs can smell many things from a far distance. Many fish can understand by the power of sound that an enemy is coming. All these examples are described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If one's senses cannot help him attain the highest perfection of life, realization of the Supreme, they are all useless.





TEXT 12



kiṁ vā yogena sāṅkhyena

nyāsa-svādhyāyayor api

kiṁ vā śreyobhir anyaiś ca

na yatrātma-prado hariḥ

SYNONYMS



kim-what is the use; vā-or; yogena-by mystic yoga practice; sāṅkhyena-by the study of Sāṅkhya philosophy; nyāsa-by accepting sannyāsa; svādhyāyayoḥ-and by study of Vedic literature; api-even; kim-what is the use; vā-or; śreyobhiḥ-by auspicious activities; anyaiḥ-other; ca-and; na-never; yatra-where; ātma-pradaḥ-full satisfaction of self; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Transcendental practices that do not ultimately help one realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead are useless, be they mystic yoga practices, the analytical study of matter, severe austerity, the acceptance of sannyāsa, or the study of Vedic literature. All these may be very important aspects of spiritual advancement, but unless one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, all these processes are useless.





In Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 24.109) it is said:



bhakti vinā kevala jñāne 'mukti' nāhi haya

bhakti sādhana kare yei 'prāpta-brahma-laya'





Impersonalists do not take to devotional service, but take to other practices, such as the analytical study of the material elements, the discrimination between matter and spirit, and the mystic yoga system. These are beneficial only insofar as they are complementary to devotional service. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore told Sanātana Gosvāmī that without a touch of devotional service, jñāna, yoga and Sāṅkhya philosophy cannot give one the desired results. The impersonalists wish to merge into the Supreme Brahman; however, merging into the Supreme Brahman also requires a touch of devotional service. The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases-impersonal Brahman, Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All these require a touch of devotional service. Sometimes it is actually seen that these Māyāvādīs also chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, although their motive is to merge into the Brahman effulgence of the Absolute. The yogīs also at times take to chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, but their purpose is different from that of the bhaktas. In all processes-karma, jñāna or yoga-bhakti is required. That is the purport of this verse.





TEXT 13



śreyasām api sarveṣām

ātmā hy avadhir arthataḥ

sarveṣām api bhūtānāṁ

harir ātmātmadaḥ priyaḥ

SYNONYMS



śreyasām-of auspicious activities; api-certainly; sarveṣām-all; ātmā-the self; hi-certainly; avadhiḥ-destination; arthataḥ-factually; sarveṣām-of all; api-certainly; bhūtānām-living entities; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmā-the Supersoul; ātma-daḥ-who can give us our original identity; priyaḥ-very dear.





Factually the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original source of all self-realization. Consequently, the goal of all auspicious activities-karma, jñāna, yoga and bhakti-is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





The living entity is the marginal energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the material world is the external energy. Under the circumstances, one must understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is factually the original source of both matter and spirit. This is explained in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā (7.4–5):



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā





apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat





"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego-all together these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which consists of all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe."



The entire cosmic manifestation is but a combination of matter and spirit. The spiritual part is the living entity, and these living entities are described as prakṛti, or energy. The living entity is never described as puruṣa, the Supreme Person; therefore to identify the living entity with the Supreme Lord is simply ignorance. The living entity is the marginal potency of the Supreme Lord, although there is factually no difference between the energy and the energetic. The duty of the living entity is to understand his real identity. When he does, Kṛṣṇa gives him all the facilities to come to the platform of devotional service. That is the perfection of life. This is indicated in the Vedic Upaniṣad:



yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas

tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām





Lord Kṛṣṇa confirms this in Bhagavad-gītā (10.10):



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te





"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me." The conclusion is that one must come to the platform of bhakti-yoga, even though one may begin with karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga or aṣṭāṅga-yoga. Unless one comes to the platform of bhakti-yoga, self-realization or realization of the Absolute Truth cannot be achieved.





TEXT 14



yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā

SYNONYMS



yathā-as; taroḥ-of a tree; mūla-the root; niṣecanena-by watering; tṛpyanti-are satisfied; tat-its; skandha-trunk; bhuja-branches; upaśākhāḥ-and twigs; prāṇa-the life air; upahārāt-by feeding; ca-and; yathā-as; indriyāṇām-of the senses; tathā eva-similarly; sarva-of all demigods; arhaṇam-worship; acyuta-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ijyā-worship.





As pouring water on the root of a tree energizes the trunk, branches, twigs and everything else, and as supplying food to the stomach enlivens the senses and limbs of the body, simply worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service automatically satisfies the demigods, who are parts of that Supreme Personality.





Sometimes people ask why this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement simply advocates worship of Kṛṣṇa to the exclusion of the demigods. The answer is given in this verse. The example of pouring water on the root of a tree is very appropriate. In Bhagavad-gītā (15.1) it is said, ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śākham: this cosmic manifestation has expanded downward, and the root is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (10.8), ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: "I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds." Kṛṣṇa is the root of everything; therefore rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-sevā), means automatically serving all the demigods. Sometimes it is argued that karma and jñāna require a mixture of bhakti in order to be successfully executed, and sometimes it is argued that bhakti also requires karma and jñāna for its successful termination. The fact is, however, that although karma and jñāna cannot be successful without bhakti, bhakti does not require the help of karma and jñāna. Actually, as described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam: [Madhya 19.167] pure devotional service should not be contaminated by the touch of karma and jñāna. Modern society is involved in various types of philanthropic works, humanitarian works and so on, but people do not know that these activities will never be successful unless Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is brought into the center. One may ask what harm there is in worshiping Kṛṣṇa and the different parts of His body, the demigods, and the answer is also given in this verse. The point is that by supplying food to the stomach, the indriyas, the senses, are automatically satisfied. If one tries to feed his eyes or ears independently, the result is only havoc. Simply by supplying food to the stomach, we satisfy all of the senses. It is neither necessary nor feasible to render separate service to the individual senses. The conclusion is that by serving Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-sevā), everything is complete. As confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.62), kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya: if one is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything is automatically accomplished.





TEXT 15



yathaiva sūryāt prabhavanti vāraḥ

punaś ca tasmin praviśanti kāle

bhūtāni bhūmau sthira-jaṅgamāni

tathā harāv eva guṇa-pravāhaḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-as; eva-certainly; sūryāt-from the sun; prabhavanti-is generated; vāraḥ-water; punaḥ-again; ca-and; tasmin-unto it; praviśanti-enters; kāle-in due course of time; bhūtāni-all living entities; bhūmau-to the earth; sthira-not moving; jaṅgamāni-and moving; tathā-similarly; harau-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva-certainly; guṇa-pravāhaḥ-emanation of material nature.





During the rainy season, water is generated from the sun, and in due course of time, during the summer season, the very same water is again absorbed by the sun. Similarly, all living entities, moving and inert, are generated from the earth, and again, after some time, they all return to the earth as dust. Similarly, everything emanates from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and in due course of time everything enters into Him again.





Because of their poor fund of knowledge, impersonalist philosophers cannot understand how everything comes out from the Supreme person and then merges into Him again. As Brahma-saṁhitā (5.40) confirms:



yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





Transcendental rays emanate from the body of Kṛṣṇa, and within those rays, which are the Brahman effulgence, everything is existing. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.4). Mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni. Although Kṛṣṇa is not personally present everywhere, His energy is the cause of all creation. The entire cosmic manifestation is nothing but a display of Kṛṣṇa's energy.



The two examples given in this verse are very vivid. During the rainy season, the rain, by rejuvenating the production of vegetables on earth, enables man and animals to obtain living energy. When there is no rain, food is scarce, and man and animal simply die. All vegetables, as well as moving living entities, are originally products of the earth. They come from the earth, and again they merge into the earth. Similarly, the total material energy is generated from the body of Kṛṣṇa, and at such a time the entire cosmic manifestation is visible. When Kṛṣṇa winds up His energy, everything vanishes. This is explained in a different way in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.48):



yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





This entire material creation comes from the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and at the time of annihilation again enters into Him. This process of creation and dissolution is made possible by the breathing of the Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is only a plenary portion of Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 16



etat padaṁ taj jagad-ātmanaḥ paraṁ

sakṛd vibhātaṁ savitur yathā prabhā

yathāsavo jāgrati supta-śaktayo

dravya-kriyā-jñāna-bhidā-bhramātyayaḥ

SYNONYMS



etat-this cosmic manifestation; padam-place of habitation; tat-that; jagat-ātmanaḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param-transcendental; sakṛt-sometimes; vibhātam-manifested; savituḥ-of the sun; yathā-as; prabhā-sunshine; yathā-as; asavaḥ-the senses; jāgrati-become manifest; supta-inactive; śaktayaḥ-energies; dravya-physical elements; kriyā-activities; jñāna-knowledge; bhidā-bhrama-differences from misunderstanding; atyayaḥ-passing away.





Just as the sunshine is nondifferent from the sun, the cosmic manifestation is also nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality is therefore all-pervasive within this material creation. When the senses are active, they appear to be part and parcel of the body, but when the body is asleep, their activities are unmanifest. Similarly, the whole cosmic creation appears different and yet nondifferent from the Supreme Person.





This confirms the philosophy of ("simultaneously one and different") propounded by Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is simultaneously different and nondifferent from this cosmic manifestation. In a previous verse it has been explained that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, like the root of a tree, is the original cause of everything. It was also explained how the Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-pervasive. He is present within everything in this material manifestation. Since the energy of the Supreme Lord is nondifferent from Him, this material cosmic manifestation is also nondifferent from Him, although it appears different. The sunshine is not different from the sun itself, but it is simultaneously also different. One may be in the sunshine, but he is not on the sun itself. Those who live in this material world are living on the bodily rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they cannot see Him personally in the material condition.

In this verse the word padam indicates the place where the Supreme Personality of Godhead resides. As confirmed in Īśopaniṣad, īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam. The proprietor of a house may live in one room of the house, but the entire house belongs to him. A king may live in one room in Buckingham Palace, but the entire palace is considered his property. It is not necessary for the king to live in every room of that palace for it to be his. He may be physically absent from the rooms, but still the entire palace is understood to be his royal domicile.



The sunshine is light, the sun globe itself is light, and the sun-god is also light. However, the sunshine is not identical with the sun-god, Vivasvān. This is the meaning of simultaneously one and different (). All the planets rest on the sunshine, and because of the heat of the sun, they all revolve in their orbits. On each and every planet, the trees and plants grow and change colors due to the sunshine. Being the rays of the sun, the sunshine is nondifferent from the sun. Similarly, all the planets, resting on the sunshine, are nondifferent from the sun. The entire material world is completely dependent on the sun, being produced by the sun, and the cause, the sun, is inherent in the effects. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes, and the effects are permeated by the original cause. The entire cosmic manifestation should be understood as the expanded energy of the Supreme Lord.

When one sleeps, the senses are inactive, but this does not mean that the senses are absent. When one is awakened, the senses become active again. Similarly, this cosmic creation is sometimes manifest and sometimes unmanifest, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate). When the cosmic manifestation is dissolved, it is in a kind of sleeping condition, an inactive state. Whether the cosmic manifestation is active or inactive, the energy of the Supreme Lord is always existing. Thus the words "appearance" and "disappearance" apply only to the cosmic manifestation.





TEXT 17



yathā nabhasy abhra-tamaḥ-prakāśā

bhavanti bhūpā na bhavanty anukramāt

evaṁ pare brahmaṇi śaktayas tv amū

rajas tamaḥ sattvam iti pravāhaḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-as; nabhasi-in the sky; abhra-clouds; tamaḥ-darkness; prakāśāḥ-and illumination; bhavanti-exist; bhū-pāḥ-O Kings; na bhavanti-do not appear; anukramāt-consecutively; evam-thus; pare-supreme; brahmaṇi-in the Absolute; śaktayaḥ-energies; tu-then; amūḥ-those; rajaḥ-passion; tamaḥ-darkness; sattvam-goodness; iti-thus; pravāhaḥ-emanation.





My dear Kings, sometimes in the sky there are clouds, sometimes there is darkness, and sometimes there is illumination. The appearance of all these takes place consecutively. Similarly, in the Supreme Absolute, the modes of passion, darkness and goodness appear as consecutive energies. Sometimes they appear, and sometimes they disappear.





Darkness, illumination and clouds sometimes appear and sometimes disappear, but even when they have disappeared, the potency is still there, always existing. In the sky sometimes we see clouds, sometimes rainfall and sometimes snow. Sometimes we see night, sometimes day, sometimes illumination and sometimes darkness. All these exist due to the sun, but the sun is unaffected by all these changes. Similarly, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original cause of the total cosmic manifestation, He is unaffected by the material existence. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (7.4):



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā





"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego-all together these eight comprise My separated material energies."



Although the material, or physical, elements are the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are separate. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is therefore not affected by material conditions. The Vedānta-sūtra confirms, janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] the creation, maintenance and dissolution of this cosmic manifestation are due to the existence of the Supreme Lord. Nonetheless, the Lord is unaffected by all these changes in the material elements. This is indicated by the word pravāha ("emanation"). The sun always shines brilliantly and is not affected by clouds or darkness. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always present in His spiritual energy and is not affected by the material emanations. Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1) confirms:



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam





"Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda, is the Supreme Godhead. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, and He is the prime cause of all causes." Although He is the supreme cause, the cause of all causes, He is still parama, transcendental, and His form is sac-cid-ānanda, eternal, spiritual bliss. Kṛṣṇa is the shelter of everything, and this is the verdict of all scripture. Kṛṣṇa is the remote cause, and material nature is the immediate cause of the cosmic manifestation. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that understanding prakṛti, or nature, to be the cause of everything is like understanding the nipples on the neck of a goat to be the cause of milk. Material nature is the immediate cause of the cosmic manifestation, but the original cause is Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes people think that the cause of an earthen pot is the earth. We see on a potter's wheel a sufficient amount of earth to produce many pots, and although unintelligent men will say that the earth on the wheel is the cause of the pot, those who are actually advanced will find that the original cause is the potter, who supplies the earth and moves the wheel. Material nature may be a helping factor in the creation of this cosmic manifestation, but it is not the ultimate cause. In Bhagavad-gītā (9.10) the Lord therefore says:



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and producing all moving and unmoving beings."



The Supreme Lord casts His glance over material energy, and His glance agitates the three modes of nature. Creation then takes place. The conclusion is that nature is not the cause of the material manifestation. The Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes.





TEXT 18



tenaikam ātmānam aśeṣa-dehināṁ

kālaṁ pradhānaṁ puruṣaṁ pareśam

sva-tejasā dhvasta-guṇa-pravāham

ātmaika-bhāvena bhajadhvam addhā

SYNONYMS



tena-therefore; ekam-one; ātmānam-unto the Supreme Soul; aśeṣa-unlimited; dehinām-of the individual souls; kālam-time; pradhānam-the material cause; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; para-īśam-the transcendental controller; sva-tejasā-by His spiritual energy; dhvasta-aloof; guṇa-pravāham-from material emanations; ātma-self; eka-bhāvena-accepting as qualitatively one; bhajadhvam-engage in devotional service; addhā-directly.





Because the Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes, He is the Supersoul of all individual living entities, and He exists as both the remote and immediate cause. Since He is aloof from the material emanations, He is free from their interactions and is Lord of material nature. You should therefore engage in His devotional service, thinking yourself qualitatively one with Him.





According to Vedic calculations, there are three causes of creation-time, the ingredient and the creator. Combined, these are called tritayātmaka, the three causes. Everything in this material world is created by these three causes. All of these causes are found in the Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Brahma-saṁhitā: sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]. Nārada Muni therefore advises the Pracetās to worship the direct cause, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated before, when the root of a tree is watered, all the parts are energized. According to the advice of Nārada Muni, one should directly engage in devotional service. This will include all pious activity. Caitanya-caritāmṛta states, kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya: when one worships the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, in devotional service, one automatically performs all other pious activity. In this verse the words sva-tejasā dhvasta-guṇa-pravāham are very significant. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is never affected by the material qualities, although they all emanate from His spiritual energy. Those who are really conversant with this knowledge can utilize everything for the service of the Lord because nothing in this material world is unconnected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 19



dayayā sarva-bhūteṣu

santuṣṭyā yena kena vā

sarvendriyopaśāntyā ca

tuṣyaty āśu janārdanaḥ

SYNONYMS



dayayā-by showing mercy; sarva-bhūteṣu-to all living entities; santuṣṭyā-by being satisfied; yena kena vā-somehow or other; sarva-indriya-all the senses; upaśāntyā-by controlling; ca-also; tuṣyati-becomes satisfied; āśu-very soon; janārdanaḥ-the Lord of all living entities.





By showing mercy to all living entities, being satisfied somehow or other and controlling the senses from sense enjoyment, one can very quickly satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Janārdana.





These are some of the ways in which the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be satisfied by the devotee. The first item mentioned is dayayā sarva-bhūteṣu, showing mercy to all conditioned souls. The best way to show mercy is to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The entire world is suffering for want of this knowledge. People should know that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original cause of everything. Knowing this, everyone should directly engage in His devotional service. Those who are actually learned, advanced in spiritual understanding, should preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world so that people may take to it and make their lives successful.



The word sarva-bhūteṣu is significant because it applies not only to species of life. The devotee can do good not only to humanity but to all living entities as well. Everyone can benefit spiritually by the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. When the transcendental vibration of Hare Kṛṣṇa is sounded, even the trees, animals and insects benefit. Thus when one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra loudly, he actually shows mercy to all living entities. To spread the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement throughout the world, the devotees should be satisfied in all conditions.



nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve

na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narakeṣv

api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ





(Bhāg. 6.17.28)



It does not matter to the pure devotee if he has to go to hell to preach. The Supreme Lord lives in the heart of a hog, although the Lord is in Vaikuṇṭha. Even while preaching in hell, a pure devotee remains a pure devotee by his constant association with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To attain this state, one has to control his senses. The senses are automatically controlled when one's mind is engaged in the service of the Lord.





TEXT 20



apahata-sakalaiṣaṇāmalātmany

aviratam edhita-bhāvanopahūtaḥ

nija-jana-vaśa-gatvam ātmano 'yan

na sarati chidravad akṣaraḥ satāṁ hi

SYNONYMS



apahata-vanquished; sakala-all; eṣaṇa-desires; amala-spotless; ātmani-to the mind; aviratam-constantly; edhita-increasing; bhāvanā-with feeling; upahūtaḥ-being called; nija-jana-of His devotees; vaśa-under the control; gatvam-going; ātmanaḥ-His; ayan-knowing; na-never; sarati-goes away; chidra-vat-like the sky; akṣaraḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; satām-of the devotees; hi-certainly.





Being completely cleansed of all material desires, the devotees are freed from all mental contamination. Thus they can always think of the Lord constantly and address Him very feelingly. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, knowing Himself to be controlled by His devotees, does not leave them for a second, just as the sky overhead never becomes invisible.





It is clear from the previous verse that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Janārdana, is very quickly satisfied by the activities of His devotees. The pure devotee is always absorbed in the thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated, śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ [SB 1.2.17]. By always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, the pure devotee's heart is freed from all kinds of desires. In the material world, the heart of the living entity is filled with material desires. When the living entity is cleansed, he does not think of anything material. As the mind is completely cleansed, one attains the perfectional stage of mystic yoga, for then the yogī always sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead within his heart (dhyanāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]). As soon as the Lord is seated within the heart of the devotee, the devotee cannot be contaminated by the material modes of nature. As long as one is under the control of the material modes, he desires so many things and makes so many plans for material sense enjoyment, but as soon as the Lord is perceived in the heart, all material desires vanish. When the mind is completely free from material desire, the devotee can think of the Lord constantly. In this way he becomes completely dependent upon the lotus feet of the Lord. Caitanya Mahāprabhu prays:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





"My dear Lord, I am Your eternal servant, but somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of this material world. Kindly pick me up and fix me as a speck of dust at Your lotus feet." (Śikṣāṣṭaka 5) Similarly, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura prays:



hā hā prabhu nanda-suta, vṛṣabhānu-sutā-yuta,

karuṇā karaha ei-bāra

narottama-dāsa kaya, nā ṭheliha rāṅgā-pāya,

tomā vine ke āche āmāra

"My dear Lord, You are now present with the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Now both of You please be merciful upon me. Don't kick me away, because I have no shelter other than You."



In this way the Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes dependent on His devotee. The Lord is invincible, yet He is conquered by His pure devotee. He enjoys being dependent on His devotee, just as Kṛṣṇa enjoyed being dependent on the mercy of mother Yaśodā. Thinking Himself dependent on the devotee gives the Supreme Lord great enjoyment. Sometimes a king may engage a joker, and in the process of joking, the king is sometimes insulted. The king, however, enjoys these activities. Everyone worships the Supreme Lord with great reverence; therefore the Lord sometimes wants to enjoy the chastisement of His devotees. In this way the relationship eternally existing between the Lord and His devotees is fixed, just like the sky overhead.





TEXT 21



na bhajati kumanīṣiṇāṁ sa ijyāṁ

harir adhanātma-dhana-priyo rasa-jñaḥ

śruta-dhana-kula-karmaṇāṁ madair ye

vidadhati pāpam akiñcaneṣu satsu

SYNONYMS



na-never; bhajati-accepts; ku-manīṣiṇām-of persons with a dirty heart; saḥ-He; ijyām-offering; hariḥ-the Supreme Lord; adhana-to those who have no material possessions; ātma-dhana-simply dependent on the Lord; priyaḥ-who is dear; rasa-jñaḥ-who accepts the essence of life; śruta-education; dhana-wealth; kula-aristocracy; karmaṇām-and of fruitive activities; madaiḥ-by pride; ye-all those who; vidadhati-perform; pāpam-disgrace; akiñcaneṣu-without material possessions; satsu-unto the devotees.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes very dear to those devotees who have no material possessions but are fully happy in possessing the devotional service of the Lord. Indeed, the Lord relishes the devotional activities of such devotees. Those who are puffed up with material education, wealth, aristocracy and fruitive activity are very proud of possessing material things, and they often deride the devotees. Even if such people offer the Lord worship, the Lord never accepts them.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is dependent on His pure devotees. He does not even accept the offerings of those who are not devotees. A pure devotee is one who feels He does not possess anything material. A devotee is always happy in possessing the devotional service of the Lord. Devotees may sometimes appear materially poor, but because they are spiritually advanced and enriched, they are most dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such devotees are free from attachment to family, society, friendship, children and so on. They abandon affection for all these material possessions and are always happy in possessing the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. The Supreme Personality of Godhead understands the position of His devotee. If a person derides a pure devotee, he is never recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, the Supreme Lord never excuses one who offends a pure devotee. There are many examples of this in history. A great mystic yogi, Durvāsā Muni, offended the great devotee Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. The great sage Durvāsā was to be chastised by the Sudarśana cakra of the Lord. Even though the great mystic directly approached the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was never excused. Those on the path of liberation should be very careful not to offend a pure devotee.





TEXT 22



śriyam anucaratīṁ tad-arthinaś ca

dvipada-patīn vibudhāṁś ca yat sva-pūrṇaḥ

na bhajati nija-bhṛtya-varga-tantraḥ

katham amum udvisṛjet pumān kṛta-jñaḥ

SYNONYMS



śriyam-the goddess of fortune; anucaratīm-who follows Him; tat-of her; arthinaḥ-those who aspire to get the favor; ca-and; dvipada-patīn-rulers of the human beings; vibudhān-demigods; ca-also; yat-because; sva-pūrṇaḥ-self-sufficient; na-never; bhajati-cares for; nija-own; bhṛtya-varga-on His devotees; tantraḥ-dependent; katham-how; amum-Him; udvisṛjet-can give up; pumān-a person; kṛta-jñaḥ-grateful.





Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is self-sufficient, He becomes dependent on His devotees. He does not care for the goddess of fortune, nor for the kings and demigods who are after the favors of the goddess of fortune. Where is that person who is actually grateful and will not worship the Personality of Godhead?





Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, is worshiped by all materialistic men, including big kings, and demigods in heaven. Lakṣmī, however, is always after the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though He does not require her service. Brahma-saṁhitā says that the Lord is worshiped by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune, but the Supreme Lord does not require service from any of them because if He so desires He can produce millions of goddesses of fortune through His spiritual energy, the pleasure potency. This very Personality of Godhead, out of His causeless mercy, becomes dependent on the devotees. How fortunate, then, is a devotee who is thus favored by the Personality of Godhead. What ungrateful devotee will not worship the Lord and enter into His devotional service? Actually, a devotee cannot forget his obligation to the Supreme Personality of Godhead even for a single moment. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that both the Supreme Lord and His devotee are rasa jña, full of transcendental humor. The mutual attachment between the Supreme Lord and His devotee is never to be considered material. It always exists as a transcendental fact. There are eight types of transcendental ecstasy (known as bhāva, anubhāva, sthāyi-bhāva and so on), and these are discussed in The Nectar of Devotion. Those who are unaware of the position of the living entity and the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa, think that the mutual attachment between the Lord and His devotees is a creation of the material energy. Factually such attachment is natural both for the Supreme Lord and for the devotee, and it cannot be accepted as material.





TEXT 23



maitreya uvāca

iti pracetaso rājann

anyāś ca bhagavat-kathāḥ

śrāvayitvā brahma-lokaṁ

yayau svāyambhuvo muniḥ

SYNONYMS



maitreyaḥ uvāca-Maitreya said; iti-thus; pracetasaḥ-the Pracetās; rājan-O King; anyāḥ-others; ca-also; bhagavat-kathāḥ-topics about the relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śrāvayitvā-after instructing; brahma-lokam-to Brahmaloka; yayau-went back; svāyambhuvaḥ-the son of Lord Brahmā; muniḥ-the great sage.





The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear King Vidura, Śrī Nārada Muni, the son of Lord Brahmā, thus described all these relationships with the Supreme Personality of Godhead to the Pracetās. Afterward, he returned to Brahmaloka.





One has to hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead from a pure devotee. The Pracetās got this opportunity from the great sage Nārada, who told them of the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees.





TEXT 24



te 'pi tan-mukha-niryātaṁ

yaśo loka-malāpaham

harer niśamya tat-pādaṁ

dhyāyantas tad-gatiṁ yayuḥ

SYNONYMS



te-the Pracetās; api-also; tat-of Nārada; mukha-from the mouth; niryātam-gone forth; yaśaḥ-glorification; loka-of the world; mala-sins; apaham-destroying; hareḥ-of Lord Hari; niśamya-having heard; tat-of the Lord; pādam-feet; dhyāyantaḥ-meditating upon; tat-gatim-unto His abode; yayuḥ-went.





Hearing from Nārada's mouth the glories of the Lord, which vanquish all the ill fortune of the world, the Pracetās also became attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Meditating on His lotus feet, they advanced to the ultimate destination.





Here it is seen that by hearing the glories of the Lord from a realized devotee the Pracetās easily attained strong attachment for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then, meditating on the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord at the end of their lives, they advanced to the ultimate goal, Viṣṇuloka. It is sure and certain that anyone who always hears the glories of the Lord and thinks of His lotus feet will reach that supreme destination. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.65):



man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo 'si me





"Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend."





TEXT 25



etat te 'bhihitaṁ kṣattar

yan māṁ tvaṁ paripṛṣṭavān

pracetasāṁ nāradasya

saṁvādaṁ hari-kīrtanam

SYNONYMS



etat-this; te-unto you; abhihitam-instructed; kṣattaḥ-O Vidura; yat-whatever; mām-unto me; tvam-you; paripṛṣṭavān-inquired; pracetasām-of the Pracetās; nāradasya-of Nārada; saṁvādam-conversation; hari-kīrtanam-describing the glories of the Lord.





My dear Vidura, I have told you everything you wanted to know about the conversation between Nārada and the Pracetās, the conversation describing the glories of the Lord. I have related this as far as possible.





Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes the glories of the Lord and His devotees. Because the whole subject matter is the glorification of the Lord, naturally the glorification of His devotees automatically follows.





TEXT 26



śrī-śuka uvāca

ya eṣa uttānapado

mānavasyānuvarṇitaḥ

vaṁśaḥ priyavratasyāpi

nibodha nṛpa-sattama

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yaḥ-which; eṣaḥ-this dynasty; uttānapadaḥ-of King Uttānapāda; mānavasya-the son of Svāyambhuva Manu; anuvarṇitaḥ-described, following in the footprints of previous ācāryas; vaṁśaḥ-dynasty; priyavratasya-of King Priyavrata; api-also; nibodha-try to understand; nṛpa-sattama-O best of kings.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O best of kings [King Parīkṣit], I have now finished telling about the descendants of the first son of Svāyambhuva Manu, Uttānapāda. I shall now try to relate the activities of the descendants of Priyavrata, the second son of Svāyambhuva Manu. Please hear them attentively.





Dhruva Mahārāja was the son of King Uttānapāda, and as far as the descendants of Dhruva Mahārāja or King Uttānapāda are concerned, their activities have been described up to the point of the Pracetās. Now Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī desires to describe the descendants of Mahārāja Priyavrata, the second son of Svāyambhuva Manu.





TEXT 27



yo nāradād ātma-vidyām

adhigamya punar mahīm

bhuktvā vibhajya putrebhya

aiśvaraṁ samagāt padam

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-one who; nāradāt-from the great sage Nārada; ātma-vidyām-spiritual knowledge; adhigamya-after learning; punaḥ-again; mahīm-the earth; bhuktvā-after enjoying; vibhajya-after dividing; putrebhyaḥ-unto his sons; aiśvaram-transcendental; samagāt-achieved; padam-position.





Although Mahārāja Priyavrata received instructions from the great sage Nārada, he still engaged in ruling the earth. After fully enjoying material possessions, he divided his property among his sons. He then attained a position by which he could return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 28



imāṁ tu kauṣāraviṇopavarṇitāṁ

kṣattā niśamyājita-vāda-sat-kathām

pravṛddha-bhāvo 'śru-kalākulo muner

dadhāra mūrdhnā caraṇaṁ hṛdā hareḥ

SYNONYMS



imām-all this; tu-then; kauṣāraviṇā-by Maitreya; upavarṇitām-described; kṣattā-Vidura; niśamya-after hearing; ajita-vāda-glorification of the Supreme Lord; sat-kathām-transcendental message; pravṛddha-enhanced; bhāvaḥ-ecstasies; aśru-of tears; kalā-by particles; ākulaḥ-overwhelmed; muneḥ-of the great sage; dadhāra-captured; mūrdhnā-by the head; caraṇam-the lotus feet; hṛdā-by the heart; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





My dear King, in this way, after hearing the transcendental messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees from the great sage Maitreya, Vidura was overwhelmed with ecstasy. With tears in his eyes, he immediately fell down at the lotus feet of his guru, his spiritual master. He then fixed the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the core of his heart.





This is a sign of associating with great devotees. A devotee takes instructions from a liberated soul and is thus overwhelmed by ecstasy from transcendental pleasure. As stated by Prahlāda Mahārāja:



naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat





(Bhāg. 7.5.32)



One cannot become a perfect devotee of the Lord without having touched the lotus feet of a great devotee. One who has nothing to do with this material world is called niṣkiñcana. The process of self-realization and the path home, back to Godhead, means surrendering to the bona fide spiritual master and taking the dust of his lotus feet on one's head. Thus one advances on the path of transcendental realization. Vidura had this relationship with Maitreya, and he attained the results.





TEXT 29



vidura uvāca

so 'yam adya mahā-yogin

bhavatā karuṇātmanā

darśitas tamasaḥ pāro

yatrākiñcana-go hariḥ

SYNONYMS



viduraḥ uvāca-Vidura said; saḥ-that; ayam-this; adya-today; mahā-yogin-O great mystic; bhavatā-by you; karuṇa-ātmanā-most merciful; darśitaḥ-I have been shown; tamasaḥ-of the darkness; pāraḥ-the other side; yatra-where; akiñcana-gaḥ-approachable by the materially free; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Śrī Vidura said: O great mystic, O greatest of all devotees, by your causeless mercy I have been shown the path of liberation from this world of darkness. By following this path, a person liberated from the material world can return home, back to Godhead.





This material world is called tamaḥ, dark, and the spiritual world is called light. The Vedas enjoin that everyone should try to get out of the darkness and go to the kingdom of light. Information of that kingdom of light can be attained through the mercy of a self-realized soul. One also has to get rid of all material desires. As soon as one frees himself from material desires and associates with a liberated person, the path back home, back to Godhead, is clear.





TEXT 30



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity ānamya tam āmantrya

viduro gajasāhvayam

svānāṁ didṛkṣuḥ prayayau

jñātīnāṁ nirvṛtāśayaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; ānamya-offering obeisances; tam-unto Maitreya; āmantrya-taking permission; viduraḥ-Vidura; gaja-sāhvayam-the city of Hastināpura; svānām-own; didṛkṣuḥ-desiring to see; prayayau-left that place; jñātīnām-of his kinsmen; nirvṛta-āśayaḥ-free from material desires.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Vidura thus offered obeisances unto the great sage Maitreya and, taking his permission, started for the city of Hastināpura to see his own kinsmen, although he had no material desires.





When a saintly person wants to see his kinsmen, he has no material desire to see them. He simply wants to give them some instructions so that they can benefit. Vidura belonged to the royal family of the Kauravas, and although he knew that all the family members were destroyed at the Battle of Kurukṣetra, he nonetheless wanted to see his elder brother, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, to see if he could deliver Dhṛtarāṣṭra from the clutches of māyā. When a great saintly person like Vidura sees his relatives, he desires only to deliver them from the clutches of māyā. Vidura thus offered his respectful obeisances to his spiritual master and departed for the city of Hastināpura, the kingdom of the Kauravas.





TEXT 31



etad yaḥ śṛṇuyād rājan

rājñāṁ hary-arpitātmanām

āyur dhanaṁ yaśaḥ svasti

gatim aiśvaryam āpnuyāt

SYNONYMS



etat-this; yaḥ-one who; śṛṇuyāt-hears; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; rājñām-of kings; hari-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arpita-ātmanām-who have given their life and soul; āyuḥ-duration of life; dhanam-wealth; yaśaḥ-reputation; svasti-good fortune; gatim-the ultimate goal of life; aiśvaryam-material opulence; āpnuyāt-achieves.





O King, those who hear these topics about kings who are completely surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead obtain without difficulty a long life, wealth, good reputation, good fortune and, ultimately, the opportunity to return home, back to Godhead.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fourth Canto, Thirty-first Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Nārada Instructs the Pracetās."

END OF THE FOURTH CANTO





Fifth Canto





Chapter One



The Activities of Mahārāja Priyavrata





This chapter describes how King Priyavrata enjoyed royal opulence and majesty and then returned to full knowledge. King Priyavrata was detached from worldly opulence, and then he became attached to his kingdom, but finally he again became detached from material enjoyment and thus achieved liberation. When King Parīkṣit heard about this, he was struck with wonder, but he was somewhat bewildered as to how a devotee with no attachment for material enjoyment could later become attached to it. Thus in astonishment he questioned Śukadeva Gosvāmī about this.





In response to the King's inquiries, Śukadeva Gosvāmī said that devotional service, being transcendental, cannot be deviated by any material influences. Priyavrata had received transcendental knowledge from the instructions of Nārada, and therefore he did not want to enter a materialistic life of enjoyment in a kingdom. He accepted the kingdom, however, at the request of such superior demigods as Lord Brahmā and Lord Indra, the King of heaven.





Everything is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, and everyone must work accordingly. Just as a bull is controlled by a rope tied to its nose, so all conditioned souls are forced to work under the spells of the modes of nature. A civilized man, therefore, works according to the institution of varṇa and āśrama. Even in materialistic life, however, no one is free to act. Everyone is compelled to accept a certain type of body offered by the Supreme Lord and thus be allotted different grades of happiness and distress. Therefore even if one artificially leaves home and goes to the forest, he again becomes attached to materialistic life. Family life is compared to a fortress for practicing sense control. When the senses are controlled. one may live either at home or in the forest; there is no difference.





When Mahārāja Priyavrata, following the instruction of Lord Brahmā. accepted the royal throne, his father, Manu, left home for the forest. Mahārāja Priyavrata then married Barhiṣmatī, the daughter of Viśvakarmā. In the womb of Barhiṣmatī he begot ten sons, named Āgnīdhra, Idhmajihva, Yajñabāhu, Mahāvīra, Hiraṇyaretā, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, Savana, Medhātithi, Vītihotra and Kavi. He also begot one daughter, whose name was Ūrjasvatī. Mahārāja Priyavrata lived with his wife and family for many thousands of years. The impressions from the rims of Mahārāja Priyavrata's chariot wheels created seven oceans and seven islands. Of the ten sons of Priyavrata, three sons named Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savana accepted sannyāsa, the fourth order of life, and the remaining seven sons became the rulers of the seven islands. Mahārāja Priyavrata also had a second wife, in whom he begot three sons named Uttama, Raivata and Tāmasa. All of them were elevated to the post of Manu. Śukadeva Gosvāmī thus described how Mahārāja Priyavrata achieved liberation.





TEXT 1



rājovāca

priyavrato bhāgavata

ātmārāmaḥ kathaṁ mune

gṛhe 'ramata yan-mūlaḥ

karma-bandhaḥ parābhavaḥ

SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; priya-vrataḥ-King Priyavrata; bhāgavataḥ-the great devotee; ātma-ārāmaḥ-who takes pleasure in self-realization; katham-why; mune-O great sage; gṛhe-at home; aramata-enjoyed; yat-mūlaḥ-having which as the root cause; karma-bandhaḥ-the bondage of fruitive activities; parābhavaḥ-the defeat of one's human mission.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O great sage, why did King Priyavrata, who was a great, self-realized devotee of the Lord, remain in household life, which is the root cause of the bondage of karma [fruitive activities] and which defeats the mission of human life?





In the Fourth Canto, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī explains that Nārada Muni perfectly instructed King Priyavrata about the mission of human life. The mission of human life is to realize one's self and then gradually to go back home, back to Godhead. Since Nārada Muni instructed the King fully on this subject, why did he again enter household life, which is the main cause of material bondage? Mahārāja Parīkṣit was greatly astonished that King Priyavrata remained in household life, especially since he was not only a self-realized soul but also a first-class devotee of the Lord. A devotee actually has no attraction for household life, but surprisingly, King Priyavrata enjoyed household life very much. One may argue, "Why is it wrong to enjoy household life?" The reply is that in household life one becomes bound by the results of fruitive activities. The essence of household life is sense enjoyment, and as long as one engrosses his mind in working hard for sense enjoyment, one becomes bound by the reactions of fruitive activities. This ignorance of self-realization is the greatest defeat in human life. The human form of life is especially meant for getting out of the bondage of fruitive activities, but as long as one is forgetful of his life's mission and acts like an ordinary animal-eating, sleeping, mating and defending-he must continue his conditioned life of material existence. Such a life is called svarūpa-vismṛti, forgetfulness of one's real constitutional position. Therefore in Vedic civilization one is trained in the very beginning of life as a brahmacārī. A brahmacārī must execute austerities and refrain from sex indulgence. Therefore if one is completely trained in the principles of brahmacarya, he generally does not enter household life. He is then called a naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī, which indicates total celibacy. King Parīkṣit was thus astonished that the great King Priyavrata, although trained in the principles of naiṣṭhika-brahmacarya, entered household life.



The words bhāgavata ātmārāmaḥ are very significant in this verse. If one is self-satisfied as is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is called bhāgavata ātmārāmaḥ. There are different types of satisfaction. Karmīs are satisfied in their fruitive activities, jñānīs are satisfied to merge into the effulgence of Brahman, and devotees are satisfied to engage in the Lord's service. The Lord is self-satisfied because He is fully opulent, and one who is satisfied by serving Him is called bhāgavata ātmārāmaḥ. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu: [Bg. 7.3] out of many thousands of persons, one may endeavor for liberation, and of many thousands of persons attempting to become liberated, one may achieve liberation from the anxieties of material existence and become self-satisfied. Even that satisfaction, however, is not the ultimate satisfaction. The jñānīs and the karmīs have desires, as do the yogīs, but devotees have no desires. Satisfaction in the service of the Lord is called akāma, freedom from desire, and this is the ultimate satisfaction. Therefore Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired, "How could one who was fully satisfied on the highest platform be satisfied with family life?"



The word parābhavaḥ in this verse is also significant. When one is satisfied in family life, he is doomed because he must already have forgotten his relationship with the Lord. Prahlāda Mahārāja describes how the activities of family life implicate one more and more. Ātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpam: household life is like a dark well. If one falls into this well, his spiritual death is assured. How Priyavrata Mahārāja remained a liberated paramahaṁsa even within family life is described in the next verse.





TEXT 2



na nūnaṁ mukta-saṅgānāṁ

tādṛśānāṁ dvijarṣabha

gṛheṣv abhiniveśo 'yaṁ

puṁsāṁ bhavitum arhati

SYNONYMS



na-not; nūnam-certainly; mukta-saṅgānām-who are free from attachment; tādṛśānām-such; dvija-ṛṣabha-O greatest of the brāhmaṇas; gṛheṣu-to family life; abhiniveśaḥ-excessive attachment; ayam-this; puṁsām-of persons; bhavitum-to be; arhati-is possible.





Devotees are certainly liberated persons. Therefore, O greatest of the brāhmaṇas, they cannot possibly be absorbed in family affairs.





In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu it is said that by executing devotional service to the Lord, one can understand the transcendental position of the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be understood by any means except bhakti. The Lord confirms this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.21). Bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ: "only by executing devotional service can one appreciate Me." Similarly, in Bhagavad-gītā (18.55) Lord Kṛṣṇa says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: "simply by discharging devotional service, one can understand Me." Thus for a bhakta to become attached to family affairs is impossible, since a bhakta and his associates are liberated. Everyone is searching after ānanda, or bliss, but in the material world there can never be any bliss. It is only possible in devotional service. Attachment for family affairs and devotional service are incompatible. Therefore Mahārāja Parīkṣit was somewhat surprised to hear that Mahārāja Priyavrata was simultaneously attached to devotional service and to family life.





TEXT 3



mahatāṁ khalu viprarṣe

uttamaśloka-pādayoḥ

chāyā-nirvṛta-cittānāṁ

na kuṭumbe spṛhā-matiḥ

SYNONYMS



mahatām-of great devotees; khalu-certainly; vipra-ṛṣe-O great sage among the brāhmaṇas; uttama-śloka-pādayoḥ-of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; chāyā-by the shade; nirvṛta-satiated; cittānām-whose consciousness; na-never; kuṭumbe-to family members; spṛhā-matiḥ-consciousness with attachment.





Elevated mahātmās who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are fully satiated by the shade of those lotus feet. Their consciousness cannot possibly become attached to family members.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung, nitāi pada-kamala, koṭī-candra suśītala, ye chāyāya jagat juḍāya. He describes the shade of the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda as being so nice and cooling that all materialists, who are always in the blazing fire of material activities, may come under the shade of His lotus feet and be fully relieved and satiated. The distinction between family life and spiritual life can be experienced by any person who has undergone the tribulations of living with a family. One who comes under the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord never becomes attracted by the activities of family life. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (2.59), paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate: one gives up lower engagements when he experiences a higher taste. Thus one becomes detached from family life as soon as he comes under the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.





TEXT 4



saṁśayo 'yaṁ mahān brahman

dārāgāra-sutādiṣu

saktasya yat siddhir abhūt

kṛṣṇe ca matir acyutā

SYNONYMS



saṁśayaḥ-doubt; ayam-this; mahān-great; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; dāra-to the wife; āgāra-home; suta-children; ādiṣu-and so on; saktasya-of a person attached; yat-because; siddhiḥ-perfection; abhūt-became; kṛṣṇe-unto Kṛṣṇa; ca-also; matiḥ-attachment; acyutā-infallible.





The King continued: O great brāhmaṇa, this is my great doubt. How was it possible for a person like King Priyavrata, who was so attached to wife, children and home, to achieve the topmost infallible perfection in Kṛṣṇa consciousness?





King Parīkṣit wondered how a person so attached to wife, children and home could become so perfectly Kṛṣṇa conscious. Prahlāda Mahārāja has said:



matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām





A gṛhavrata, one who has taken a vow to execute family duties, has no chance to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. This is because most gṛhavratas are guided by sense gratification and therefore gradually glide down to the darkest regions of material existence (adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisram). How can they possibly become perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness? Mahārāja Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī to resolve this great doubt.





TEXT 5



śrī-śuka uvāca

bāḍham uktaṁ bhagavata uttamaślokasya śrīmac-caraṇāravinda-makaranda-rasa āveśita-cetaso bhāgavata-paramahaṁsa-dayita-kathāṁ kiñcid antarāya-vihatāṁ svāṁ śivatamāṁ padavīṁ na prāyeṇa hinvanti.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bāḍham-correct; uktam-what you have said; bhagavataḥ-of the Personality of Godhead; uttama-ślokasya-who is praised with excellent verses; śrīmat-caraṇa-aravinda-of the feet, which are just like the most beautiful fragrant lotus flowers; makaranda-honey; rase-in the nectar; āveśita-absorbed; cetasaḥ-whose hearts; bhāgavata-to the devotees; paramahaṁsa-liberated persons; dayita-pleasing; kathām-glorification; kiñcit-sometimes; antarāya-by impediments; vihatām-checked; svām-own; śiva-tamām-most exalted; padavīm-position; na-do not; prāyeṇa-almost always; hinvanti-give up.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: What you have said is correct. The glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is praised in eloquent, transcendental verses by such exalted personalities as Brahmā, are very pleasing to great devotees and liberated persons. One who is attached to the nectarean honey of the Lord's lotus feet, and whose mind is always absorbed in His glories, may sometimes be checked by some impediment, but he still never gives up the exalted position he has acquired.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī accepted both of the King's propositions-that a person who is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot embrace materialistic life again and that one who has embraced materialistic life cannot take up Kṛṣṇa consciousness at any stage of his existence. Although accepting both these statements, Śukadeva Gosvāmī qualified them by saying that a person who has once absorbed his mind in the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead may sometimes be influenced by impediments, but he still does not give up his exalted devotional position.



According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, there are two kinds of impediments to devotional service. The first is an offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava. This is called vaiṣṇava-aparādha. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu warned His devotees not to commit vaiṣṇava-aparādha, which He described as the mad elephant offense. When a mad elephant enters a beautiful garden, it destroys everything, leaving a barren field. Similarly, the power of vaiṣṇava-aparādha is so great that even an advanced devotee becomes almost devoid of his spiritual assets if he commits it. Since Kṛṣṇa consciousness is eternal, it cannot be destroyed altogether, but advancement may be checked for the time being. Thus vaiṣṇava-aparādha is one kind of impediment to devotional service. Sometimes, however, the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee desires to impede one's devotional service. For example, Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa were formerly Jaya and Vijaya, the gatekeepers in Vaikuṇṭha, but by the desire of the Lord, they became His enemies for three lives. Thus the desire of the Lord is another kind of impediment. But in both cases, the pure devotee, once advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, cannot be lost. Following the orders of his superiors (Svāyambhuva and Lord Brahmā), Priyavrata accepted family life, but this did not mean he lost his position in devotional service. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is perfect and eternal, and therefore it cannot be lost under any circumstances. Because the material world is full of obstructions to advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there may appear to be many impediments, yet Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, declares in Bhagavad-gītā (9.31), kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: once one has taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, he cannot be lost.



In this verse, the word śivatamām is very significant. Śivatamām means "the most auspicious." The devotional path is so auspicious that a devotee cannot be lost under any circumstances. This is described in the Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā by the Lord Himself. pārtha naiveha nāmutra vināśas tasya vidyate: "My dear Arjuna, for a devotee there is no question of being lost, either in this life or in the next." (Bg. 6.40) In Bhagavad-gītā (6.43) the Lord clearly explains how this is so.



tatra taṁ buddhi-saṁyogaṁ

labhate paurva-dehikam

yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ

saṁsiddhau kuru-nandana





By the order of the Lord, a perfect devotee sometimes comes to this material world like an ordinary human being. Because of his previous practice, such a perfect devotee naturally becomes attached to devotional service, apparently without cause. Despite all kinds of impediments due to surrounding circumstances, he automatically perseveres in devotional service and gradually advances until he once again becomes perfect. Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura had been an advanced devotee in his previous life, but in his next life he became greatly fallen and was attached to a prostitute. Suddenly, however, his entire behavior was changed by the words of the very prostitute who had so much attracted him, and he became a great devotee. In the lives of exalted devotees, there are many such instances, proving that once one has taken to the shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, he cannot be lost (kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati).



The fact is, however, that one becomes a devotee when he is completely freed from all reactions to sinful life. As Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gītā (7.28):



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvanda-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ





"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of illusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." On the other hand, as Prahlāda Mahārāja said:



matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām





A person who is too attached to materialistic family life-home, family, wife, children and so on-cannot develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



These apparent contradictions are resolved in the life of a devotee by the grace of the Supreme Lord, and therefore a devotee is never bereft of his position on the path of liberation, which is described in this verse as śivatamāṁ padavīm.





TEXT 6



yarhi vāva ha rājan sa rāja-putraḥ priyavrataḥ parama-bhāgavato nāradasya caraṇopasevayāñjasāvagata-paramārtha-satattvo brahma-satreṇa dīkṣiṣyamāṇo 'vani-tala-paripālanāyāmnāta-pravara-guṇa-gaṇaikānta-bhājanatayā sva-pitropāmantrito bhagavati vāsudeva evāvyavadhāna-samādhi-yogena samāveśita-sakala-kāraka-kriyā-kalāpo naivābhyanandad yadyapi tad apratyāmnātavyaṁ tad-adhikaraṇa ātmano 'nyasmād asato 'pi parābhavam anvīkṣamāṇaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yarhi-because; vāva ha-indeed; rājan-O King; saḥ-he; rāja-putraḥ-the Prince; priyavrataḥ-Priyavrata; parama-supreme; bhāgavataḥ-devotee; nāradasya-of Nārada; caraṇa-the lotus feet; upasevayā-by serving; añjasā-quickly; avagata-became aware of; parama-artha-transcendental subject matter; sa-tattvaḥ-with all knowable facts; brahma-satreṇa-by continuous discussion of the Supreme; dīkṣiṣyamāṇaḥ-desiring to fully dedicate himself; avani-tala-the surface of the globe; paripālanāya-to rule over; āmnāta-directed in the revealed scriptures; pravara-highest; guṇa-of qualities; gaṇa-the sum total; ekānta-without deviation; bhājanatayā-because of his possessing; sva-pitrā-by his father; upāmantritaḥ-being asked; bhagavati-in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeve-the all-pervading Lord; eva-certainly; avyavadhāna-without cessation; samādhi-yogena-by practicing yoga in complete absorption; samāveśita-completely dedicated; sakala-all; kāraka-senses; kriyā-kalāpaḥ-whose total activities; na-not; eva-thus; abhyanandat-welcomed; yadyapi-although; tat-that; apratyāmnātavyam-not to be rejected for any reason; tat-adhikaraṇe-in occupying that post; ātmanaḥ-of himself; anyasmāt-by other engagements; asataḥ-material; api-certainly; parābhavam-deterioration; anvīkṣamāṇaḥ-foreseeing.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, Prince Priyavrata was a great devotee because he sought the lotus feet of Nārada, his spiritual master, and thus achieved the highest perfection in transcendental knowledge. With advanced knowledge, he always engaged in discussing spiritual subjects and did not divert his attention to anything else. The Prince's father then asked him to take charge of ruling the world. He tried to convince Priyavrata that this was his duty as indicated in the revealed scriptures. Prince Priyavrata, however, was continuously practicing bhakti-yoga by constantly remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thus engaging all his senses in the service of the Lord. Therefore, although the order of his father could not be rejected, the Prince did not welcome it. Thus he very conscientiously raised the question of whether he might be diverted from devotional service by accepting the responsibility of ruling over the world.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung, chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: "Without serving the lotus feet of a pure Vaiṣṇava or spiritual master, no one has ever attained perfect liberation from material bondage." prince Priyavrata regularly served the lotus feet of Nārada, and thus the Prince perfectly understood transcendental subjects in truth (sa-tattvaḥ). The word sa-tattvaḥ means that Priyavrata knew all the facts about the spirit soul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the relationship between the spirit soul and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he also knew all about this material world and the relationship of the spirit soul and the Supreme Lord within the material world. Thus the Prince decided to engage himself only in rendering service to the Lord.



When Priyavrata's father, Svāyambhuva Manu, requested him to accept the responsibility of ruling over the world, he did not welcome the suggestion. This is the symptom of a great, liberated devotee. Even though engaged in worldly affairs, he does not take pleasure in them, but remains always absorbed in the Lord's service. While thus serving the Lord, he deals externally with worldly affairs without being affected. For example, although he has no attraction for his children, he cares for them and educates them to become devotees. Similarly, he speaks to his wife with affectionate words, but he is not attached to her. By rendering devotional service, a devotee acquires all the good qualities of the Supreme Lord. Lord Kṛṣṇa had sixteen thousand wives, all of them very beautiful, and although He dealt with each of them as a beloved husband, He was not attracted or attached to any of them. In the same way, although a devotee may enter family life and act very affectionately toward his wife and children, he is never attached to these activities.



This verse states that by serving the lotus feet of his spiritual master, prince Priyavrata very soon attained the perfectional stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is the only way to advance in spiritual life. As stated in the Vedas:



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ





"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically revealed." (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23)



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ





"No one can understand Kṛṣṇa as He is by the blunt material senses. But He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their transcendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram





"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55)



These are Vedic instructions. One must have full faith in the words of the spiritual master and similar faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the real knowledge of ātmā and Paramātmā and the distinction between matter and spirit will be automatically revealed. This ātma-tattva, or spiritual knowledge, will be revealed within the core of a devotee's heart because of his having taken shelter of the lotus feet of a mahājana such as Prahlāda Mahārāja.6.23]



"If one has unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord and the spiritual master, the essence of all Vedic knowledge is revealed to him. (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23) A devotee always thinks of the Lord continuously. While chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, the words Kṛṣṇa and Hare immediately remind him of all the Lord's activities. Since his entire life is engaged in the service of the Lord, a devotee cannot forget the Lord at any time. Just as an ordinary man always engages his mind in material activities, a devotee always engages his mind in spiritual activities. This is called brahma-satra, or meditating upon the Supreme Lord always. Prince Priyavrata was perfectly initiated into this practice by Śrī Nārada.





TEXT 7



atha ha bhagavān ādi-deva etasya guṇa-visargasya paribṛṁhaṇānudhyāna-vyavasita-sakala-jagad-abhiprāya ātma-yonir akhila-nigama-nija-gaṇa-pariveṣṭitaḥ sva-bhavanād avatatāra.



SYNONYMS



atha-thus; ha-indeed; bhagavān-the most powerful; ādi-devaḥ-the first demigod; etasya-of this universe; guṇa-visargasya-the creation of the three modes of material nature; paribṛṁhaṇa-the welfare; anudhyāna-always thinking of; vyavasita-known; sakala-whole; jagat-of the universe; abhiprāyaḥ-by whom the ultimate purpose; ātma-the Supreme Self; yoniḥ-whose source of birth; akhila-all; nigama-by the Vedas; nija-gaṇa-by personal associates; pariveṣṭitaḥ-being surrounded; sva-bhavanāt-from his own abode; avatatāra-descended.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The first created being and most powerful demigod in this universe is Lord Brahmā, who is always responsible for developing universal affairs. Born directly from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he dedicates his activities to the welfare of the entire universe, for he knows the purpose of the universal creation. This supremely powerful Lord Brahmā, accompanied by his associates and the personified Vedas, left his own abode in the highest planetary system and descended to the place of Prince Priyavrata's meditation.





Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Self (ātmā), is the source of everything, as explained in the Vedānta-sūtra: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Because Brahmā was born directly from Lord Viṣṇu, he is called ātma-yoni. He is also called bhagavān, although generally bhagavān refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Viṣṇu or Lord Kṛṣṇa). Sometimes great personalities-such as demigods like Lord Brahmā, Nārada or Lord Śiva-are also addressed as bhagavān because they carry out the purpose of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahmā is called bhagavān because he is the secondary creator of this universe. He is always thinking of how to improve the situation of the conditioned souls who have come to the material world to enjoy material activities. For this reason, he disseminates the Vedic knowledge throughout the universe for everyone's guidance.



Vedic knowledge is divided into two parts: pravṛtti-mārga and nivṛtti-mārga. Nivṛtti-mārga is the path of negating sense enjoyment, and pravṛtti-mārga is the path by which the living entities are given a chance to enjoy and at the same time are directed in such a way that they can go back home, back to Godhead. Because ruling over this universe is a great responsibility, Brahmā must force many Manus in different ages to take charge of universal affairs. Under each Manu there are different kings who also execute the purpose of Lord Brahmā. It is understood from previous explanations that the father of Dhruva Mahārāja, King Uttānapāda, ruled over the universe because his elder brother, Priyavrata, practiced austerity from the very beginning of his life. Thus up to the point of the Pracetās, the kings of the universe were all descendants of Uttānapāda Mahārāja. Since there were no suitable kings after the Pracetās, Svāyambhuva Manu went to the Gandhamādana Hill to bring back his eldest son, Priyavrata, who was meditating there. Svāyambhuva Manu requested Priyavrata to rule over the universe. When he refused, Lord Brahmā descended from the supreme planetary system, known as Satyaloka, to request Priyavrata to accept the order. Lord Brahmā did not come alone. He came with other great sages like Marīci, Ātreya and Vasiṣṭha. To convince Priyavrata that it was necessary for him to follow the Vedic injunctions and accept the responsibility of ruling over the world, Lord Brahmā also brought with him the personified Vedas, his constant associates.



A significant word in this verse is sva-bhavanāt, indicating that Lord Brahmā descended from his own abode. Every demigod has his own abode. Indra, the King of the demigods, has his own abode, as do Candra, the lord of the moon planet, and Sūrya, the predominating deity of the sun planet. There are many millions of demigods, and the stars and planets are their respective homes. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā. Yānti deva-vratā devān: [Bg. 9.25] "Those who worship the demigods go to their different planetary systems." Lord Brahmā's abode. the highest planetary system, is called Satyaloka or sometimes Brahmaloka. Brahmaloka usually refers to the spiritual world. The abode of Lord Brahmā is Satyaloka, but because Lord Brahmā resides there, it is also sometimes called Brahmaloka.





TEXT 8



sa tatra tatra gagana-tala uḍu-patir iva vimānāvalibhir anupatham amara-parivṛḍhair abhipūjyamānaḥ pathi pathi ca varūthaśaḥ siddha-gandharva-sādhya-cāraṇa-muni-gaṇair upagīyamāno gandha-mādana-droṇīm avabhāsayann upasasarpa.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Lord Brahmā); tatra tatra-here and there; gagana-tale-under the canopy of the sky; uḍu-patiḥ-the moon; iva-like; vimāna-āvalibhiḥ-in their different airplanes; anupatham-along the path; amara-of the demigods; parivṛḍhaiḥ-by the leaders; abhipūjyamānaḥ-being worshiped; pathi pathi-on the way, one after another; ca-also; varūthaśaḥ-in groups; siddha-by the residents of Siddhaloka; gandharva-by the residents of Gandharvaloka; sādhya-by the residents of Sādhyaloka; cāraṇa-by the residents of Cāraṇaloka; muni-gaṇaiḥ-and by great sages; upagīyamānaḥ-being worshiped; gandha-mādana-of the planet where the Gandhamādana Hill is found; droṇīm-the border; avabhāsayan-illuminating; upasasarpa-he approached.





As Lord Brahmā descended on his carrier, the great swan, all the residents of the planets named Siddhaloka, Gandharvaloka, Sādhyaloka and Cāraṇaloka, as well as great sages and demigods flying in their different airplanes, assembled within the canopy of the sky to receive Lord Brahmā and worship him. As he received respect and adoration from the residents of the various planets, Lord Brahmā appeared just like the full moon surrounded by illuminating stars. Lord Brahmā's great swan then arrived at the border of Gandhamādana Hill and approached Prince Priyavrata, who was sitting there.





It appears from this description that there is regular interplanetary travel between the planets of the demigods. Another significant point is that there is a planet covered mostly by great mountains, one of which is Gandhamādana Hill. Three great personalities-Priyavrata, Nārada and Svāyambhuva Manu-were sitting on this hill. According to Brahmā-saṁhitā, each universe is filled with different planetary systems, and every system has a unique opulence. For example, on Siddhaloka, all the residents are very advanced in the powers of mystic yoga. They can fly from one planet to another without airplanes or other flying machines. Similarly, the residents of Gandharvaloka are expert in musical science, and those on Sādhyaloka are all great saints. The interplanetary system undoubtedly exists, and residents of different planets may go from one to another. On this earth, however, we have not invented any machine that can go directly from one planet to another, although an unsuccessful attempt has been made to go directly to the moon.





TEXT 9



tatra ha vā enaṁ devarṣir haṁsa-yānena pitaraṁ bhagavantaṁ hiraṇya-garbham upalabhamānaḥ sahasaivotthāyārhaṇena saha pitā-putrābhyām avahitāñjalir upatasthe.



SYNONYMS



tatra-there; ha vā-certainly; enam-him; deva-ṛṣiḥ-the great saint Nārada; haṁsa-yānena-by the swan carrier; pitaram-his father; bhagavantam-most powerful; hiraṇya-garbham-Lord Brahmā; upalabhamānaḥ-understanding; sahasā eva-immediately; utthāya-having stood up; arhaṇena-with paraphernalia for worship; saha-accompanied; pitā-putrābhyām-by Priyavrata and his father. Svāyambhuva Manu; avahita-añjaliḥ-with respect and folded hands; upatasthe-worshiped.





Lord Brahmā, the father of Nārada Muni, is the supreme person within this universe. As soon as Nārada saw the great swan, he could understand that Lord Brahmā had arrived. Therefore he immediately stood up, along with Svāyambhuva Manu and his son Priyavrata, whom Nārada was instructing. Then they folded their hands and began to worship Lord Brahmā with great respect.





As stated in the previous verse, Lord Brahmā was accompanied by other demigods, but his specific carrier was the great swan. Therefore as soon as Nārada Muni saw the swan, he could understand that his father, Lord Brahmā, who is also known as Hiraṇyagarbha, was arriving. Thus he immediately stood up with Svāyambhuva Manu and his son Priyavrata to receive Lord Brahmā and offer him respect.





TEXT 10



bhagavān api bhārata tad-upanītārhaṇaḥ sūkta-vākenātitarām udita-guṇa-gaṇāvatāra-sujayaḥ priyavratam ādi-puruṣas taṁ sadaya-hāsāvaloka iti hovāca.



SYNONYMS



bhagavān-Lord Brahmā; api-moreover; bhārata-O King Parīkṣit; tat-by them; upanīta-brought forward; arhaṇaḥ-worshipable paraphernalia; sūkta-according to Vedic etiquette; vākena-by language; atitarām-highly; udita-praised; guṇa-gaṇa-qualities; avatāra-because of the descent; su-jayaḥ-whose glories; priyavratam-unto Priyavrata; ādi-puruṣaḥ-the original person; tam-unto him; sa-daya-with compassion; hāsa-smiling; avalokaḥ-whose looking; iti-thus; ha-certainly; uvāca-said.





My dear King Parīkṣit, because Lord Brahmā had finally descended from Satyaloka to Bhūloka, Nārada Muni, Prince Priyavrata and Svāyambhuva Manu came forward to offer him objects of worship and to praise him in highly qualified language, according to Vedic etiquette. At that time, Lord Brahmā, the original person of this universe, felt compassion for Priyavrata and, looking upon him with a smiling face, spoke to him as follows.





That Lord Brahmā descended from Satyaloka to see Priyavrata indicates that the matter was very serious. Nārada Muni had come to advise Priyavrata about the value of spiritual life, knowledge, renunciation and bhakti, and Lord Brahmā knew that Nārada's instructions were very impressive. Therefore unless Lord Brahmā personally went to Gandhamādana Hill to request Priyavrata, Lord Brahmā knew that prince Priyavrata would not accept his father's order. Brahmā's purpose was to break Priyavrata's determination. Therefore Brahmā first looked upon Priyavrata with compassion. His smile and compassionate features also indicated that although Brahmā would request Priyavrata to accept household life, Priyavrata would not be out of touch with devotional service. By the blessings of a Vaiṣṇava, everything is possible. This is described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu as kṛpā-siddhi, or perfection attained simply by the blessings of a superior person. One usually becomes liberated and perfect by executing the regulative principles set down in the śāstras. Nonetheless, many persons have achieved perfection simply by the blessings of a spiritual master or superior.



Priyavrata was the grandson of Lord Brahmā, and as joking competition sometimes takes place between grandson and grandfather, in this case also Priyavrata was determined to remain in meditation, whereas Brahmā was determined that he rule the universe. Thus Lord Brahmā's affectionate smile and glance meant, "My dear Priyavrata, you have decided not to accept household life, but I have decided to convince you that you must accept it." Actually, Brahmā had come to praise Priyavrata for his high standard of renunciation, austerity, penance and devotion so that he would not be deviated from devotional service, even though he would accept household life.



In this verse, one important word is sūkta-vākena (by Vedic hymns). In the Vedas, there is the following prayer to Lord Brahmā: hiraṇyagarbhaḥ samavartatāgre bhūtasya jātaḥ patir eka āsīt. Brahmā was received with the appropriate Vedic hymns, and because he was welcomed according to the Vedic etiquette, he was very pleased.





TEXT 11



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

nibodha tātedam ṛtaṁ bravīmi

māsūyituṁ devam arhasy aprameyam

vayaṁ bhavas te tata eṣa maharṣir

vahāma sarve vivaśā yasya diṣṭam

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the supreme person, Lord Brahmā, said; nibodha-kindly hear with attention; tāta-my dear son; idam-this; ṛtam-true; bravīmi-I am speaking; mā-not; asūyitum-to be jealous of; devam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arhasi-you ought; aprameyam-who is beyond our experimental knowledge; vayam-we; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; te-your; tataḥ-father; eṣaḥ-this; mahā-ṛṣiḥ-Nārada; vahāmaḥ-carry out; sarve-all; vivaśāḥ-unable to deviate; yasya-of whom; diṣṭam-the order.





Lord Brahmā, the supreme person within this universe, said: My dear Priyavrata, kindly hear attentively what I shall say to you. Do not be jealous of the Supreme Lord, who is beyond our experimental measurements. All of us, including Lord Śiva, your father and the great sage Mahārṣi Nārada, must carry out the order of the Supreme. We cannot deviate from His order.





Of the twelve great authorities in devotional service, four-Lord Brahmā himself, his son Nārada, Svāyambhuva Manu and Lord Śiva-were present before Priyavrata. They were accompanied by many other authoritative sages. Brahmā first wanted to impress upon Priyavrata that although these great personalities are all authorities, they cannot possibly disobey the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is described in this verse as deva, which means "always glorious." The power, glory and potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can never be diminished. In the Īśopaniṣad, the Lord is described as apāpa-viddha, which indicates that He is never affected by anything materially considered sinful. Similarly, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead as being so powerful that nothing we might consider abominable can affect Him. An example sometimes given to explain the position of the Supreme Lord is that of the sun, which evaporates urine from the earth but is never affected by contamination. The Supreme Lord can never be accused of doing anything wrong.



When Lord Brahmā went to induce Priyavrata to accept the responsibility for ruling the universe, he did not go whimsically; he was following the dictations of the Supreme Lord. Indeed, Brahmā and other genuine authorities never do anything without His permission. The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart. In the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said, tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye: the Lord dictated Vedic knowledge to Brahmā through his heart. The more a living entity is purified by devotional service, the more he comes in direct contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te





"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) Lord Brahmā, therefore, had not come to Priyavrata by his own whims: rather, it is understood that he had been ordered to persuade Priyavrata by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities cannot be understood by material senses and who is therefore described herein as aprameya. Thus Lord Brahmā first advised Priyavrata to hear his words with attention and without envy.



Why one is induced to perform certain acts despite his desire to do something else is indicated herein. One cannot disobey the orders of the Supreme Lord, even if one is as powerful as Lord Śiva. Lord Brahmā. Manu or the great sage Nārada. All these authorities are certainly very powerful, but they do not have the power to disobey the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since Lord Brahmā had come to Priyavrata in accordance with the orders of the Supreme Lord, he first wanted to dispel any suspicions that he might be acting as Priyavrata's enemy. Lord Brahmā was following the orders of the Supreme Lord, and therefore it would be worthwhile for Priyavrata to accept Lord Brahmā's order, as the Lord desired.





TEXT 12



na tasya kaścit tapasā vidyayā vā

na yoga-vīryeṇa manīṣayā vā

naivārtha-dharmaiḥ parataḥ svato vā

kṛtaṁ vihantuṁ tanu-bhṛd vibhūyāt

SYNONYMS



na-never; tasya-His; kaścit-anyone; tapasā-by austerity; vidyayā-by education; vā-or; na-never; yoga-by power of mystic yoga; vīryeṇa-by personal strength; manīṣayā-by intelligence; vā-or; na-never; eva-certainly; artha-by material opulence; dharmaiḥ-by the power of religion; parataḥ-by any external power; svataḥ-by personal endeavor; vā-or; kṛtam-the order; vihantum-to avoid; tanu-bhṛt-a living entity who has accepted a material body; vibhūyāt-is able.





One cannot avoid the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not by the strength of severe austerities, an exalted Vedic education, or the power of mystic yoga, physical prowess or intellectual activities. Nor can one use his power of religion, his material opulence or any other means, either by himself or with the help of others, to defy the orders of the Supreme Lord. That is not possible for any living being, from Brahmā down to the ant.





In the Garga Upaniṣad, Gargamuni says to his wife, etasya vā akṣarasya praśāsane gargi sūryā-candramasau vidhṛtau tiṣṭhataḥ: "My dear Gargī, everything is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the sun, the moon and other controllers and demigods like Lord Brahmā and King Indra are all under His control." An ordinary human being or animal who has accepted a material body cannot go beyond the jurisdiction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's control. A material body includes senses. However, the sense activities of so-called scientists who try to be free from God's law or the laws of nature are useless. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14). Mama māyā duratyayā: it is impossible to surpass the control of material nature, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead is working behind it. Sometimes we are proud of our austerities, penances and mystic yogic powers, but it is clearly stated herein that one cannot surpass the laws and directions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, either by dint of mystic power, a scientific education, or austerities and penances. It is impossible.



The word manīṣayā ("by intelligence") is of special significance. Priyavrata might argue that Lord Brahmā was requesting him to accept family life and the responsibility for ruling a kingdom, although Nārada Muni had advised him not to enter household life and be entangled in material affairs. Whom to accept would be a puzzle for Priyavrata because both Lord Brahmā and Nārada Muni are authorities. Under the circumstances, the use of the word manīṣayā is very appropriate, for it indicates that since both Nārada Muni and Lord Brahmā are authorized to give instruction, Priyavrata should neglect neither of them but should use his intelligence to follow the advice of both. To solve such dilemmas, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given a very clear conception of intelligence. He says:



anāsaktasya viṣayān

yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe

yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate





Viṣayān, material affairs, should be accepted without attachment. and everything should be dovetailed with the service of the Lord. That is real intelligence (manīṣā). Becoming a family man or king in the material world is not harmful if one accepts everything for Kṛṣṇa's service. That necessitates clear intelligence. Māyāvādī philosophers say, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: this material world is false, and only the Absolute Truth is real. However, an intelligent devotee in the line of Lord Brahmā and the great sage Nārada-or, in other words, in the Brahma-sampradāya-does not consider this world false. That which is created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be false, but using it for enjoyment is. Everything is meant to be enjoyed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (5.29). Bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme proprietor and enjoyer, and therefore everything should be dovetailed for His enjoyment and service. Regardless of one's circumstances, favorable or unfavorable, one should use everything to serve the Supreme Lord. That is the perfect way to use one's intelligence.





TEXT 13



bhavāya nāśāya ca karma kartuṁ

śokāya mohāya sadā bhayāya

sukhāya duḥkhāya ca deha-yogam

avyakta-diṣṭaṁ janatāṅga dhatte

SYNONYMS



bhavāya-for birth; nāśāya-for death; ca-also; karma-activity; kartum-to do; śokāya-for bereavement; mohāya-for illusion; sadā-always; bhayāya-for fear; sukhāya-for happiness; duḥkhāya-for distress; ca-also; deha-yogam-connection with a material body; avyakta-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; diṣṭam-directed; janatā-the living entities; aṅga-O Priyavrata; dhatte-accept.





My dear Priyavrata, by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all living entities accept different types of bodies for birth and death, activity, lamentation, illusion, fear of future dangers, and happiness and distress.





Every living entity who has come to this material world has come here for material enjoyment, but according to his own karma, activities, he must accept a certain type of body given to him by material nature under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.27), prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ: everything is being done by prakṛti, material nature, under the direction of the Supreme Lord. Modern scientists do not know why there are varieties of bodies in 8,400,000 forms. The fact is that all these bodies are ordained for the living entities by the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to the living entities' desires. He gives the living entities freedom to act as they like, but on the other hand they must accept a body according to the reactions of their activities. Thus there are different types of bodies. Some living entities have short durations of life, whereas others live for fantastic durations. Every one of them, however, from Brahmā down to the ant, acts according to the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is sitting in everyone's heart. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15):



sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca





"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance. knowledge and forgetfulness." It is not a fact, however, that the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives direction to certain living entities in one way and other living entities in another way. The truth is that every living entity has a certain desire, and the Supreme Lord gives him a chance to fulfill it. The best course, therefore, is to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and act according to His desire. One who does so is liberated.





TEXT 14



yad-vāci tantyāṁ guṇa-karma-dāmabhiḥ

sudustarair vatsa vayaṁ suyojitāḥ

sarve vahāmo balim īśvarāya

protā nasīva dvi-pade catuṣ-padaḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-of whom; vāci-in the form of Vedic instruction; tantyām-to a long rope; guṇa-of quality; karma-and work; dāmabhiḥ-by the ropes; su-dustaraiḥ-very difficult to avoid; vatsa-my dear boy; vayam-we; su-yojitāḥ-are engaged; sarve-all; vahāmaḥ-carry out; balim-orders to please Him; īśvarāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; protāḥ-being bound; nasi-in the nose; iva-like; dvi-pade-to the two-legged (driver); catuḥ-padaḥ-the four-legged (bulls).





My dear boy, all of us are bound by the Vedic injunctions to the divisions of varṇāśrama according to our qualities and work. These divisions are difficult to avoid because they are scientifically arranged. We must therefore carry out our duties of varṇāśrama-dharma, like bulls obliged to move according to the direction of a driver pulling on ropes knotted to their noses.





In this verse, the words tantyāṁ guṇa-karma-dāmabhiḥ are very important. We each get a body according to our association with the guṇas, the qualities or modes of material nature, and we act accordingly. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, the four orders of the social system-namely brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra-are arranged according to guṇa and karma, their qualities and work. There is some controversy about this, however, because some say that since one receives a body according to the guṇa and karma of his past life, it is one's birth that determines his social status. Others say, however, that one's birth according to the guṇa and karma of his past life is not the essential consideration, since one can change his guṇa and karma even in this life. Thus they say that the four divisions of the social order-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra-should be arranged according to the guṇa and karma of this life. This version is confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by Nārada Muni. While instructing Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira about the symptoms of guṇa and karma, Nārada Muni said that these symptoms must govern the division of society. In other words, if a person born in the family of a brāhmaṇa has the symptoms of a śūdra, he should be designated as a śūdra. Similarly, if a śūdra has brahminical qualities, he should be designated a brāhmaṇa.



The varṇāśrama system is scientific. Therefore if we accept the divisions of varṇa and āśrama according to the Vedic instructions, our lives will be successful. Unless human society is thus divided and arranged, it cannot be perfect. As stated in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (3.8.9):



varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, is worshiped by the proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varṇa and āśrama. There is no other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One must be situated in the institution of the four varṇas and āśramas." All of human society is meant to worship Lord Viṣṇu. At the present moment, however, human society does not know that this is the ultimate goal or perfection of life. Therefore instead of worshiping Lord Viṣṇu. people have been educated to worship matter. According to the direction of modern society, men think they can advance in civilization by manipulating matter to build skyscrapers, big roads, automobiles and so on. Such a civilization must certainly be called materialistic because its people do not know the goal of life. The goal of life is to reach Viṣṇu. but instead of reaching Viṣṇu, people are bewildered by the external manifestation of the material energy. Therefore progress in material advancement is blind, and the leaders of such material advancement are also blind. They are leading their followers in the wrong way.



It is best, therefore, to accept the injunctions of the Vedas, which are mentioned in this verse as yad-vāci. In accordance with those injunctions, everyone should find out whether he is a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra and should thus be educated accordingly. Then his life will be successful. Otherwise, all of human society will be confused. If human society is divided scientifically according to varṇa and āśrama, and if the Vedic directions are followed, one's life, regardless of his position, will be successful. It is not that brāhmaṇas will be elevated to the transcendental platform but not the śūdras. If the Vedic injunctions are followed, all of them-brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras-will be elevated to the transcendental platform, and their lives will be successful. The injunctions in the Vedas are explicit directions from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example cited in this verse is that bulls tied by ropes in their nostrils move according to the direction of the driver. Similarly, if we move according to the instructions of the Vedas, the perfect paths for our lives will be set. Otherwise, if we do not move in that way but act according to our whimsical ideas, our lives will be spoiled by confusion and will end in despair. Actually, because people at the present moment are not following the instructions of the Vedas, they are all confused. We must therefore accept this instruction by Lord Brahmā to Priyavrata as the factual scientific direction leading to the success of life. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (16.23):



yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

vartate kāma-kārataḥ

na sa siddhim avāpnoti

na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim





If we do not live according to the injunctions of the śāstras, the Vedas, we shall never achieve success in life, to say nothing of happiness or elevation to higher statuses of living.





TEXT 15



īśābhisṛṣṭaṁ hy avarundhmahe 'ṅga

duḥkhaṁ sukhaṁ vā guṇa-karma-saṅgāt

āsthāya tat tad yad ayuṅkta nāthaś

cakṣuṣmatāndhā iva nīyamānāḥ

SYNONYMS



īśa-abhisṛṣṭam-created or given by the Lord; hi-certainly; avarundhmahe-we have to accept; aṅga-my dear Priyavrata; duḥkham-distress; sukham-happiness; vā-or; guṇa-karma-with quality and work; saṅgāt-by association; āsthāya-being situated in; tat tat-that condition; yat-which body; ayuṅkta-He gave; nāthaḥ-the Supreme Lord; cakṣuṣmatā-by a person having eyes; andhāḥ-blind men; iva-like; nīyamānāḥ-being conducted.





My dear Priyavrata, according to our association with different modes of material nature, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives us our specific bodies and the happiness and distress we achieve. One must therefore remain situated as he is and be conducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, exactly as a blind man is led by a person who has eyes with which to see.





By material means, one cannot avoid the happiness and distress unique to his particular body. There are 8,400,000 bodily forms, each destined to enjoy and suffer a certain amount of happiness and distress. This we cannot change, for the happiness and distress are ordained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in accordance with whose decision we have received our bodies. Since we cannot avoid the plan of the Supreme Godhead, we must agree to be directed by Him, just as a blind man is led by a person who has eyes. Under any circumstances, if we remain in the condition allotted to us by the Supreme Lord and follow His instructions, we will become perfect. The main purpose of life is to follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is such instructions that constitute one's religion or occupational duty.



In Bhagavad-gītā, therefore, Lord Kṛṣṇa says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: "Give up all other engagements. Simply surrender unto Me and follow Me." (Bg. 18.66) This process of surrendering by following the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not meant for any particular caste or creed. A brāhmaṇa can surrender, and so can a kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra. Everyone can adopt this process. As stated in this verse, cakṣuṣmatāndhā iva nīyamānāḥ: one should follow the Lord the way a blind man follows a person who has eyes. If we follow the Supreme Personality of Godhead by following the directions He gives in the Vedas and Bhagavad-gītā, our lives will be successful. The Lord therefore says:



man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo 'si me





"Always think of Me, become My devotee, and offer respect and obeisances unto Me. Then you will certainly come back home, back to Godhead. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend." (Bg. 18.65) This instruction is meant for everyone-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra. If anyone, from any division of life, surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and follows His instructions, his life will be successful.



The previous verse has given the analogy of bulls moving under the direction of the driver of a bullock cart. The bulls, being completely surrendered to the driver, remain wherever he wants to place them and eat whatever he wants them to eat. Similarly, being completely surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we should not aspire for happiness, or regret distress; we must be satisfied with the position allotted to us by the Lord. We should follow the path of devotional service and not be dissatisfied with the happiness and distress He has given. People in the material modes of passion and ignorance generally cannot understand the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with its 8,400,000 forms of life, but the human form affords one the special privilege to understand this plan, engage in devotional service and elevate oneself to the highest position of perfection by following the Lord's instructions. The entire world is working under the influence of the modes of material nature, especially ignorance and passion, but if people engage in hearing and chanting about the glories of the Supreme Lord, their lives can be successful, and they can be elevated to the highest perfection. In the Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa, therefore, it is said:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





"In this age of Kali, there is no other way, no other way, no other way for spiritual perfection than the holy name, the holy name, the holy name of the Lord." Everyone should be given the chance to hear the holy names of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for thus one will gradually come to understand his real position in life and be elevated to the transcendental position above the mode of goodness. Thus all impediments to his progress will be cut to pieces. In conclusion, therefore, we must be satisfied in whatever position we have been put into by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and we should try to engage ourselves in His devotional service. Then our lives will be successful.





TEXT 16



mukto 'pi tāvad bibhṛyāt sva-deham

ārabdham aśnann abhimāna-śūnyaḥ

yathānubhūtaṁ pratiyāta-nidraḥ

kiṁ tv anya-dehāya guṇān na vṛṅkte

SYNONYMS



muktaḥ-a liberated person; api-even; tāvat-so long; bibhṛyāt-must maintain; sva-deham-his own body; ārabdham-obtained as a result of past activity; aśnan-accepting; abhimāna-śūnyaḥ-without erroneous conceptions; yathā-as; anubhūtam-what was perceived; pratiyāta-nidraḥ-one who has awakened from sleep; kim tu-but; anya-dehāya-for another material body; guṇān-the material qualities; na-never; vṛṅkte-enjoys.





Even if one is liberated, he nevertheless accepts the body he has received according to his past karma. Without misconceptions, however, he regards his enjoyment and suffering due to that karma the way an awakened person regards a dream he had while sleeping. He thus remains steadfast and never works to achieve another material body under the influence of the three modes of material nature.





The difference between a liberated and conditioned soul is that the conditioned soul is under the concept of bodily life, whereas a liberated person knows that he is not the body but a spirit, different from the body. Priyavrata might have thought that although a conditioned soul is forced to act according to the laws of nature, why should he, who was far advanced in spiritual understanding, accept the same kind of bondage and impediments to spiritual advancement? To answer this doubt, Lord Brahmā informed him that even those who are liberated do not resent accepting, in the present body, the results of their past activities. While sleeping, one dreams many unreal things, but when he awakens he disregards them and makes progress in factual life. Similarly, a liberated person-one who has completely understood that he is not the body but a spirit soul-disregards past activities performed in ignorance and performs his present activities in such a way that they produce no reactions. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (3.9). Yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ: if one performs activities for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality, the yajña-puruṣa, his work does not produce reactions, whereas karmīs, who act for themselves, are bound by the reactions of their work. A liberated person, therefore, does not think about whatever he has ignorantly done in the past; instead, he acts in such a way that he will not produce another body by fruitive activities. As clearly mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā:



mām ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) Regardless of what we have done in our past lives, if we engage ourselves in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord in this life, we will always be situated in the brahma-bhūta (liberated) state, free from reactions, and will not be obliged to accept another material body. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so 'rjuna (Bg. 4.9). After giving up the body, one who has acted in that way does not accept another material body, but instead goes back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 17



bhayaṁ pramattasya vaneṣv api syād

yataḥ sa āste saha-ṣaṭ-sapatnaḥ

jitendriyasyātma-rater budhasya

gṛhāśramaḥ kiṁ nu karoty avadyam

SYNONYMS



bhayam-fear; pramattasya-of one who is bewildered; vaneṣu-in forests; api-even; syāt-there must be; yataḥ-because; saḥ-he (one who is not self-controlled); āste-is existing; saha-with; ṣaṭ-sapatnaḥ-six co-wives; jita-indriyasya-for one who has already conquered the senses; ātma-rateḥ-self-satisfied; budhasya-for such a learned man; gṛha-āśramaḥ-household life; kim-what; nu-indeed; karoti-can do; avadyam-harm.





Even if he goes from forest to forest, one who is not self-controlled must always fear material bondage because he is living with six co-wives-the mind and knowledge-acquiring senses. Even householder life, however, cannot harm a self-satisfied, learned man who has conquered his senses.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung, gṛhe vā vanete thāke, 'hā gaurāṅga' bale ḍāke: whether one is situated in the forest or at home, if he is engaged in the devotional service of Lord Caitanya, he is a liberated person. Here this is also repeated. For one who has not controlled his senses, going to the forest to become a so-called yogī is meaningless. Because his uncontrolled mind and senses are going with him, he cannot achieve anything, even by giving up household life and staying in the forest. Formerly many mercantile men from the up-country of India used to go to Bengal, and thus there is a familiar saying, "If you go to Bengal, your fortune will go with you." Our first concern, therefore, should be to control the senses, and since the senses cannot be controlled unless engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, our most important duty is to engage the senses in devotional service. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] bhakti means engagement of the purified senses in the service of the Lord.



Herein Lord Brahmā indicates that instead of going to the forest with uncontrolled senses, it is better and more secure to engage the senses in the service of the Lord. Even household life can do no harm to a self-controlled person acting in this way; it cannot force him into material bondage. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has further enunciated this position:



īhā yasya harer dāsye

karmaṇā manasā girā

nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu

jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate





"Regardless of one's circumstances, if one fully engages his activities, mind and words in the devotional service of the Lord, he should be understood to be a liberated person." Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was a responsible officer and a householder, yet his service to the cause of expanding the mission of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu is unique. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura says, durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate. The sense organs are certainly our greatest enemies, and they are therefore compared to venomous serpents. However, if a venomous serpent is bereft of its poison fangs, it is no longer fearful. Similarly, if the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, there is no need to fear their activities. The devotees in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement move within this material world, but because their senses are fully engaged in the service of the Lord, they are always aloof from the material world. They are always living in a transcendental position.





TEXT 18



yaḥ ṣaṭ sapatnān vijigīṣamāṇo

gṛheṣu nirviśya yateta pūrvam

atyeti durgāśrita ūrjitārīn

kṣīṇeṣu kāmaṁ vicared vipaścit

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; ṣaṭ-six; sapatnān-adversaries; vijigīṣamāṇaḥ-desiring to conquer; gṛheṣu-in household life; nirviśya-having entered; yateta-must try; pūrvam-first; atyeti-conquers; durga-āśritaḥ-being in a fortified place; ūrjita-arīn-very strong enemies; kṣīṇeṣu-decreased; kāmam-lusty desires; vicaret-can go; vipaścit-the most experienced, learned.





One who is situated in household life and who systematically conquers his mind and five sense organs is like a king in his fortress who conquers his powerful enemies. After one has been trained in household life and his lusty desires have decreased, he can move anywhere without danger.





The Vedic system of four varṇas and four āśramas is very scientific, and its entire purpose is to enable one to control the senses. Before entering household life (gṛhastha-āśrama), a student is fully trained to become jitendriya, a conqueror of the senses. Such a mature student is allowed to become a householder, and because he was first trained in conquering his senses, he retires from household life and becomes vānaprastha as soon as the strong waves of youthful life are past and he reaches the verge of old age at fifty years or slightly more. Then, after being further trained, he accepts sannyāsa. He is then a fully learned and renounced person who can move anywhere and everywhere without fear of being captivated by material desires. The senses are considered very powerful enemies. As a king in a strong fortress can conquer powerful enemies, so a householder in gṛhastha-āśrama, household life, can conquer the lusty desires of youth and be very secure when he takes vānaprastha and sannyāsa.





TEXT 19



tvaṁ tv abja-nābhāṅghri-saroja-kośa-

durgāśrito nirjita-ṣaṭ-sapatnaḥ

bhuṅkṣveha bhogān puruṣātidiṣṭān

vimukta-saṅgaḥ prakṛtiṁ bhajasva

SYNONYMS



tvam-yourself; tu-then; abja-nābha-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose navel is like a lotus flower; aṅghri-feet; saroja-lotus; kośa-hole; durga-the stronghold; āśritaḥ-taken shelter of; nirjita-conquered; ṣaṭ-sapatnaḥ-the six enemies (the mind and five senses); bhuṅkṣva-enjoy; iha-in this material world; bhogān-enjoyable things; puruṣa-by the Supreme person; atidiṣṭān-extraordinarily ordered; vimukta-liberated; saṅgaḥ-from material association; prakṛtim-constitutional position; bhajasva-enjoy.





Lord Brahmā continued: My dear Priyavrata, seek shelter inside the opening in the lotus of the feet of the Lord, whose navel is also like a lotus. Thus conquer the six sense organs [the mind and knowledge-acquiring senses]. Accept material enjoyment because the Lord, extraordinarily, has ordered you to do this. You will thus always be liberated from material association and be able to carry out the Lord's orders in your constitutional position.





There are three kinds of men within this material world. Those who are trying to enjoy the senses to the utmost are called karmīs, above them are the jñānīs, who try to conquer the urges of the senses, and above them are the yogīs, who have already conquered the senses. None of them, however, are situated in a transcendental position. Only devotees. who belong to none of the above-mentioned groups, are transcendental. As explained in Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman." Lord Brahmā herein advises Priyavrata to remain transcendental in the fortress not of family life but of the lotus feet of the Lord (abja-nābhāṅghri-saroja). When a bumblebee enters the opening of a lotus flower and drinks its honey, it is fully protected by the petals of the lotus. The bee is undisturbed by sunshine and other external influences. Similarly, one who always seeks shelter at the lotus feet of the personality of Godhead is protected from all dangers. It is therefore said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.58):



samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ

mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ

bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ

padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām





For one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, everything becomes easier. Indeed, even crossing the great ocean of nescience (bhavāmbudhi) is exactly like crossing the hoofprint created by a calf (vatsa-padam). For such a devotee, there is no question of remaining in a place where every step is dangerous.



Our actual duty is to carry out the supreme order of the Personality of Godhead. If we are fixed in our determination to carry out the supreme order of the Lord, we are always secure, regardless of where we are situated, whether in hell or in heaven. Herein the words prakṛtiṁ bhajasva are very significant. Prakṛtim refers to one's constitutional position. Every living entity has the constitutional position of being an eternal servant of God. Therefore Lord Brahmā advised Priyavrata, "Be situated in your original position as an eternal servant of the Lord. If you carry out His orders, you will never fall, even in the midst of material enjoyment." Material enjoyment achieved by dint of one's fruitive activities differs from material enjoyment given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A devotee sometimes appears to be in a very opulent position, but he accepts that position to follow the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore a devotee is never affected by material influences. The devotees in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement are preaching all over the world in accordance with the order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. They have to meet many karmīs, but by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they are unaffected by material influences. He has blessed them, as described in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 7.129):



kabhu nā bādhibe tomāra viṣaya-taraṅga

punarapi ei ṭhāñi pābe mora saṅge





A sincere devotee who engages in the service of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu by preaching His cult all over the world will never be affected by viṣaya-taraṅga, material influences. On the contrary, in due course of time he will return to the shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and will thus have perpetual association with Him.





TEXT 20



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti samabhihito mahā-bhāgavato bhagavatas tri-bhuvana-guror anuśāsanam ātmano laghutayāvanata-śirodharo bāḍham iti sabahu-mānam uvāha.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; samabhihitaḥ-completely instructed; mahā-bhāgavataḥ-the great devotee; bhagavataḥ-of the most powerful Lord Brahmā; tri-bhuvana-of the three worlds; guroḥ-the spiritual master; anuśāsanam-the order; ātmanaḥ-of himself; laghutayā-because of inferiority; avanata-bowed down; śirodharaḥ-his head; bāḍham-yes, sir; iti-thus; sa-bahu-mānam-with great respect; uvāha-carried out.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After thus being fully instructed by Lord Brahmā, who is the spiritual master of the three worlds, Priyavrata, his own position being inferior, offered obeisances, accepted the order and carried it out with great respect.





Śrī Priyavrata was the grandson of Lord Brahmā. Therefore according to social etiquette, his position was inferior. It is the duty of the inferior to carry out the order of the superior with great respect. Priyavrata therefore immediately said, "Yes, sir. I shall carry out your order." Priyavrata is described as a mahā-bhāgavata, a great devotee. The duty of a great devotee is to carry out the order of the spiritual master, or the spiritual master of the spiritual master in the paramparā system. As described in Bhagavad-gītā (4.2), evaṁ paramparā prāptam: one has to receive the instructions of the Supreme Lord through the disciplic chain of spiritual masters. A devotee of the Lord always considers himself a servant of the servant of the servant of the Lord.





TEXT 21



bhagavān api manunā yathāvad upakalpitāpacitiḥ priyavrata-nāradayor aviṣamam abhisamīkṣamāṇayor ātmasam avasthānam avāṅ-manasaṁ kṣayam avyavahṛtaṁ pravartayann agamat.



SYNONYMS



bhagavān-the most powerful Lord Brahmā; api-also; manunā-by Manu; yathāvat-as deserved; upakalpita-apacitiḥ-being worshiped; priyavrata-nāradayoḥ-in the presence of Priyavrata and Nārada; aviṣamam-without aversion; abhisamīkṣamāṇayoḥ-looking on; ātmasam-just suitable for his position; avasthānam-to his abode; avāk-manasam-beyond the description of mind and words; kṣayam-the planet; avyavahṛtam-extraordinarily situated; pravartayan-departing; agamat-returned.





Lord Brahmā was then worshiped by Manu, who respectfully satisfied him as well as he could. Priyavrata and Nārada also looked upon Brahmā with no tinges of resentment. Having engaged Priyavrata in accepting his father's request, Lord Brahmā returned to his abode, Satyaloka, which is indescribable by the endeavor of mundane mind or words.





Manu was certainly very satisfied that Lord Brahmā had persuaded his son Priyavrata to take the responsibility for ruling the world. Priyavrata and Nārada were also very satisfied. Although Brahmā had forced Priyavrata to accept the management of worldly affairs, thus breaking his vow to remain brahmacārī and completely engage in devotional service, Nārada and Priyavrata did not look upon Brahmā with resentment. Nārada was not at all sorry that he had been frustrated in making Priyavrata a disciple. Both Priyavrata and Nārada were exalted personalities who knew how to respect Lord Brahmā. Therefore instead of looking upon Brahmā with resentment, they very feelingly offered him their respect. Lord Brahmā then returned to his celestial abode, known as Satyaloka, which is described here as being impeccable and being unapproachable by words.



It is stated in this verse that Lord Brahmā returned to his residence, which is as important as his own personality. Lord Brahmā is the creator of this universe and the most exalted personality within it. His lifetime is described in Bhagavad-gītā (8.17). Sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ. The total duration of the four yugas is 4,300,000 years, and when that is multiplied a thousand times, it equals twelve hours in the life of Brahmā. Therefore we cannot factually comprehend even twelve hours of Brahmā's life, to say nothing of the one hundred years that constitute his entire lifetime. How, then, can we understand his abode? The Vedic literatures describe that in Satyaloka there is no birth, death, old age or disease. In other words, since Satyaloka is situated next to Brahmaloka, or the Brahman effulgence, it is almost as good as Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Lord Brahmā's abode is practically indescribable from our present status. Therefore it has been described as avāṅ-manasa-gocara, or beyond the description of our words and the imagination of our minds. The Vedic literatures thus describe the abode of Lord Brahmā: yad vai parārdhyaṁ tad upārameṣṭhyaṁ na yatra śoko na jarā na mṛtyur nārtir na codvegaḥ. "In Satyaloka, which is situated many millions and billions of years away, there is no lamentation, nor is there old age, death, anxiety or the influence of enemies."





TEXT 22



manur api pareṇaivaṁ pratisandhita-manorathaḥ surarṣi-varānumatenātmajam akhila-dharā-maṇḍala-sthiti-guptaya āsthāpya svayam ati-viṣama-viṣaya-viṣa-jalāśayāśāyā upararāma.



SYNONYMS



manuḥ-Svāyambhuva Manu; api-also; pareṇa-by Lord Brahmā; evam-thus; pratisandhita-executed; manaḥ-rathaḥ-his mental aspiration; sura-ṛṣi-vara-of the great sage Nārada; anumatena-by the permission; ātma-jam-his son; akhila-of the entire universe; dharā-maṇḍala-of planets; sthiti-maintenance; guptaye-for the protection; āsthāpya-establishing; svayam-personally; ati-viṣama-very dangerous; viṣaya-material affairs; viṣa-of poison; jala-āśaya-ocean; āśāyāḥ-from desires; upararāma-got relief.





Svāyambhuva Manu, with the assistance of Lord Brahmā, thus fulfilled his desires. With the permission of the great sage Nārada, he delivered to his son the governmental responsibility for maintaining and protecting all the planets of the universe. He thus achieved relief from the most dangerous, poisonous ocean of material desires.





Svāyambhuva Manu was practically hopeless because such a great personality as Nārada was instructing his son Priyavrata not to accept household life. Now he was very pleased that Lord Brahmā had interfered by inducing his son to accept the responsibility for ruling the government of the universe. From Bhagavad-gītā we get information that Vaivasvata Manu was the son of the sun-god and that his son, Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, ruled this planet earth. Svāyambhuva Manu, however, appears to have been in charge of the entire universe, and he entrusted to his son, Mahārāja Priyavrata, the responsibility for maintaining and protecting all the planetary systems. Dharā-maṇḍala means "planet." This earth, for instance, is called dharā-maṇḍala. Akhila, however, means "all" or "universal." It is therefore difficult to understand where Mahārāja Priyavrata was situated, but from this literature his position certainly appears greater than that of Vaivasvata Manu, for he was entrusted with all the planetary systems of the entire universe.



Another significant statement is that Svāyambhuva Manu took great satisfaction from abnegating the responsibility for ruling all the planetary systems of the universe. At present, politicians are very eager to take charge of the government, and they engage their men in canvassing from door to door to get votes to win the post of president or a similar exalted office. On the contrary, however, herein we find that King Priyavrata had to be persuaded by Lord Brahmā to accept the post of emperor of the entire universe. Similarly, his father, Svāyambhuva Manu, felt relieved to entrust the universal government to Priyavrata. Thus it is evident that the kings and executive heads of government in the Vedic age never accepted their positions for sense enjoyment. Such exalted kings, who were known as rājarṣis, ruled only to maintain and protect the kingdom for the welfare of the citizens. The history of Priyavrata and Svāyambhuva Manu describes how exemplary, responsible monarchs performed the duties of government with disinterest, keeping themselves always aloof from the contamination of material attachment.



Material affairs have herein been compared to an ocean of poison. They have been described in a similar way by Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura in one of his songs:



saṁsāra-viṣānale, divā-niśi hiyā jvale,

juḍāite nā kainu upāya

"My heart is always burning in the fire of material existence. and I have made no provisions for getting out of it."



golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana,

rati nā janmila kene tāya

"The only remedy is hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, which is imported from the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana. How unfortunate I am that I have no attraction for this." Manu wanted to seek shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore when his son Priyavrata took charge of his worldly affairs, Manu was very relieved. That is the system of Vedic civilization. At the end of life, one must free himself from worldly affairs and completely engage in the service of the Lord.



The word surarṣi-vara-anumatena is also significant. Manu entrusted the government to his son with the permission of the great saint Nārada. This is particularly mentioned because although Nārada wanted Priyavrata to become free from all material affairs, when Priyavrata took charge of the universe by the request of Lord Brahmā and Manu, Nārada was also very pleased.





TEXT 23



iti ha vāva sa jagatī-patir īśvarecchayādhiniveśita-karmādhikāro 'khila-jagad-bandha-dhvaṁsana-parānubhāvasya bhagavata ādi-puruṣasyāṅghri-yugalānavarata-dhyānānubhāvena parirandhita-kaṣāyāśayo 'vadāto 'pi māna-vardhano mahatāṁ mahītalam anuśaśāsa.



SYNONYMS



iti-thus; ha vāva-indeed; saḥ-he; jagatī-patiḥ-the emperor of the whole universe; īśvara-icchayā-by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhiniveśita-completely engaged; karma-adhikāraḥ-in material affairs; akhila-jagat-of the entire universe; bandha-bondage; dhvaṁsana-destroying; para-transcendental; anubhāvasya-whose influence; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-puruṣasya-the original person; aṅghri-on the lotus feet; yugala-two; anavarata-constant; dhyāna-anubhāvena-by meditation; parirandhita-destroyed; kaṣāya-all the dirty things; āśayaḥ-in his heart; avadātaḥ-completely pure; api-although; māna-vardhanaḥ-just to give honor; mahatām-to superiors; mahītalam-the material world; anuśaśāsa-ruled.





Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahārāja Priyavrata fully engaged in worldly affairs, yet he always thought of the lotus feet of the Lord, which are the cause of liberation from all material attachment. Although Priyavrata Mahārāja was completely freed from all material contamination, he ruled the material world just to honor the orders of his superiors.





The words māna-vardhano mahatām ("just to show honor to superiors") are very significant. Although Mahārāja Priyavrata was already a liberated person and had no attraction for material things, he engaged himself fully in governmental affairs just to show respect to Lord Brahmā. Arjuna had also acted in the same way. Arjuna had no desire to participate in political affairs or the fighting at Kurukṣetra, but when ordered to do so by the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, he executed those duties very nicely. One who always thinks of the lotus feet of the Lord is certainly above all the contamination of the material world. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā:



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) Mahārāja Priyavrata. therefore, was a liberated person and was among the highest of yogīs, yet superficially he became the emperor of the universe in accordance with the order of Lord Brahmā. Showing respect to his superior in this way was another of his extraordinary qualifications. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.17.28):



nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve

na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narkeṣv

api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ





A devotee who is actually advanced is not afraid of anything, provided be has the opportunity to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the proper explanation of why Priyavrata engaged in worldly affairs although he was a liberated person. Also, only because of this principle does a mahā-bhāgavata, who has nothing to do with the material world, come down to the second platform of devotional service to preach the glories of the Lord all over the world.





TEXT 24



atha ca duhitaraṁ prajāpater viśvakarmaṇa upayeme barhiṣmatīṁ nāma tasyām u ha vāva ātmajān ātma-samāna-śīla-guṇa-karma-rūpa-vīryodārān daśa bhāvayām babhūva kanyāṁ ca yavīyasīm ūrjasvatīṁ nāma.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; ca-also; duhitaram-the daughter; prajāpateḥ-of one of the prajāpatis entrusted with increasing population; viśvakarmaṇaḥ-named Viśvakarmā; upayeme-married; barhiṣmatīm-Barhiṣmatī; nāma-named; tasyām-in her; u ha-as it is celebrated; vāva-wonderful; ātma-jān-sons; ātma-samāna-exactly equal to him; śīla-character; guṇa-quality; karma-activities; rūpa-beauty; vīrya-prowess; udārān-whose magnanimity; daśa-ten; bhāvayām babhūva-he begot; kanyām-daughter; ca-also; yavīyasīm-the youngest of all; ūrjasvatīm-Ūrjasvatī; nāma-named.





Thereafter, Mahārāja Priyavrata married Barhiṣmatī, the daughter of the prajāpati named Viśvakarmā. In her he begot ten sons equal to him in beauty, character, magnanimity and other qualities. He also begot a daughter, the youngest of all, named Ūrjasvatī.





Mahārāja Priyavrata not only carried out the order of Lord Brahmā by accepting the duties of government, but also married Barhiṣmatī, the daughter of Viśvakarmā, one of the prajāpatis. Since Mahārāja Priyavrata was fully trained in transcendental knowledge, he could have returned home and conducted the business of government as a brahmacārī. Instead, however, when he returned to household life, he accepted a wife also. The principle is that when one becomes a gṛhastha, he must live perfectly in that order, which means he must live peacefully with a wife and children. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu's first wife died, His mother requested Him to marry for a second time. He was twenty years old and was going to take sannyāsa at the age of twenty-four, yet by the request of His mother, He married. "As long as I am in household life," He told His mother, "I must have a wife, for household life does not mean staying in a house. Real household life means living in a house with a wife."



Three words in this verse are very significant-u ha vāva. These words are used to express wonder. Priyavrata Mahārāja had taken a vow of renunciation, but accepting a wife and begetting children have nothing to do with the path of renunciation; these are activities on the path of enjoyment. It was a source of great wonder, therefore, that Priyavrata Mahārāja, who had followed the path of renunciation, had now accepted the path of enjoyment.



Sometimes we are criticized because although I am a sannyāsī, I have taken part in the marriage ceremonies of my disciples. It must be explained, however, that since we have started a Kṛṣṇa conscious society and since a human society must also have ideal marriages, to correctly establish an ideal society we must take part in marrying some of its members, although we have taken to the path of renunciation. This may be astonishing to persons who are not very interested in establishing daiva-varṇāśrama, the transcendental system of four social orders and four spiritual orders. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, however, wanted to reestablish daiva-varṇāśrama. In daiva-varṇāśrama there cannot be acknowledgement of social status according to birthright because in Bhagavad-gītā it is said that the determining considerations are guṇa and karma, one's qualities and work. It is this daiva-varṇāśrama that should be established all over the world to continue a perfect society for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This may be astonishing to foolish critics, but it is one of the functions of a Kṛṣṇa conscious society.





TEXT 25



āgnīdhredhmajihva-yajñabāhu-mahāvīra-hiraṇyareto-ghṛtapṛṣṭha-savana-medhātithi-vītihotra-kavaya iti sarva evāgni-nāmānaḥ.



SYNONYMS



āgnīdhra-Āgnīdhra; idhma-jihva-Idhmajihva; yajña-bāhu-Yajñabāhu; mahā-vīra-Mahāvīra; hiraṇya-retaḥ-Hiraṇyaretā; ghṛtapṛṣṭha-Ghṛtapṛṣṭha; savana-Savana; medhā-tithi-Medhātithi; vītihotra-Vītihotra; kavayaḥ-and Kavi; iti-thus; sarve-all these; eva-certainly; agni-of the demigod controlling fire; nāmānaḥ-names.





The ten sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata were named Āgnīdhra, Idhmajihva, Yajñabāhu, Mahāvīra, Hiraṇyaretā, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, Savana, Medhātithi, Vītihotra and Kavi. These are also names of Agni, the fire-god.





TEXT 26



eteṣāṁ kavir mahāvīraḥ savana iti traya āsann ūrdhva-retasas ta ātma-vidyāyām arbha-bhāvād ārabhya kṛta-paricayāḥ pāramahaṁsyam evāśramam abhajan.



SYNONYMS



eteṣām-of these; kaviḥ-Kavi; mahāvīraḥ-Mahāvīra; savanaḥ-Savana; iti-thus; trayaḥ-three; āsan-were; ūrdhva-retasaḥ-completely celibate; te-they; ātma-vidyāyām-in transcendental knowledge; arbha-bhāvāt-from childhood; ārabhya-beginning; kṛta-paricayāḥ-very well versed; pāramahaṁsyam-of the highest spiritual perfection of human life; eva-certainly; āśramam-the order; abhajan-executed.





Three among these ten-namely Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savana-lived in complete celibacy. Thus trained in brahmacārī life from the beginning of childhood, they were very conversant with the highest perfection, known as the paramahaṁsa-āśrama.





The word ūrdhva-retasaḥ in this verse is very significant. Ūrdhva-retaḥ refers to one who can control sex life and who instead of wasting semen by discharging it, can use this most important substance accumulated in the body to enrich the brain. One who can completely control sex life is able to work wonderfully with his brain, especially in remembering. Thus students who simply hear Vedic instructions once from their teacher could remember them verbatim without needing to read books, which therefore did not exist in former times.



Another significant word is arbha-bhāvāt, which means "from very childhood." Another meaning is "from being very affectionate to children." In other words, paramahaṁsa life is dedicated for the benefit of others. Just as a father sacrifices many things out of affection for his son, great saintly persons sacrifice all kinds of bodily comforts for the benefit of human society. In this connection there is a verse concerning the six Gosvāmīs:



tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tucchavat

bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau





Because of their compassion for the poor fallen souls. the six Gosvāmīs gave up their exalted positions as ministers and took vows as mendicants. Thus minimizing their bodily wants as far as possible, they each accepted only a loincloth and a begging bowl. Thus they remained in Vṛndāvana to execute the orders of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu by compiling and publishing various Vaiṣṇava literatures.





TEXT 27



tasminn u ha vā upaśama-śīlāḥ paramarṣayaḥ sakala-jīva-nikāyāvāsasya bhagavato vāsudevasya bhītānāṁ śaraṇa-bhūtasya śrīmac-caraṇāravindāvirata-smaraṇāvigalita-parama-bhakti-yogānu-bhāvena paribhāvitāntar-hṛdayādhigate bhagavati sarveṣāṁ bhūtānām ātma-bhūte pratyag-ātmany evātmanas tādātmyam aviśeṣeṇa samīyuḥ.



SYNONYMS



tasmin-in that paramahaṁsa-āśrama; u-certainly; ha-so celebrated; vā-indeed; upaśama-śīlāḥ-in the renounced order of life; parama-ṛṣayaḥ-the great sages; sakala-all; jīva-of living entities; nikāya-in total; āvāsasya-the residence; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevasya-Lord Vāsudeva; bhītānām-of those afraid of material existence; śaraṇa-bhūtasya-the one who is the only shelter; śrīmat-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; caraṇa-aravinda-the lotus feet; avirata-constantly; smaraṇa-remembering; avigalita-completely uncontaminated; parama-supreme; bhakti-yoga-of mystic devotional service; anubhāvena-by the prowess; paribhāvita-purified; antaḥ-within; hṛdaya-the heart; adhigate-perceived; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarveṣām-of all; bhūtānām-living entities; ātma-bhūte-situated within the body; pratyak-directly; ātmani-with the Supreme Supersoul; eva-certainly; ātmanaḥ-of the self; tādātmyam-qualitative equality; aviśeṣeṇa-without differences; samīyuḥ-realized.





Thus situated in the renounced order from the beginning of their lives, all three of them completely controlled the activities of their senses and thus became great saints. They concentrated their minds always upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the resting place of the totality of living entities and who is therefore celebrated as Vāsudeva. Lord Vāsudeva is the only shelter of those who are actually afraid of material existence. By constantly thinking of His lotus feet, these three sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata became advanced in pure devotional service. By the prowess of their devotional service, they could directly perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul, and realize that there was qualitatively no difference between themselves and Him.





The paramahaṁsa stage is the topmost position in renounced life. In sannyāsa, the renounced order, there are four stages-kuṭīcaka, bahūdaka, parivrājakācārya and paramahaṁsa. According to the Vedic system, when one accepts the renounced order, he stays outside his village in a cottage, and his necessities, especially his food, are supplied from home. This is called the kuṭīcaka stage. When a sannyāsī advances further, he no longer accepts anything from home: instead, he collects his necessities, especially his food, from many places. This system is called mādhukarī, which literally means "the profession of the bumblebees." As bumblebees collect honey from many flowers, a little from each, so a sannyāsī should beg from door to door but not accept very much food from any particular house; he should collect a little bit from every house. This is called the bahūdaka stage. When a sannyāsī is still more experienced, he travels all over the world to preach the glories of Lord Vāsudeva. He is then known as parivrājakācārya. The sannyāsī reaches the paramahaṁsa stage when he finishes his preaching work and sits down in one place, strictly for the sake of advancing in spiritual life. An actual paramahaṁsa is one who completely controls his senses and engages in the unalloyed service of the Lord. Therefore all three of these sons of Priyavrata, namely Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savana, were situated in the paramahaṁsa stage from the very beginning. Their senses could not disturb them, for their senses were completely engaged in serving the Lord. Therefore the three brothers are described in this verse as upaśama-śīlāḥ. Upaśama means "completely subdued." Because they completely subdued their senses, they are understood to have been great sages and saints.



After subduing their senses, the three brothers concentrated their minds upon the lotus feet of Vāsudeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19), vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti. The lotus feet of Vāsudeva are everything. Lord Vāsudeva is the reservoir of all living entities. When this cosmic manifestation is dissolved, all living entities enter the supreme body of the Lord, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who merges within the body of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Both of these viṣṇu-tattvas are vāsudeva-tattvas, and therefore the great sages Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savana concentrated always upon the lotus feet of Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. In this way they could understand that the Supersoul within the heart is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they could recognize their identity with Him. The complete description of this realization is that simply by discharging the unalloyed form of devotional service, one can realize his self completely. The parama-bhakti-yoga mentioned in this verse means that a living entity, by dint of unalloyed devotional service, has no other interest than the service of the Lord, as described in Bhagavad-gītā (vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]). By parama-bhakti-yoga, by elevating oneself to the highest platform of loving service, one can automatically be relieved from the bodily concept of life and see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. As confirmed in Brahma-saṁhitā:



premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.38]





An advanced devotee, who is known as a sat, or saint, can always see within his heart the Supreme Personality of Godhead, face to face. Kṛṣṇa, Śyāmasundara, expands Himself by His plenary portion, and thus a devotee can always see Him within his heart.





TEXT 28



anyasyām api jāyāyāṁ trayaḥ putrā āsann uttamas tāmaso raivata iti manvantarādhipatayaḥ.



SYNONYMS



anyasyām-other; api-also; jāyāyām-in the wife; trayaḥ-three; putrāḥ-sons; āsan-there were; uttamaḥ tāmasaḥ raivataḥ-Uttama, Tāmasa and Raivata; iti-thus; manu-antara-of the manvantara millennium; adhipatayaḥ-rulers.





In his other wife, Mahārāja Priyavrata begot three sons, named Uttama, Tāmasa and Raivata. All of them later took charge of manvantara millenniums.





In every day of Brahmā there are fourteen manvantaras. The duration of one manvantara, the lifespan of one Manu, is seventy-one yugas, and each yuga is 4,320,000 years. Almost all the Manus selected to rule the manvantaras came from the family of Mahārāja Priyavrata. Three of them are particularly mentioned herein, namely Uttama, Tāmasa and Raivata.





TEXT 29



evam upaśamāyaneṣu sva-tanayeṣv atha jagatī-patir jagatīm arbudāny ekādaśa parivatsarāṇām avyāhatākhila-puruṣa-kāra-sāra-sambhṛta-dor-daṇḍa-yugalāpīḍita-maurvī-guṇa-stanita-viramita-dharma-pratipakṣo barhiṣmatyāś cānudinam edhamāna-pramoda-prasaraṇa-yauṣiṇya-vrīḍā-pramuṣita-hāsāvaloka-rucira-kṣvely-ādibhiḥ parābhūyamāna-viveka ivānavabudhyamāna iva mahāmanā bubhuje.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; upaśama-ayaneṣu-all well qualified; sva-tanayeṣu-his own sons; atha-thereafter; jagatī-patiḥ-the master of the universe; jagatīm-the universe; arbudāni-arbudas (one arbuda equals 100,000,000); ekādaśa-eleven; parivatsarāṇām-of years; avyāhata-without being interrupted; akhila-universal; puruṣa-kāra-prowess; sāra-strength; sambhṛta-endowed with; doḥ-daṇḍaḥ-of powerful arms; yugala-by the pair; āpīḍita-being drawn; maurvī-guṇa-of the bowstring; stanita-by the loud sound; viramita-defeated; dharma-religious principles; pratipakṣaḥ-those who are against; barhiṣmatyāḥ-of his wife Barhiṣmatī; ca-and; anudinam-daily; edhamāna-increasing; pramoda-pleasing intercourse; prasaraṇa-amiability; yauṣiṇya-feminine behavior; vrīḍā-by shyness; pramuṣita-held back; hāsa-laughing; avaloka-glancing; rucira-pleasing; kṣveli-ādibhiḥ-by exchanges of loving propensities; parābhūyamāna-being defeated; vivekaḥ-his true knowledge; iva-like; anavabudhyamānaḥ-a less intelligent person; iva-like; mahā-manāḥ-the great soul; bubhuje-ruled.





After Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savana were completely trained in the paramahaṁsa stage of life, Mahārāja Priyavrata ruled the universe for eleven arbudas of years. Whenever he was determined to fix his arrow upon his bowstring with his two powerful arms, all opponents of the regulative principles of religious life would flee from his presence in fear of the unparalleled prowess he displayed in ruling the universe. He greatly loved his wife Barhiṣmatī, and with the increase of days, their exchange of nuptial love also increased. By her feminine behavior as she dressed herself, walked, got up, smiled, laughed, and glanced about, Queen Barhiṣmatī increased his energy. Thus although he was a great soul, he appeared lost in the feminine conduct of his wife. He behaved with her just like an ordinary man, but actually he was a great soul.





In this verse, the word dharma-pratipakṣaḥ ("opponents of religious principles") refers not to a particular faith, but to varṇāśrama-dharma, the division of society, socially and spiritually, into four varṇas (brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra) and four āśramas (brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa). To maintain proper social order and help the citizens gradually progress toward the goal of life-namely spiritual understanding-the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma must be accepted. From this verse, Mahārāja Priyavrata appears to have been so strict in maintaining this institution of varṇāśrama-dharma that anyone neglecting it would immediately flee from his presence as soon as the King warned him by fighting or administering light punishment. Indeed, Mahārāja Priyavrata would not have to fight, for simply because of his strong determination, they dared not disobey the rules and regulations of varṇāśrama-dharma. It is said that unless human society is regulated by varṇāśrama-dharma, it is no better than a bestial society of cats and dogs. Mahārāja Priyavrata, therefore, strictly maintained varṇāśrama-dharma by his extraordinary, unparalleled prowess.



To maintain such a life of strict vigilance, one needs encouragement from his wife. In the varṇāśrama-dharma system, certain classes, such as the brāhmaṇas and sannyāsīs, do not need encouragement from the opposite sex. Kṣatriyas and gṛhasthas, however, actually need the encouragement of their wives in order to execute their duties. Indeed, a gṛhastha or kṣatriya cannot properly execute his responsibilities without the association of his wife. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu personally admitted that a gṛhastha must live with a wife. Kṣatriyas were even allowed to have many wives to encourage them in discharging the duties of government. The association of a good wife is necessary in a life of karma and political affairs. To execute his duties properly, therefore. Mahārāja Priyavrata took advantage of his good wife Barhiṣmatī, who was always very expert in pleasing her great husband by properly dressing herself, smiling, and exhibiting her feminine bodily features. Queen Barhiṣmatī always kept Mahārāja Priyavrata very encouraged, and thus he executed his governmental duty very properly. In this verse iva has twice been used to indicate that Mahārāja Priyavrata acted exactly like a henpecked husband and thereby seemed to have lost his sense of human responsibility. Actually, however, he was fully conscious of his position as a spirit soul, although he seemingly behaved like an acquiescent karmī husband. Mahārāja Priyavrata thus ruled the universe for eleven arbudas of years. One arbuda consists of 100,000,000 years, and Mahārāja Priyavrata ruled the universe for eleven such arbudas.





TEXT 30



yāvad avabhāsayati sura-girim anuparikrāman bhagavān ādityo vasudhā-talam ardhenaiva pratapaty ardhenāvacchādayati tadā hi bhagavad-upāsanopacitāti-puruṣa-prabhāvas tad anabhinandan samajavena rathena jyotirmayena rajanīm api dinaṁ kariṣyāmīti sapta-kṛt vastaraṇim anuparyakrāmad dvitīya iva pataṅgaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yāvat-so long; avabhāsayati-illuminates; sura-girim-the Sumeru Hill; anuparikrāman-by circumambulating; bhagavān-the most powerful; ādityaḥ-sun-god; vasudhā-talam-the lower planetary system; ardhena-by half; eva-certainly; pratapati-makes dazzling; ardhena-by half; avacchādayati-covers with darkness; tadā-at that time; hi-certainly; bhagavat-upāsanā-by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upacita-by satisfying Him perfectly; ati-puruṣa-superhuman; prabhāvaḥ-influence; tat-that; anabhinandan-without appreciating; samajavena-by equally powerful; rathena-on a chariot; jyotiḥ-mayena-dazzling; rajanīm-night; api-also; dinam-day; kariṣyāmi-I shall make it; iti-thus; sapta-kṛt-seven times; vastaraṇim-exactly following the orbit of the sun; anuparyakrāmat-circumambulated; dvitīyaḥ-second; iva-like; pataṅgaḥ-sun.





While so excellently ruling the universe, King Priyavrata once became dissatisfied with the circumambulation of the most powerful sun-god. Encircling Sumeru Hill on his chariot, the sun-god illuminates all the surrounding planetary systems. However, when the sun is on the northern side of the hill, the south receives less light, and when the sun is in the south, the north receives less. King Priyavrata disliked this situation and therefore decided to make daylight in the part of the universe where there was night. He followed the orbit of the sun-god on a brilliant chariot and thus fulfilled his desire. He could perform such wonderful activities because of the power he had achieved by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





There is a Bengali saying which describes that someone is so powerful that he can make the night day and the day night. That saying is current because of the prowess of Priyavrata. His activities demonstrate how powerful he became by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Kṛṣṇa is known as Yogeśvara, the master of all mystic powers. In Bhagavad-gītā (18.78) it is said wherever there is the master of all mystic powers (yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇaḥ), victory, fortune and all other opulences are present. Devotional service is so powerful. When a devotee achieves what he wants to accomplish, it is not by his own mystic power but by the grace of the master of mystic power. Lord Kṛṣṇa: by His grace, a devotee can accomplish wonderful things unimaginable even to the most powerful scientist.



From the description in this verse, it appears that the sun moves. According to modern astronomers, the sun is fixed in one place, surrounded by the solar system, but here we find that the sun is not stationary: it is rotating in a prescribed orbit. This fact is corroborated by Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52). Yasyājñayā bhramati saṁbhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ: the sun is rotating in its fixed orbit in accordance with the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to Jyotir Veda, the science of astronomy in the Vedic literature, the sun moves for six months on the northern side of the Sumeru Hill and for six months on the southern side. We have practical experience on this planet that when there is summer in the north there is winter in the south and vice versa. Modern materialistic scientists sometimes present themselves as knowing all the ingredients of the sun, yet they are unable to offer a second sun like Mahārāja Priyavrata's.



Although Mahārāja Priyavrata devised a very powerful chariot as brilliant as the sun, he had no desire to compete with the sun-god, for a Vaiṣṇava never wants to supersede another Vaiṣṇava. His purpose was to give abundant benefits in material existence. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that in the months of April and May the rays of Mahārāja Priyavrata's brilliant sun were as pleasing as the rays of the moon, and in October and November, both morning and evening, that sun provided more warmth than the sunshine. In short, Mahārāja Priyavrata was extremely powerful, and his actions extended his power in all directions.





TEXT 31



ye vā u ha tad-ratha-caraṇa-nemi-kṛta-parikhātās te sapta sindhava āsan yata eva kṛtāḥ sapta bhuvo dvīpāḥ.



SYNONYMS



ye-that; vā u ha-certainly; tat-ratha-of his chariot; caraṇa-of the wheels; nemi-by the rims; kṛta-made; parikhātāḥ-trenches; te-those; sapta-seven; sindhavaḥ-oceans; āsan-became; yataḥ-because of which; eva-certainly; kṛtāḥ-were made; sapta-seven; bhuvaḥ-of the Bhū-maṇḍala; dvīpāḥ-islands.





When Priyavrata drove his chariot behind the sun, the rims of his chariot wheels created impressions that later became seven oceans, dividing the planetary system known as Bhū-maṇḍala into seven islands.





Sometimes the planets in outer space are called islands. We have experience of various types of islands in the ocean, and similarly the various planets, divided into fourteen lokas, are islands in the ocean of space. As Priyavrata drove his chariot behind the sun, he created seven different types of oceans and planetary systems, which altogether are known as Bhū-maṇḍala, or Bhūloka. In the Gāyatrī mantra, we chant, oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur vareṇyam. Above the Bhūloka planetary system is Bhuvarloka, and above that is Svargaloka, the heavenly planetary system. All these planetary systems are controlled by Savitā, the sun-god. By chanting the Gāyatrī mantra just after rising early in the morning, one worships the sun-god.





TEXT 32



jambū-plakṣa-śālmali-kuśa-krauñca-śāka-puṣkara-saṁjñās teṣāṁ parimāṇaṁ pūrvasmāt pūrvasmād uttara uttaro yathā-saṅkhyaṁ dvi-guṇa-mānena bahiḥ samantata upakḷptāḥ.



SYNONYMS



jambū-Jambū; plakṣa-Plakṣa; śālmali-Śālmali; kuśa-Kuśa; krauñca-Krauñca; śāka-Śāka; puṣkara-Puṣkara; saṁjñāḥ-known as; teṣām-of them; parimāṇam-measurement; pūrvasmāt pūrvasmāt-from the former; uttaraḥ uttaraḥ-the following; yathā-according to; saṅkhyam-number; dvi-guṇa-twice as much; mānena-with a measure; bahiḥ-outside; samantataḥ-all around; upakḷptāḥ-produced.





The names of the islands are Jambū, Plakṣa, Śālmali, Kuśa, Krauñca, Śāka and Puṣkara. Each island is twice as large as the one preceding it, and each is surrounded by a liquid substance, beyond which is the next island.





The ocean in each planetary system has a different type of liquid. How they are situated is explained in the next verse.





TEXT 33



kṣārodekṣu-rasoda-suroda-ghṛtoda-kṣīroda-dadhi-maṇḍoda-śuddhodāḥ sapta jaladhayaḥ sapta dvīpa-parikhā ivābhyantara-dvīpa-samānā ekaikaśyena yathānupūrvaṁ saptasv api bahir dvīpeṣu pṛthak parita upakalpitās teṣu jambv-ādiṣu barhiṣmatī-patir anuvratānātmajān āgnīdhredhmajihva-yajñabāhu-hiraṇyareto-ghṛtapṛṣṭha-medhātithi-vītihotra-saṁjñān yathā-saṅkhyenaikaikasminn ekam evādhi-patiṁ vidadhe.



SYNONYMS



kṣāra-salt; uda-water; ikṣu-rasa-the liquid extract from sugarcane; uda-water; surā-liquor; uda-water; ghṛta-clarified butter; uda-water; kṣīra-milk; uda-water; dadhi-maṇḍa-emulsified yogurt; uda-water; śuddha-udāḥ-and drinking water; sapta-seven; jala-dhayaḥ-oceans; sapta-seven; dvīpa-islands; parikhāḥ-trenches; iva-like; abhyantara-internal; dvīpa-islands; samānāḥ-equal to; eka-ekaśyena-one after another; yathā-anupūrvam-in chronological order; saptasu-seven; api-although; bahiḥ-outside; dvīpeṣu-in islands; pṛthak-separate; paritaḥ-all around; upakalpitāḥ-situated; teṣu-within them; jambū-ādiṣu-beginning with Jambū; barhiṣmatī-of Barhiṣmatī; patiḥ-the husband; anuvratān-who were actually followers of the father's principles; ātma-jān-sons; āgnīdhra-idhmajihva-yajñabāhu-hiraṇyaretaḥ-ghṛtapṛṣṭha-medhātithi-vītihotra-saṁjñān-named Āgnīḍhra, Idhmajihva, Yajñabāhu, Hiraṇyaretā, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, Medhātithi and Vītihotra; yathā-saṅkhyena-by the same number; eka-ekasmin-in each island; ekam-one; eva-certainly; adhi-patim-king; vidadhe-he made.





The seven oceans respectively contain salt water, sugarcane juice, liquor, clarified butter, milk, emulsified yogurt, and sweet drinking water. All the islands are completely surrounded by these oceans, and each ocean is equal in breadth to the island it surrounds. Mahārāja Priyavrata, the husband of Queen Barhiṣmatī, gave sovereignty over these islands to his respective sons, namely Āgnīdhra, Idhmajihva, Yajñabāhu, Hiraṇyaretā, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, Medhātithi and Vītihotra. Thus they all became kings by the order of their father.





It is to be understood that all the dvīpas, or islands, are surrounded by different types of oceans, and it is said herein that the breadth of each ocean is the same as that of the island it surrounds. The length of the oceans, however, cannot equal the length of the islands. According to Vīrarāghava Ācārya, the breadth of the first island is 100,000 yojanas. One yojana equals eight miles, and therefore the breadth of the first island is calculated to be 800,000 miles. The water surrounding it must have the same breadth, but its length must be different.





TEXT 34



duhitaraṁ corjasvatīṁ nāmośanase prāyacchad yasyām āsīd devayānī nāma kāvya-sutā.



SYNONYMS



duhitaram-the daughter; ca-also; ūrjasvatīm-Ūrjasvatī; nāma-named; uśanase-unto the great sage Uśanā (Śukrācārya); prāyacchat-he gave; yasyām-unto whom; āsīt-there was; devayānī-Devayānī; nāma-named; kāvya-sutā-the daughter of Śukrācārya.





King Priyavrata then gave his daughter, Ūrjasvatī, in marriage to Śukrācārya, who begot in her a daughter named Devayānī.





TEXT 35



naivaṁ-vidhaḥ puruṣa-kāra urukramasya

puṁsāṁ tad-aṅghri-rajasā jita-ṣaḍ-guṇānām

citraṁ vidūra-vigataḥ sakṛd ādadīta

yan-nāmadheyam adhunā sa jahāti bandham

SYNONYMS



na-not; evam-vidhaḥ-like that; puruṣa-kāraḥ-personal influence; uru-kramasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puṁsām-of the devotees; tat-aṅghri-of His lotus feet; rajasā-by the dust; jita-ṣaṭ-guṇānām-who have conquered the influence of the six kinds of material whips; citram-wonderful; vidūra-vigataḥ-the fifth-grade person, or the untouchable; sakṛt-only once; ādadīta-if he utters; yat-whose; nāmadheyam-holy name; adhunā-immediately; saḥ-he; jahāti-gives up; bandham-material bondage.





My dear King, a devotee who has taken shelter of the dust from the lotus feet of the Lord can transcend the influence of the six material whips-namely hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death-and he can conquer the mind and five senses. However, this is not very wonderful for a pure devotee of the Lord because even a person beyond the jurisdiction of the four castes-in other words, an untouchable-is immediately relieved of bondage to material existence if he utters the holy name of the Lord even once.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī was speaking to Mahārāja Parīkṣit about the activities of King Priyavrata, and since the King might have had doubts about these wonderful, uncommon activities, Śukadeva Gosvāmī reassured him. "My dear King," he said, "don't be doubtful about the wonderful activities of Priyavrata. For a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything is possible because the Lord is also known as Urukrama." Urukrama is a name for Lord Vāmanadeva, who performed the wonderful act of occupying the three worlds with three footsteps. Lord Vāmanadeva requested three paces of land from Mahārāja Bali, and when Mahārāja Bali agreed to grant them, the Lord immediately covered the entire world with two footsteps, and for His third step He placed His foot upon Bali Mahārāja's head. Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī says:



chalayasi vikramaṇe balim adbhuta-vāmana

pada-nakha-nīra-janita-jana-pāvana

keśava dhṛta-vamāna-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare





"All glories to Lord Keśava, who assumed the form of a dwarf. O Lord of the universe, who takes away everything inauspicious for the devotees! O wonderful Vāmanadeva! You tricked the great demon Bali Mahārāja by Your steps. The water that touched the nails of Your lotus feet when You pierced through the covering of the universe purifies all living entities in the form of the River Ganges."



Since the Supreme Lord is all-powerful, He can do things that seem wonderful for a common man. Similarly, a devotee who has taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord can also do wonderful things unimaginable to a common man, by the grace of the dust of those lotus feet. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore teaches us to take shelter of the Lord's lotus feet:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāṁbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





"O son of Nanda Mahārāja, I am Your eternal servant, yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up from this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms of Your lotus feet." Lord Caitanya teaches us to come in touch with the dust of the Lord's lotus feet, for then there will undoubtedly be all success.



Because of the material body, every living entity in material existence is always disturbed by sad-guṇa, six whips-hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, invalidity and death. Furthermore, another sad-guṇa are the mind and five sense organs. Not to speak of a sanctified devotee, even a caṇḍāla, an outcaste, who is untouchable, is immediately freed from material bondage if he utters the holy name of the Lord even once. Sometimes caste brāhmaṇas argue that unless one changes his body he cannot be accepted as a brāhmaṇa, for since the present body is obtained as a result of past actions, one who has in the past acted as a brāhmaṇa takes birth in a brāhmaṇa family. Therefore, they contend, without such a brahminical body, one cannot be accepted as a brāhmaṇa. Herein it is said, however, that even vidūra-vigata, a caṇḍāla-a fifth-class untouchable-is freed if he utters the holy name even once. Being freed means that he immediately changes his body. Sanātana Gosvāmī confirms this:



yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāti

kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena

dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām





When a person, even though a caṇḍāla, is initiated by a pure devotee into chanting the holy name of the Lord, his body changes as he follows the instructions of the spiritual master. Although one cannot see how his body has changed, we must accept, on the grounds of the authoritative statements of the śāstras, that he changes his body. This is to be understood without arguments. This verse clearly says, sa jahāti bandham: "He gives up his material bondage." The body is a symbolic representation of material bondage according to one's karma. Although sometimes we cannot see the gross body changing, chanting the holy name of the Supreme Lord immediately changes the subtle body, and because the subtle body changes, the living entity is immediately freed from material bondage. After all, changes of the gross body are conducted by the subtle body. After the destruction of the gross body, the subtle body takes the living entity from his present gross body to another. In the subtle body, the mind is predominant, and therefore if one's mind is always absorbed in remembering the activities or the lotus feet of the Lord, he is to be understood to have already changed his present body and become purified. Therefore it is irrefutable that a caṇḍāla, or any fallen or lowborn person, can become a brāhmaṇa simply by the method of bona fide initiation.





TEXT 36



sa evam aparimita-bala-parākrama ekadā tu devarṣi-caraṇānuśayanānu-patita-guṇa-visarga-saṁsargeṇānirvṛtam ivātmānaṁ manyamāna ātma-nirveda idam āha.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Mahārāja Priyavrata); evam-thus; aparimita-unparalleled; bala-strength; parākramaḥ-whose influence; ekadā-once upon a time; tu-then; deva-ṛṣi-of the great saint Nārada; caraṇa-anuśayana-surrendering unto the lotus feet; anu-thereafter; patita-fallen down; guṇa-visarga-with material affairs (created by the three material modes of nature); saṁsargeṇa-by connection; anirvṛtam-not satisfied; iva-like; ātmānam-himself; manyamānaḥ-thinking like that; ātma-self; nirvedaḥ-possessing renunciation; idam-this; āha-said.





While enjoying his material opulences with full strength and influence, Mahārāja Priyavrata once began to consider that although he had fully surrendered to the great saint Nārada and was actually on the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he had somehow become again entangled in material activities. Thus his mind now became restless, and he began to speak in a spirit of renunciation.





In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.17) it is said:



tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ





"One who has forsaken his material occupations to engage in the devotional service of the Lord may sometimes fall down while in an immature stage, yet there is no danger of his being unsuccessful. On the other hand, a nondevotee, though fully engaged in occupational duties, does not gain anything." If one somehow or other comes to the shelter of a great Vaiṣṇava, takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness because of sentiment or realization, but in course of time falls down because of immature understanding, he is not actually fallen, for his having engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is a permanent asset. If one falls down, therefore, his progress might be checked for a certain time, but it will again become manifest at an opportune moment. Although Priyavrata Mahārāja was serving according to the instructions of Nārada Muni meant for going back home, back to Godhead, he returned to material affairs at the request of his father. In due course of time, however, his consciousness for serving Kṛṣṇa reawakened by the grace of his spiritual master, Nārada.



As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (6.41), śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate. One who falls down from the process of bhakti-yoga is again offered the opulence of the demigods, and after enjoying such material opulence, he is given a chance to take birth in a noble family of a pure brāhmaṇa, or in a rich family, to be given the chance to revive his Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This actually happened in the life of Priyavrata: he is a most glorious example of this truth. In due course of time, he no longer wanted to enjoy his material opulences and his wife, kingdom and sons; instead, he wanted to renounce them all. Therefore, after having described the material opulences of Mahārāja Priyavrata, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, in this verse, describes his tendency for renunciation.



The words devarṣi-caraṇānuśayana indicate that Mahārāja Priyavrata, having fully surrendered to the great sage Devarṣi Nārada, was strictly following all the devotional processes and regulative principles under his direction. In regard to strictly following the regulative principles, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says; daṇḍavat-praṇāmās tān anupatitaḥ. By immediately offering obeisances (daṇḍavat) unto the spiritual master and by strictly following his directions, the student becomes advanced. Mahārāja Priyavrata was doing all these things regularly.



As long as one is in the material world, he has to be under the influence of the modes of material nature (guṇa-visarga). It is not that Mahārāja Priyavrata was freed from material influence because he possessed all material opulences. In this material world, both the very poor man and the very rich man are under material influences, for both wealth and poverty are creations of the modes of material nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.27), prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ. According to the modes of material nature we acquire, the material nature gives us facility for material enjoyment.





TEXT 37



aho asādhv anuṣṭhitaṁ yad abhiniveśito 'ham indriyair avidyā-racita-viṣama-viṣayāndha-kūpe tad alam alam amuṣyā vanitāyā vinoda-mṛgaṁ māṁ dhig dhig iti garhayāṁ cakāra.



SYNONYMS



aho-alas; asādhu-not good; anuṣṭhitam-executed; yat-because; abhiniveśitaḥ-being completely absorbed; aham-I; indriyaiḥ-for sense gratification; avidyā-by nescience; racita-made; viṣama-causing distress; viṣaya-sense gratification; andha-kūpe-in the dark well; tat-that; alam-insignificant; alam-of no importance; amuṣyāḥ-of that; vanitāyāḥ-wife; vinoda-mṛgam-just like a dancing monkey; mām-unto me; dhik-all condemnation; dhik-all condemnation; iti-thus; garhayām-criticism; cakāra-he did.





The King thus began criticizing himself: Alas, how condemned I have become because of my sense gratification! I have now fallen into material enjoyment, which is exactly like a covered well. I have had enough! I am not going to enjoy any more. Just see how I have become like a dancing monkey in the hands of my wife. Because of this, I am condemned.





How condemned is the advancement of material knowledge can be understood from the behavior of Mahārāja Priyavrata. He performed such wonderful acts as creating another sun, which shined during the night, and creating a chariot so great that its wheels formed vast oceans. These activities are so great that modern scientists cannot even imagine how such things can be done. Mahārāja Priyavrata acted very wonderfully in the material field of activities, but because he was dealing in sense gratification-ruling his kingdom and dancing to the indications of his beautiful wife-he personally condemned himself. When we think about this example of Mahārāja Priyavrata, we can just consider how degraded is the modern civilization of materialistic advancement. Modern so-called scientists and other materialists are very satisfied because they can construct great bridges, roads and machines, but such activities are nothing comparable to those of Mahārāja Priyavrata. If Mahārāja Priyavrata could condemn himself in spite of his wonderful activities, how condemned we are in our so-called advancement of material civilization. We can conclude that such advancement has nothing to do with the problems of the living entity entangled within this material world. Unfortunately, modern man does not understand his entanglement and how condemned he is, nor does he know what kind of body he is going to have in the next life. From a spiritual point of view, a great kingdom, beautiful wife and wonderful material activities are all impediments to spiritual advancement. Mahārāja Priyavrata had served the great sage Nārada sincerely. Therefore even though he had accepted material opulences, he could not be deviated from his own task. He again became Kṛṣṇa conscious. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā:



nehābhikrama-nāśo 'sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

svalpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt





"In devotional service there is no loss or diminution, and even a small service rendered in devotional life is sufficient to save one from the greatest danger." (Bg. 2.40) Such renunciation as Mahārāja Priyavrata's is possible only by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Generally when people are powerful or when they have a beautiful wife, a beautiful home and material popularity, they become more and more entangled. Priyavrata Mahārāja, however, having been completely trained by the great sage Nārada, revived his Kṛṣṇa consciousness in spite of all impediments.





TEXT 38



para-devatā-prasādādhigatātma-pratyavamarśenānupravṛttebhyaḥ putrebhya imāṁ yathā-dāyaṁ vibhajya bhukta-bhogāṁ ca mahiṣīṁ mṛtakam iva saha mahā-vibhūtim apahāya svayaṁ nihita-nirvedo hṛdi gṛhīta-hari-vihārānubhāvo bhagavato nāradasya padavīṁ punar evānusasāra.



SYNONYMS



para-devatā-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prasāda-by the mercy; adhigata-obtained; ātma-pratyavamarśena-by self-realization; anupravṛttebhyaḥ-who exactly follow his path; putrebhyaḥ-unto his sons; imām-this earth; yathā-dāyam-exactly according to the inheritance; vibhajya-dividing; bhukta-bhogām-whom he enjoyed in so many ways; ca-also; mahiṣīm-the Queen; mṛtakam iva-exactly like a dead body; saha-with; mahā-vibhūtim-great opulence; apahāya-giving up; svayam-himself; nihita-perfectly taken to; nirvedaḥ-renunciation; hṛdi-in the heart; gṛhīta-accepted; hari-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vihāra-pastimes; anubhāvaḥ-in such an attitude; bhagavataḥ-of the great saintly person; nāradasya-of Saint Nārada; padavīm-position; punaḥ-again; eva-certainly; anusasāra-began to follow.





By the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mahārāja Priyavrata reawakened to his senses. He divided all his earthly possessions among his obedient sons. He gave up everything, including his wife, with whom he had enjoyed so much sense gratification, and his great and opulent kingdom, and he completely renounced all attachment. His heart, having been cleansed, became a place of pastimes for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he was able to return to the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, spiritual life, and resume the position he had attained by the grace of the great saint Nārada.





As enunciated by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in His Śikṣāṣṭaka, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam: [Cc. Antya 20.12] as soon as one's heart is cleansed, the blazing fire of material existence is immediately extinguished. Our hearts are meant for the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This means that one should be fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, thinking of Kṛṣṇa, as He Himself advises (man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]). This should be our only business. One whose heart is not clean cannot think of the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Lord, but if one can once again place the Supreme Personality of Godhead in his heart, he very easily becomes qualified to renounce material attachment. Māyāvādī philosophers, yogīs and jñānīs try to give up this material world simply by saying, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "This world is false. There is no use of it. Let us take to Brahman." Such theoretical knowledge will not help us. If we believe that Brahman is the real truth, we have to place within our hearts the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as Mahārāja Ambarīṣa did (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ). One has to fix the lotus feet of the Lord within his heart. Then he gets the strength to be freed from material entanglement.



Mahārāja Priyavrata was able to give up his opulent kingdom, and he also gave up the association of his beautiful wife as if she were a dead body. However beautiful one's wife and however attractive her bodily features, one is no longer interested in her when her body is dead. We praise a beautiful woman for her body, but that same body, when bereft of a spirit soul, is no longer interesting to any lusty man. Mahārāja Priyavrata was so strong, by the grace of the Lord, that even though his beautiful wife was alive, he could give up her association exactly like one who is forced to give up the association of a dead wife. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:



na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi





"O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desire beautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Your causeless devotional service birth after birth." For one who desires to advance in spiritual life, attachment to material opulence and attachment to a beautiful wile are two great impediments. Such attachments are condemned even more than suicide. Therefore anyone desiring to cross beyond material nescience must, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, be freed from attachment to women and money. When Mahārāja Priyavrata became completely free from these attachments, he could again peacefully follow the principles instructed by the great sage Nārada.





TEXT 39



tasya ha vā ete ślokāḥ--

priyavrata-kṛtaṁ karma

ko nu kuryād vineśvaram

yo nemi-nimnair akaroc

chāyāṁ ghnan sapta vāridhīn

SYNONYMS



tasya-his; ha vā-certainly; ete-all these; ślokāḥ-verses; priyavrata-by King Priyavrata; kṛtam-done; karma-activities; kaḥ-who; nu-then; kuryāt-can execute; vinā-without; īśvaram-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaḥ-one who; nemi-of the rim of the wheels of his chariot; nimnaiḥ-by the depressions; akarot-made; chāyām-darkness; ghnan-dissipating; sapta-seven; vāridhīn-oceans.





There are many famous verses regarding Mahārāja Priyavrata's activities:



"No one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead could do what Mahārāja Priyavrata has done. Mahārāja Priyavrata dissipated the darkness of night, and with the rims of his great chariot, he excavated seven oceans."





There are many excellent verses, famous all over the world, concerning the activities of Mahārāja Priyavrata. He is so celebrated that his activities are compared to those of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes a sincere servant and devotee of the Lord is also called bhagavān. Śrī Nārada is called bhagavān, and Lord Śiva and Vyāsadeva are also sometimes called bhagavān. This designation, bhagavān, is sometimes conferred upon a pure devotee by the grace of the Lord so that he will be very highly esteemed. Mahārāja Priyavrata was such a devotee.





TEXT 40



bhū-saṁsthānaṁ kṛtaṁ yena

sarid-giri-vanādibhiḥ

sīmā ca bhūta-nirvṛtyai

dvīpe dvīpe vibhāgaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



bhū-saṁsthānam-the situation of the earth; kṛtam-done; yena-by whom; sarit-by rivers; giri-by hills and mountains; vana-ādibhiḥ-by forests and so on; sīmā-boundaries; ca-also; bhūta-of different nations; nirvṛtyai-to stop fighting; dvīpe dvīpe-on the various islands; vibhāgaśaḥ-separately.





"To stop the quarreling among different peoples, Mahārāja Priyavrata marked boundaries at rivers and at the edges of mountains and forests so that no one would trespass upon another's property."





The example set by Mahārāja Priyavrata in marking off different states is still followed. As indicated here, different classes of men are destined to live in different areas, and therefore the boundaries of various tracts of land, which are described here as islands, should be defined by different rivers, forests and hills. This is also mentioned in relation to Mahārāja Pṛthu, who was born from the dead body of his father by the manipulation of great sages. Mahārāja Pṛthu's father was very sinful, and therefore a black man called Niṣāda was first born from his dead body. The Naiṣāda race was given a place in the forest because by nature they are thieves and rogues. As animals are given places in various forests and hills, men who are like animals are also destined to live there. One cannot be promoted to civilized life unless one comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for by nature one is destined to live in a particular situation according to one's karma and association with the modes of nature. If men want to live in harmony and peace, they must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for they cannot achieve the highest standard while absorbed in the bodily concept of life. Mahārāja Priyavrata divided the surface of the globe into different islands so that each class of men would live peacefully and not clash with the others. The modern idea of nationhood has gradually developed from the divisions made by Mahārāja Priyavrata.





TEXT 41



bhaumaṁ divyaṁ mānuṣaṁ ca

mahitvaṁ karma-yogajam

yaś cakre nirayaupamyaṁ

puruṣānujana-priyaḥ

SYNONYMS



bhaumam-of the lower planets; divyam-heavenly; mānuṣam-of human beings; ca-also; mahitvam-all opulences; karma-by fruitive activities; yoga-by mystic power; jam-born; yaḥ-one who; cakre-did; niraya-with hell; aupamyam-comparison or equality; puruṣa-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anujana-to the devotee; priyaḥ-most dear.





"As a great follower and devotee of the sage Nārada, Mahārāja Priyavrata considered hellish the opulences he had achieved by dint of fruitive activities and mystic power, whether in the lower or heavenly planetary systems or in human society."





Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has said that the position of a devotee is so superexcellent that a devotee does not consider any material opulence worth having. There are different types of opulences on earth, in the heavenly planets and even in the lower planetary system, known as Pātāla. A devotee, however, knows that they are all material, and consequently he is not at all interested in them. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate. Sometimes yogīs and jñānīs voluntarily give up all material opulences to practice their system of liberation and taste spiritual bliss. However, they frequently fall down because artificial renunciation of material opulences cannot endure. One must have a superior taste in spiritual life; then he can give up material opulence. Mahārāja Priyavrata had already tasted spiritual bliss, and therefore he had no interest in any of the material achievements available in the lower, higher or middle planetary systems.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Fifth Canto, First Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Activities of Mahārāja Priyavrata."



Chapter Two



The Activities of Mahārāja Āgnīdhra





In this chapter, the character of Mahārāja Āgnīdhra is described. When Mahārāja Priyavrata went off for spiritual realization, his son Āgnīdhra became the ruler of Jambūdvīpa, in accordance with Mahārāja Priyavrata's instructions, and maintained its residents with the same affection a father feels for his sons. Once Mahārāja Āgnīdhra desired to have a son, and therefore he entered a cave of Mandara Mountain to practice austerity. Understanding his desire, Lord Brahmā sent a celestial girl named Pūrvacitti to Āgnīdhra's hermitage. After dressing herself very attractively, she presented herself before him with various feminine movements, and Āgnīdhra was naturally attracted to her. The girl's actions, expressions, smile, sweet words and moving eyes were fascinating to him. Āgnīdhra was expert in flattery. Thus he attracted the celestial girl, who was pleased to accept him as her husband because of his mellifluous words. She enjoyed royal happiness with Āgnīdhra for many years before returning to her abode in the heavenly planets. In her womb Āgnīdhra begot nine sons-Nābhi, Kiṁpuruṣa, Harivarṣa, Ilāvṛta, Ramyaka, Hiraṇmaya, Kuru, Bhadrāśva and Ketumāla. He gave them nine islands with names corresponding to theirs. Āgnīdhra, however, his senses unsatisfied, was always thinking of his celestial wife, and therefore in his next life he was born in her celestial planet. After the death of Āgnīdhra, his nine sons married nine daughters of Meru named Merudevī, Pratirūpā, Ugradaṁṣṭrī, Latā, Ramyā, Śyāmā, Nārī, Bhadrā and Devavīti.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ pitari sampravṛtte tad-anuśāsane vartamāna āgnīdhro jambūdvīpaukasaḥ prajā aurasavad dharmāvekṣamāṇaḥ paryagopāyat.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī; uvāca-said; evam-thus; pitari-when his father; sampravṛtte-took to the path of liberation; tat-anuśāsane-according to his order; vartamānaḥ-situated; āgnīdhraḥ-King Āgnīdhra; jambū-dvīpa-okasaḥ-the inhabitants of Jambūdvīpa; prajāḥ-citizens; aurasa-vat-as if they were his sons; dharma-religious principles; avekṣamāṇaḥ-strictly observing; paryagopāyat-completely protected.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After his father, Mahārāja Priyavrata, departed to follow the path of spiritual life by undergoing austerities, King Āgnīdhra completely obeyed his order. Strictly observing the principles of religion, he gave full protection to the inhabitants of Jambūdvīpa as if they were his own begotten sons.





Following the instruction of his father, Mahārāja Priyavrata, Mahārāja Āgnīdhra ruled the inhabitants of Jambūdvīpa according to religious principles. These principles are exactly contrary to the modern principles of faithlessness. As clearly stated here, the King protected the citizens the way a father protects his begotten children. How he ruled the citizens is also described here-dharmāvekṣamāṇaḥ, strictly according to religious principles. It is the duty of the executive head of a state to see that the citizens strictly follow religious principles. The Vedic religious principles begin with varṇāśrama-dharma, the duties of the four varṇas and four āśramas. Dharma refers to principles given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The first principle of dharma, or religion, is to observe the duties of the four orders as enjoined by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to people's qualities and activities, society should be divided into brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras and then again into brahmacārīs, gṛhasthas, vānaprasthas and sannyāsīs. These are religious principles, and it is the duty of the head of state to see that his citizens strictly follow them. He should not merely act officially; he should be like a father who is always a well-wisher of his sons. Such a father strictly observes whether his sons are performing their duties, and sometimes he also punishes them.



Just contrary to the principles mentioned here, the presidents and chief executives in the age of Kali are simply tax collectors who do not care whether religious principles are observed. Indeed, the chief executives of the present day introduce all kinds of sinful activity, especially illicit sex, intoxication, animal killing and gambling. These sinful activities are now very prominently manifested in India. Although a hundred years ago these four principles of sinful life were strictly prohibited in the families of India, they have now been introduced into every Indian family; therefore they cannot follow religious principles. In contrast to the principles of the kings of old, the modern state is concerned only with propaganda for levying taxes and is no longer responsible for the spiritual welfare of the citizens. The state is now callous to religious principles. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam predicts that in Kali-yuga the government will be entrusted with dasyu-dharma, which means the occupational duty of rogues and thieves. Modern heads of state are rogues and thieves who plunder the citizens instead of giving them protection. Rogues and thieves plunder without regard for law, but in this age of Kali, as stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the lawmakers themselves plunder the citizens. The next prediction to be fulfilled, which is already coming to pass, is that because of the sinful activities of the citizens and the government, rain will become increasingly scarce. Gradually there will be complete drought and no production of food grains. People will be reduced to eating flesh and seeds, and many good, spiritually inclined people will have to forsake their homes because they will be too harassed by drought, taxation and famine. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is the only hope to save the world from such devastation. It is the most scientific and authorized movement for the actual welfare of the whole human society.





TEXT 2



sa ca kadācit pitṛloka-kāmaḥ sura-vara-vanitākrīḍācala-droṇyāṁ bhagavantaṁ viśva-sṛjāṁ patim ābhṛta-paricaryopakaraṇa ātmaikāgryeṇa tapasvy ārādhayāṁ babhūva.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (King Āgnīdhra); ca-also; kadācit-once upon a time; pitṛloka-the Pitṛloka planet; kāmaḥ-desiring; sura-vara-of the great demigods; vanitā-the women; ākrīḍā-the place of pastimes; acala-droṇyām-in one valley of the Mandara Hill; bhagavantam-unto the most powerful (Lord Brahmā); viśva-sṛjām-of personalities who have created this universe; patim-the master; ābhṛta-having collected; paricaryā-upakaraṇaḥ-ingredients for worship; ātma-of the mind; eka-agryeṇa-with full attention; tapasvī-one who executes austerity; ārādhayām babhūva-became engaged in worshiping.





Desiring to get a perfect son and become an inhabitant of Pitṛloka, Mahārāja Āgnīdhra once worshiped Lord Brahmā, the master of those in charge of material creation. He went to a valley of Mandara Hill, where the damsels of the heavenly planets come down to stroll. There he collected garden flowers and other necessary paraphernalia and then engaged in severe austerities and worship.





The King became pitṛloka-kāma, or desirous of being transferred to the planet named Pitṛloka. Pitṛloka is mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā (yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.25]). To go to this planet, one needs very good sons who can make offerings to Lord Viṣṇu and then offer the remnants to their forefathers. The purpose of the śrāddha ceremony is to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, so that after pleasing Him one may offer prasāda to one's forefathers and in this way make them happy. The inhabitants of Pitṛloka are generally men of the karma-kāṇḍīya, or fruitive activities category, who have been transferred there because of their pious activities. They can stay there as long as their descendants offer them viṣṇu-prasāda. Everyone in heavenly planets such as Pitṛloka, however, must return to earth after exhausting the effects of his pious acts. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.21), kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti: persons who perform pious acts are transferred to higher planets, but when the effects of their pious acts are over, they are again transferred to earth.



Since Mahārāja Priyavrata was a great devotee, how could he have begotten a son who desired to be transferred to Pitṛloka? Lord Kṛṣṇa says, pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ: persons who desire to go to Pitṛloka are transferred there. Similarly, yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām: persons who desire to be transferred to the spiritual planets, Vaikuṇṭhalokas, can also go there. Since Mahārāja Āgnīdhra was the son of a Vaiṣṇava, he should have desired to be transferred to the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Why, then, did he desire to be transferred to Pitṛloka? In answer to this, Gosvāmī Giridhara, one of the Bhāgavatam commentators, remarks that Āgnīdhra was born when Mahārāja Priyavrata was infatuated by lusty desires. This may be accepted as a fact because sons are begotten with different mentalities according to the time of their conception. According to the Vedic system, therefore, before a child is conceived, the garbhādhāna-saṁskāra is performed. This ceremony molds the mentality of the father in such a way that when he plants his seed in the womb of his wife, he will beget a child whose mind will be completely saturated with a devotional attitude. At the present moment, however, there are no such garbhādhāna-saṁskāras, and therefore people generally have a lusty attitude when they beget children. Especially in this age of Kali, there are no garbhādhāna ceremonies; everyone enjoys sex with his wife like a cat or dog. Therefore according to śāstric injunctions, almost all the people of this age belong to the śūdra category. Of course, although Mahārāja Āgnīdhra had a desire to be transferred to Pitṛloka, this does not mean that his mentality was that of a śūdra; he was a kṣatriya.



Mahārāja Āgnīdhra desired to be transferred to Pitṛloka, and therefore he needed a wife because anyone desiring to be transferred to Pitṛloka must leave behind a good son to offer yearly piṇḍa, or prasāda from Lord Viṣṇu. To have a good son, Mahārāja Āgnīdhra wanted a wife from a family of demigods. Therefore he went to Mandara Hill. where the women of the demigods generally come, to worship Lord Brahmā. In Bhagavad-gītā (4.12) it is said, kāṅkṣantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ yajanta iha devatāḥ: materialists who want quick results in the material world worship demigods. This is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śrī-aiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ: those who desire beautiful wives, substantial wealth and many sons worship the demigods, but an intelligent devotee, instead of being entangled by the happiness of this material world in the form of a beautiful wife, material opulence and children, desires to be immediately transferred back home, back to Godhead. Thus he worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu.





TEXT 3



tad upalabhya bhagavān ādi-puruṣaḥ sadasi gāyantīṁ pūrvacittiṁ nāmāpsarasam abhiyāpayām āsa.



SYNONYMS



tat-that; upalabhya-understanding; bhagavān-the most powerful; ādi-puruṣaḥ-the first created being within this universe; sadasi-in his assembly; gāyantīm-dancing girl; pūrvacittim-Pūrvacitti; nāma-named; apsarasam-the heavenly dancing girl; abhiyāpayām āsa-sent down.





Understanding King Āgnīdhra's desire, the first and most powerful created being of this universe, Lord Brahmā, selected the best of the dancing girls in his assembly, whose name was Pūrvacitti, and sent her to the King.





In this verse, the words bhagavān ādi-puruṣaḥ are significant. Bhagavān ādi-puruṣaḥ is Lord Kṛṣṇa. Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. Lord Kṛṣṇa is the original person. In Bhagavad-gītā, He is also addressed by Arjuna as puruṣam ādyam, the original person, and He is called Bhagavān. In this verse, however, we see that Lord Brahmā is described as bhagavān ādi-puruṣaḥ. The reason he is called bhagavān is that he fully represents the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is the first-born creature in this universe. Lord Brahmā could understand Mahārāja Āgnīdhra's desire because he is as powerful as Lord Viṣṇu. As Lord Viṣṇu, situated as Paramātmā, can understand the desire of the living entity, so Lord Brahmā can also understand the living entity's desire, for Viṣṇu, as a via medium, informs him. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.1), tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye: Lord Viṣṇu informs Lord Brahmā of everything from within his heart. Because Mahārāja Āgnīdhra specifically worshiped Lord Brahmā, Lord Brahmā was pleased, and he sent Pūrvacitti, the Apsarā, to satisfy him.





TEXT 4



sā ca tad-āśramopavanam ati-ramaṇīyaṁ vividha-nibiḍa-viṭapi-viṭapa-nikara-saṁśliṣṭa-puraṭa-latārūḍha-sthala-vihaṅgama-mithunaiḥ procyamāna-śrutibhiḥ pratibodhyamāna-salila-kukkuṭa-kāraṇḍava-kalahaṁsādibhir vicitram upakūjitāmala-jalāśaya-kamalākaram upababhrāma.



SYNONYMS



sā-she (Pūrvacitti); ca-also; tat-of Mahārāja Āgnīdhra; āśrama-of the place of meditation; upavanam-the park; ati-very; ramaṇīyam-beautiful; vividha-varieties of; nibiḍa-dense; viṭapi-trees; viṭapa-of branches and twigs; nikara-masses; saṁśliṣṭa-attached; puraṭa-golden; latā-with creepers; ārūḍha-going high; sthala-vihaṅgama-of land birds; mithunaiḥ-with pairs; procyamāna-vibrating; śrutibhiḥ-pleasing sounds; pratibodhyamāna-responding; salila-kukkuṭa-water fowl; kāraṇḍava-ducks; kala-haṁsa-with various kinds of swans; ādibhiḥ-and so on; vicitram-variegated; upakūjita-resounding with the vibration; amala-clear; jala-āśaya-in the lake; kamala-ākaram-the source of lotus flowers; upababhrāma-began to walk in.





The Apsarā sent by Lord Brahmā began strolling in a beautiful park near the place where the King was meditating and worshiping. The park was beautiful because of its dense green foliage and golden creepers. There were pairs of varied birds such as peacocks, and in a lake there were ducks and swans, all vibrating very sweet sounds. Thus the park was magnificently beautiful because of the foliage, the clear water, the lotus flowers and the sweet singing of various kinds of birds.





TEXT 5



tasyāḥ sulalita-gamana-pada-vinyāsa-gati-vilāsāyāś cānupadaṁ khaṇa-khaṇāyamāna-rucira-caraṇābharaṇa-svanam upākarṇya naradeva-kumāraḥ samādhi-yogenāmīlita-nayana-nalina-mukula-yugalam īṣad vikacayya vyacaṣṭa.



SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-of her (Pūrvacitti); sulalita-in a very beautiful; gamana-movements; pada-vinyāsa-with styles of walking; gati-in the progression; vilāsāyāḥ-whose pastime; ca-also; anupadam-with every step; khaṇa-khaṇāyamāna-making a tinkling sound; rucira-very pleasing; caraṇa-ābharaṇa-of the ornaments on the feet; svanam-the sound; upākarṇya-hearing; naradeva-kumāraḥ-the Prince; samādhi-in ecstasy; yogena-by controlling the senses; āmīlita-half-open; nayana-eyes; nalina-of lotus; mukula-buds; yugalam-like a pair; īṣat-slightly; vikacayya-opening; vyacaṣṭa-saw.





As Pūrvacitti passed by on the road in a very beautiful style and mood of her own, the pleasing ornaments on her ankles tinkled with her every step. Although Prince Āgnīdhra was controlling his senses, practicing yoga with half-open eyes, he could see her with his lotuslike eyes, and when he heard the sweet tinkling of her bangles, he opened his eyes slightly more and could see that she was just nearby.





It is said that yogīs always think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within their hearts. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ (Bhāg. 12.13.1). The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always observed by yogīs who practice controlling the venomous senses. As recommended in Bhagavad-gītā, yogīs should practice samprekṣya nāsikāgram, keeping their eyes half-open. If the eyes are closed completely, there will be a tendency to sleep. So-called yogīs sometimes practice a fashionable form of yoga by closing their eyes and meditating, but we have actually seen such so-called yogīs sleeping and snoring while meditating. This is not the practice of yoga. To actually practice yoga, one should keep his eyes half-open and gaze at the tip of his nose.



Although Āgnīdhra, the son of Priyavrata, was practicing mystic yoga and trying to control his senses, the tinkling sound of Pūrvacitti's ankle bells disturbed his practice. Yoga indriya-saṁyamaḥ: actual yoga practice means controlling the senses. One must practice mystic yoga, to control the senses, but the sense control of a devotee who fully engages in the service of the Lord with his purified senses (hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]) can never be disturbed. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī therefore stated, durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭra-yate (Caitanya-candrāmṛta 5). The practice of yoga is undoubtedly good because it controls the senses, which are like venomous serpents. When one engages in devotional service, however, completely employing all the activities of the senses in the service of the Lord, the venomous quality of the senses is completely nullified. It is explained that a serpent is to be feared because of its poison fangs, but if those fangs are broken. the serpent, although it seems fearsome, is not at all dangerous. Devotees, therefore, may see hundreds and thousands of beautiful women with fascinating bodily movements and gestures but not be allured, whereas such women would make ordinary yogīs fall. Even the advanced yogī Viśvāmitra broke his mystic practice to unite with Menakā and beget a child known as Śakuntalā. The practice of mystic yoga, therefore, is not sufficiently strong to control the senses. Another example is Prince Āgnīdhra, whose attention was drawn to the movements of Pūrvacitti, the Apsarā, simply because he heard the tinkling of her ankle bells. In the same way that Viśvāmitra Muni was attracted by the tinkling bangles of Menakā, Prince Āgnīdhra, upon hearing the tinkling bangles of Pūrvacitti, immediately opened his eyes to see her beautiful movements as she walked. The prince was also very handsome. As described herein, his eyes were just like the buds of lotus flowers. As he opened his lotuslike eyes, he could immediately see that the Apsarā was present by his side.





TEXT 6



tām evāvidūre madhukarīm iva sumanasa upajighrantīṁ divija-manuja-mano-nayanāhlāda-dughair gati-vihāra-vrīḍā-vinayāvaloka-susvarākṣarāvayavair manasi nṛṇāṁ kusumāyudhasya vidadhatīṁ vivaraṁ nija-mukha-vigalitāmṛtāsava-sahāsa-bhāṣaṇāmoda-madāndha-madhukara-nikaroparodhena druta-pada-vinyāsena valgu-spandana-stana-kalaśa-kabara-bhāra-raśanāṁ devīṁ tad-avalokanena vivṛtāvasarasya bhagavato makara-dhvajasya vaśam upanīto jaḍavad iti hovāca.



SYNONYMS



tām-to her; eva-indeed; avidūre-nearby; madhukarīm iva-like a honeybee; sumanasaḥ-beautiful flowers; upajighrantīm-smelling; divi-ja-of those born in the heavenly planets; manu-ja-of those born in human society; manaḥ-mind; nayana-for the eyes; āhlāda-pleasure; dughaiḥ-producing; gati-by her movement; vihāra-by pastimes; vrīḍā-by shyness; vinaya-by humility; avaloka-by glancing; su-svara-akṣara-by her sweet voice; avayavaiḥ-and by the limbs of the body; manasi-in the mind; nṛṇām-of men; kusuma-āyudhasya-of Cupid, who has a flower arrow in his hand; vidadhatīm-making; vivaram-aural reception; nija-mukha-from her own mouth; vigalita-pouring out; amṛta-āsava-nectar like honey; sa-hāsa-in her smiling; bhāṣaṇa-and talking; āmoda-by the pleasure; mada-andha-blinded by intoxication; madhukara-of bees; nikara-by groups; uparodhena-because of being surrounded; druta-hasty; pada-of feet; vinyāsena-by stylish stepping; valgu-a little; spandana-moving; stana-breasts; kalaśa-like waterpots; kabara-of her braids of hair; bhāra-weight; raśanām-the belt upon the hips; devīm-the goddess; tat-avalokanena-simply by seeing her; vivṛta-avasarasya-taking the opportunity of; bhagavataḥ-of the greatly powerful; makara-dhvajasya-of Cupid; vaśam-under the control; upanītaḥ-being brought in; jaḍa-vat-as if stunned; iti-thus; ha-certainly; uvāca-he said.





Like a honeybee, the Apsarā smelled the beautiful and attractive flowers. She could attract the minds and vision of both humans and demigods by her playful movements, her shyness and humility, her glances, the very pleasing sounds that poured from her mouth as she spoke, and the motion of her limbs. By all these qualities, she opened for Cupid, who bears an arrow of flowers, a path of aural reception into the minds of men. When she spoke, nectar seemed to flow from her mouth. As she breathed, the bees, mad for the taste of her breath, tried to hover about her beautiful lotuslike eyes. Disturbed by the bees, she tried to move hastily, but as she raised her feet to walk quickly, her hair, the belt on her hips, and her breasts, which were like water jugs, also moved in a way that made her extremely beautiful and attractive. Indeed, she seemed to be making a path for the entrance of Cupid, who is most powerful. Therefore the prince, completely subdued by seeing her, spoke to her as follows.





How a beautiful woman's movements and gestures, her hair and the structure of her breasts, hips and other bodily features attract the minds not only of men but of demigods also is very finely described in this statement. The words divija and manuja specifically emphasize that the attraction of feminine gestures is powerful everywhere within this material world, both on this planet and in the higher planetary systems. It is said that the standard of living in the higher planetary systems is thousands and thousands of times higher than the standard of living on this planet. Therefore the beautiful bodily features of the women there are also thousands and thousands of times more attractive than the features of the women on earth. The creator has constructed women in such a way that their beautiful voices and movements and the beautiful features of their hips, their breasts, and the other parts of their bodies attract the members of the opposite sex, both on earth and on other planets, and awaken their lusty desires. When one is controlled by Cupid or the beauty of women, he becomes stunned like matter such as stone. Captivated by the material movements of women, he wants to remain in this material world. Thus one's promotion to the spiritual world is checked simply by seeing the beautiful bodily structure and movements of women. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has therefore warned all devotees to beware of the attraction of beautiful women and materialistic civilization. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu even refused to see Pratāparudra Mahārāja because he was a very opulent person in the material world. Lord Caitanya said in this connection, niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya: those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord because they are very serious about going back home, back to Godhead, should be very careful to avoid seeing the beautiful gestures of women and should also avoid seeing persons who are very rich.



niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya

pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya

sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca

hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu





"Alas, for a person who is seriously desiring to cross the material ocean and engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without material motives, seeing a materialist engaged in sense gratification or seeing a woman who is similarly interested is more abominable than drinking poison willingly." (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 11.8) One who is serious about going back home, back to Godhead, should not contemplate the attractive features of women and the opulence of rich men. Such contemplation will check one's advancement in spiritual life. Once a devotee is fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, these attractions will not agitate his mind.





TEXT 7



kā tvaṁ cikīrṣasi ca kiṁ muni-varya śaile

māyāsi kāpi bhagavat-para-devatāyāḥ

vijye bibharṣi dhanuṣī suhṛd-ātmano 'rthe

kiṁ vā mṛgān mṛgayase vipine pramattān

SYNONYMS



kā-who; tvam-are you; cikīrṣasi-are you trying to do; ca-also; kim-what; muni-varya-O best of munis; śaile-on this hill; māyā-illusory potency; asi-are you; kāpi-some; bhagavat-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; para-devatāyāḥ-of the transcendental Lord; vijye-without strings; bibharṣi-you are carrying; dhanuṣī-two bows; suhṛt-of a friend; ātmanaḥ-of yourself; arthe-for the sake; kim vā-or; mṛgān-forest animals; mṛgayase-are you trying to hunt; vipine-in this forest; pramattān-who are materially maddened.





The Prince mistakenly addressed the Apsarā: O best of saintly persons, who are you? Why are you on this hill, and what do you want to do? Are you one of the illusory potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? You seem to be carrying two bows without strings, What is the reason you carry these bows? Is it for some purpose of your own or for the sake of a friend? Perhaps you carry them to kill the mad animals in this forest.





While undergoing severe penances in the forest, Āgnīdhra was captivated by the movements of Pūrvacitti, the girl sent by Lord Brahmā. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ: [Bg. 7.20] when one becomes lusty, he loses his intelligence. Therefore Āgnīdhra, having lost his intelligence, could not distinguish whether Pūrvacitti was male or female. He mistook her for a muni-putra, the son of a saintly person in the forest, and addressed her as muni-varya. Because of her personal beauty, however, he could not believe her to be a boy. He therefore began studying her features. First he saw her two eyebrows, which were so expressive that he wondered whether he or she might be the māyā of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The words used in this connection are bhagavat-para-devatāyāḥ. Devatāḥ, the demigods, all belong to this material world, whereas Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is always beyond this material world and is therefore known as para-devatā. The material world is certainly created by māyā, but it is created under the direction of para-devatā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]), māyā is not the ultimate authority for the creation of this material world. Māyā acts on behalf of Kṛṣṇa.



Pūrvacitti's eyebrows were so beautiful that Āgnīdhra compared them to bows without strings. He therefore asked her whether they were to be used for her own purposes or for the sake of someone else. Her eyebrows were like bows meant to kill animals in the forest. This material world is like a great forest, and its inhabitants are like forest animals such as deer and tigers meant to be killed. The killers are the eyebrows of beautiful women. Captivated by the beauty of the fair sex, all the men of the world are killed by bows without strings, but cannot see how they are killed by māyā. It is a fact, however, that they are being killed (bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate). By dint of his tapasya, Āgnīdhra could understand how māyā acts under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



The word pramattān is also significant. pramatta refers to one who cannot control his senses. The entire material world is being exploited by people who are pramatta, or vimūḍha. Prahlāda Mahārāja therefore said:



śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-

māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān





"They are rotting in material activities for transient material pleasure and spoiling their lives toiling all day and night simply for sense gratification, with no attachment for love of Godhead. I am simply lamenting for them and devising various plans to deliver them from the clutches of māyā." (Bhāg. 7.9.43) Karmīs who act very seriously for sense gratification are always referred to in the śāstras by such terms as pramatta, vimukha and vimūḍha. They are killed by māyā. However, one who is apramatta, a sane, sober person, a dhīra, knows very well that a human being's primary duty is to render service to the Supreme Person. Māyā is always ready to kill those who are pramatta with her invisible bows and arrows. Āgnīdhra questioned Pūrvacitti about this.





TEXT 8



bāṇāv imau bhagavataḥ śata-patra-patrau

śāntāv apuṅkha-rucirāv ati-tigma-dantau

kasmai yuyuṅkṣasi vane vicaran na vidmaḥ

kṣemāya no jaḍa-dhiyāṁ tava vikramo 'stu

SYNONYMS



bāṇau-two arrows; imau-these; bhagavataḥ-of you, the most powerful; śata-patra-patrau-having feathers like the petals of a lotus flower; śāntau-peaceful; apuṅkha-without a shaft; rucirau-very beautiful; ati-tigma-dantau-having a very sharp point; kasmai-whom; yuyuṅkṣasi-you want to pierce; vane-in the forest; vicaran-loitering; na vidmaḥ-we cannot understand; kṣemāya-for welfare; naḥ-of us; jaḍa-dhiyām-who are dull-headed; tava-your; vikramaḥ-prowess; astu-may be.





Then Āgnīdhra observed the glancing eyes of Pūrvacitti and said: My dear friend, you have two very powerful arrows, namely your glancing eyes. Those arrows have feathers like the petals of a lotus flower. Although they have no shafts, they are very beautiful, and they have very sharp, piercing points. They appear very peaceful, and thus it seems that they will not be shot at anyone. You must be loitering in this forest to shoot those arrows at someone, but I cannot understand whom. My intelligence is dull, and I cannot combat you. Indeed, no one can equal you in prowess, and therefore I pray that your prowess will be for my good fortune.





Āgnīdhra thus began appreciating Pūrvacitti's powerful glance upon him. He compared her glancing eyes to very sharp arrows. Although her eyes were as beautiful as lotuses, they were simultaneously like shaftless arrows, and Āgnīdhra was therefore afraid of them. He hoped that her glances upon him would be favorable because he was already captivated, and the more captivated he became, the more impossible it would be for him to remain without her. Āgnīdhra therefore prayed to Pūrvacitti that her glances at him would be auspicious, not futile. In other words, he prayed that she would become his wife.





TEXT 9



śiṣyā ime bhagavataḥ paritaḥ paṭhanti

gāyanti sāma sarahasyam ajasram īśam

yuṣmac-chikhā-vilulitāḥ sumano 'bhivṛṣṭīḥ

sarve bhajanty ṛṣi-gaṇā iva veda-śākhāḥ

SYNONYMS



śiṣyāḥ-disciples, followers; ime-these; bhagavataḥ-of your worshipable self; paritaḥ-surrounding; paṭhanti-are reciting; gāyanti-are singing; sāma-the Sāma Veda; sa-rahasyam-with the confidential portion; ajasram-incessantly; īśam-unto the Lord; yuṣmat-your; śikhā-from bunches of hair; vilulitāḥ-fallen; sumanaḥ-of flowers; abhivṛṣṭīḥ-showers; sarve-all; bhajanti-enjoy, resort to; ṛṣi-gaṇāḥ-sages; iva-like; veda-śākhāḥ-branches of Vedic literature.





Seeing the bumblebees following Pūrvacitti, Mahārāja Āgnīdhra said: My dear Lord, the bumblebees surrounding your body are like disciples surrounding your worshipable self. They are incessantly chanting the mantras of the Sāma Veda and the Upaniṣads, thus offering prayers to you. Just as great sages resort to the branches of Vedic literatures, the bumblebees are enjoying the showers of flowers falling from your hair.





TEXT 10



vācaṁ paraṁ caraṇa-pañjara-tittirīṇāṁ

brahmann arūpa-mukharāṁ śṛṇavāma tubhyam

labdhā kadamba-rucir aṅka-viṭaṅka-bimbe

yasyām alāta-paridhiḥ kva ca valkalaṁ te

SYNONYMS



vācam-the resounding vibration; param-only; caraṇa-pañjara-of the ankle bells; tittirīṇām-of the tittiri birds; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; arūpa-without form; mukharām-able to be very distinctly heard; śṛṇavāma-I hear; tubhyam-your; labdhā-gotten; kadamba-like the kadamba flower; ruciḥ-lovely color; aṅka-viṭaṅka-bimbe-on the beautiful circular hips; yasyām-on which; alāta-paridhiḥ-encirclement of burning cinders; kva-where; ca-also; valkalam-covering cloth; te-your.





O brāhmaṇa, I can simply hear the tinkling of your ankle bells. Within those bells, tittiri birds seem to be chirping among themselves. Although I do not see their forms, I can hear how they are chirping. When I look at your beautiful circular hips, I see they are the lovely color of kadamba flowers, and your waist is encircled by a belt of burning cinders. Indeed, you seem to have forgotten to dress yourself.





With lusty desires to see Pūrvacitti, Āgnīdhra especially gazed upon the girl's attractive hips and waist. When a man looks upon a woman with such lusty desires, he is captivated by her face, her breasts and her waist, for a woman first attracts a man to fulfill his sexual desires by the beautiful features of her face, by the beautiful slope of her breasts and also by her waist. Pūrvacitti was dressed in fine yellow silk, and therefore her hips looked like kadamba flowers. Because of her belt, her waist seemed to be encircled by burning cinders. She was fully dressed, but Āgnīdhra had become so lusty that he asked, "Why have you come naked?"





TEXT 11



kiṁ sambhṛtaṁ rucirayor dvija śṛṅgayos te

madhye kṛśo vahasi yatra dṛśiḥ śritā me

paṅko 'ruṇaḥ surabhir ātma-viṣāṇa īdṛg

yenāśramaṁ subhaga me surabhī-karoṣi

SYNONYMS



kim-what; sambhṛtam-filled; rucirayoḥ-very beautiful; dvija-O brāhmaṇa; śṛṅgayoḥ-within two horns; te-your; madhye-in the middle; kṛśaḥ-thin; vahasi-you are carrying; yatra-wherein; dṛśiḥ-eyes; śritā-attached; me-my; paṅkaḥ-powder; aruṇaḥ-red; surabhiḥ-fragrant; ātma-viṣāṇe-on the two horns; īdṛk-such; yena-by which; āśramam-place of residence; su-bhaga-O most fortunate one; me-my; surabhī-karoṣi-you are perfuming.





Āgnīdhra then praised Pūrvacitti's raised breasts. He said: My dear brāhmaṇa your waist is very thin, yet with great difficulty you are carefully carrying two horns, to which my eyes have become attracted. What is filling those two beautiful horns? You seem to have spread fragrant red powder upon them, powder that is like the rising morning sun. O most fortunate one, I beg to inquire where you have gotten this fragrant powder that is perfuming my āśrama, my place of residence.





Āgnīdhra appreciated Pūrvacitti's raised breasts. After seeing the girl's breasts, he became almost mad. Nevertheless, he could not recognize whether Pūrvacitti was a boy or a girl, for as a result of his austerity, he saw no distinction between the two. He therefore addressed her with the word dvija, "O brāhmaṇa." Yet why should a dvija, a brāhmaṇa boy, have horns on his chest? Because the boy's waist was thin, Āgnīdhra thought, he was carrying the horns with great difficulty. and therefore they must be filled with something very valuable. Otherwise why would he carry them? When a woman's waist is thin and her breasts are full, she looks very attractive. Āgnīdhra, his eyes attracted, contemplated the heavy breasts on the girl's thin body and imagined how her back must sustain them. Āgnīdhra imagined that her raised breasts were two horns she had covered with cloth so that others would not see the valuables within them. Āgnīdhra, however, was very anxious to see them. Therefore he requested, "Please uncover them so that I can see what you are carrying. Rest assured that I shall not take it away. If you feel an inconvenience in removing the covering, I can help you; I myself can uncover them to see what valuable things those raised horns contain." He was also surprised to see the red dust of perfumed kuṅkuma spread over her breasts. Nevertheless, still considering Pūrvacitti a boy, Āgnīdhra addressed her as subhaga, most fortunate muni. The boy must have been fortunate; otherwise how simply by standing there could he perfume Āgnīdhra's entire āśrama?





TEXT 12



lokaṁ pradarśaya suhṛttama tāvakaṁ me

yatratya ittham urasāvayavāv apūrvau

asmad-vidhasya mana-unnayanau bibharti

bahv adbhutaṁ sarasa-rāsa-sudhādi vaktre

SYNONYMS



lokam-residential place; pradarśaya-please show; suhṛt-tama-O best of friends; tāvakam-your; me-unto me; yatratyaḥ-a person born wherein; ittham-like this; urasā-by the chest; avayavau-two limbs (breasts); apūrvau-wonderful; asmat-vidhasya-of a person like me; manaḥ-unnayanau-very agitating to the mind; bibharti-sustains; bahu-many; adbhutam-wonderful; sarasa-sweet words; rāsa-amorous gestures like smiling; sudhā-ādi-such as nectar; vaktre-in the mouth.





O best friend, will you kindly show me the place where you reside? I cannot imagine how the residents of that place have gotten such wonderful bodily features as your raised breasts, which agitate the mind and eyes of a person like me who sees them. Judging by the sweet speech and kind smiles of those residents, I think that their mouths must contain nectar.





Still bewildered, Āgnīdhra wanted to see the place from which the brāhmaṇa boy had come, where the men had such raised breasts. Such attractive features, he thought, must be due to the severe austerities performed there. Āgnīdhra addressed the girl as suhṛttama, the best friend, so that she would not refuse to take him there. Not only was Āgnīdhra captivated by the girl's raised breasts; he was also attracted by her sweet speech. Nectar seemed to emanate from her mouth, and therefore he was increasingly surprised.





TEXT 13



kā vātma-vṛttir adanād dhavir aṅga vāti

viṣṇoḥ kalāsy animiṣonmakarau ca karṇau

udvigna-mīna-yugalaṁ dvija-paṅkti-śocir

āsanna-bhṛṅga-nikaraṁ sara in mukhaṁ te

SYNONYMS



kā-what; vā-and; ātma-vṛttiḥ-food for maintenance of the body; adanāt-by the chewing (of betel); haviḥ-pure sacrificial ingredients; aṅga-my dear friend; vāti-emanate; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; kalā-expansion of the body; asi-you are; animiṣa-without blinking; unmakarau-two brilliant sharks; ca-also; karṇau-two ears; udvigna-restless; mīna-yugalam-possessing two fish; dvija-paṅkti-of lines of teeth; śociḥ-beauty; āsanna-nearby; bhṛṅga-nikaram-possessing swarms of bumblebees; saraḥ it-like a lake; mukham-face; te-your.





My dear friend, what do you eat to maintain your body? Because you are chewing betel, a pleasing scent is emanating from your mouth. This proves that you always eat the remnants of food offered to Viṣṇu. Indeed, you must also be an expansion of Lord Viṣṇu's body. Your face is as beautiful as a pleasing lake. Your jeweled earrings resemble two brilliant sharks with unblinking eyes like those of Viṣṇu, and your own eyes resemble two restless fish. Simultaneously, therefore, two sharks and two restless fish are swimming in the lake of your face. Besides them, the white rows of your teeth seem like rows of very beautiful swans in the water, and your scattered hair resembles swarms of bumblebees following the beauty of your face.





The devotees of Lord Viṣṇu are also His expansions. They are called vibhinnāṁśa. Lord Viṣṇu is offered all kinds of sacrificial ingredients, and because devotees always eat prasāda, the remnants of His food, the scent of sacrificial ingredients emanates not only from Viṣṇu but also from the devotees who eat the remnants of His food or the food of His devotees. Āgnīdhra considered Pūrvacitti an expansion of Lord Viṣṇu because of the pleasing scent of her body. Aside from that, because of her jeweled earrings, shaped like sharks, because of her scattered hair, resembling bumblebees mad after the scent of her body, and because of the white rows of her teeth, which resembled swans, Āgnīdhra compared Pūrvacitti's face to a beautiful lake decorated with lotus flowers, fish, swans and bumblebees.





TEXT 14



yo 'sau tvayā kara-saroja-hataḥ pataṅgo

dikṣu bhraman bhramata ejayate 'kṣiṇī me

muktaṁ na te smarasi vakra-jaṭā-varūthaṁ

kaṣṭo 'nilo harati lampaṭa eṣa nīvīm

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-which; asau-that; tvayā-by you; kara-saroja-with the lotus palm; hataḥ-struck; pataṅgaḥ-the ball; dikṣu-in all directions; bhraman-moving; bhramataḥ-restless; ejayate-disturbs; akṣiṇī-eyes; me-of me; muktam-scattered; na-not; te-your; smarasi-are you mindful of; vakra-curling; jaṭā-of hair; varūtham-bunches; kaṣṭaḥ-giving trouble; anilaḥ-wind; harati-takes away; lampaṭaḥ-like a man attached to women; eṣaḥ-this; nīvīm-lower garment.





My mind is already restless, and by playing with a ball, moving it all about with your lotuslike palm, you are also agitating my eyes. Your curling black hair is now scattered, but you are not attentive to arranging it. Are you not going to arrange it? Like a man attached to women, the most cunning wind is trying to take off your lower garment. Are you not mindful of it?





The girl Pūrvacitti was playing with a ball in her hand, and the ball seemed like nothing but another lotus flower captured by her lotuslike palm. Because of her movements, her hair was loose, and the belt holding her cloth was giving way, as if the cunning wind were trying to make her naked. Yet she paid no attention to arranging her hair or fixing her dress. As Āgnīdhra tried to see the girl's naked beauty, his eyes were very agitated by her movements.





TEXT 15



rūpaṁ tapodhana tapaś caratāṁ tapoghnaṁ

hy etat tu kena tapasā bhavatopalabdham

cartuṁ tapo 'rhasi mayā saha mitra mahyaṁ

kiṁ vā prasīdati sa vai bhava-bhāvano me

SYNONYMS



rūpam-beauty; tapaḥ-dhana-O best of the sages performing austerity; tapaḥ caratām-of persons engaged in executing austerities and penances; tapaḥ-ghnam-which dismantles the austerities; hi-certainly; etat-this; tu-indeed; kena-by what; tapasā-austerity; bhavatā-by you; upalabdham-achieved; cartum-to execute; tapaḥ-austerity; arhasi-you ought; mayā saha-with me; mitra-my dear friend; mahyam-unto me; kim vā-or maybe; prasīdati-is pleased; saḥ-he; vai-certainly; bhava-bhāvanaḥ-the creator of this universe; me-with me.





O best among those performing austerities, where did you get this wonderful beauty that dismantles the austerities performed by others? Where have you learned this art? What austerity have you undergone to achieve this beauty, my dear friend? I desire that you join me to perform austerity and penance, for it may be that the creator of the universe, Lord Brahmā, being pleased with me, has sent you to become my wife.





Āgnīdhra appreciated the wonderful beauty of Pūrvacitti. Indeed, he was surprised to see such exceptional beauty, which must have been the result of past austerities and penances. He therefore asked the girl whether she had achieved such beauty just to break the penances and austerities of others. He thought that Lord Brahmā, the creator of the universe, might have been pleased with him and might therefore have sent her to become his wife. He requested Pūrvacitti to become his wife so that together they could perform austerities and penances in family life. In other words, a suitable wife helps her husband perform penances and austerities in household life if both of them are on the same elevated platform of spiritual understanding. Without spiritual understanding, husband and wife cannot be equally situated. Lord Brahmā, the creator of the universe, is interested in good progeny. Therefore unless he is pleased, one cannot get a suitable wife. In fact, Lord Brahmā is worshiped in marriage ceremonies. In India even today, wedding invitations are still issued with a picture of Lord Brahmā on the face of the card.





TEXT 16



na tvāṁ tyajāmi dayitaṁ dvija-deva-dattaṁ

yasmin mano dṛg api no na viyāti lagnam

māṁ cāru-śṛṅgy arhasi netum anuvrataṁ te

cittaṁ yataḥ pratisarantu śivāḥ sacivyaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; tvām-you; tyajāmi-I shall give up; dayitam-very dear; dvija-deva-by Lord Brahmā, the demigod worshiped by the brāhmaṇas; dattam-given; yasmin-unto whom; manaḥ-mind; dṛk-eyes; api-also; naḥ-my; na viyāti-do not go away; lagnam-tightly attached; mām-me; cāru-śṛṅgi-O woman with beautiful raised breasts; arhasi-you ought; netum-to lead; anuvratam-follower; te-your; cittam-desire; yataḥ-wherever; pratisarantu-may follow; śivāḥ-favorable; sacivyaḥ-friends.





Lord Brahmā, who is worshiped by the brāhmaṇas, has very mercifully given you to me, and that is why I have met you. I do not want to give up your company, for my mind and eyes are fixed upon you and cannot be drawn away. O woman with beautiful raised breasts, I am your follower. You may take me wherever you like, and your friends may also follow me.





Now Āgnīdhra frankly admits his weakness. He was attracted to Pūrvacitti, and therefore before she could say, "But I have no business with you," he expressed his desire to be united with her. He was so attracted that he was ready to go anywhere, hell or heaven, in her company. When one is absorbed in lust and the influence of sex, one surrenders to the feet of a woman without reservations. Śrīla Madhvācārya remarks in this connection that when one engages in joking and talking like a crazy person, one may say anything and everything, but his words will be meaningless.





TEXT 17



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti lalanānunayāti-viśārado grāmya-vaidagdhyayā paribhāṣayā tāṁ vibudha-vadhūṁ vibudha-matir adhisabhājayām āsa.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; lalanā-women; anunaya-in winning over; ati-viśāradaḥ-very expert; grāmya-vaidagdhyayā-expert in fulfilling one's material desires; paribhāṣayā-by selected words; tām-her; vibudha-vadhūm-the celestial girl; vibudha-matiḥ-Āgnīdhra, who possessed intelligence like that of the demigods; adhisabhājayām āsa-gained the favor of.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Mahārāja Āgnīdhra, whose intelligence was like that of a demigod, knew the art of flattering women to win them to his side. He therefore pleased that celestial girl with his lusty words and gained her favor.





Since King Āgnīdhra was a devotee, he actually had no attraction for material enjoyment, but because he wanted a wife for progeny and Lord Brahmā had sent Pūrvacitti for this purpose, he expertly pleased her with flattering words. Women are attracted by a man's flattering words. One who is expert in this art of flattery is called vidagdha.





TEXT 18



sā ca tatas tasya vīra-yūtha-pater buddhi-śīla-rūpa-vayaḥ-śriyaudāryeṇa parākṣipta-manās tena sahāyutāyuta-parivatsaropalakṣaṇaṁ kālaṁ jambūdvīpa-patinā bhauma-svarga-bhogān bubhuje.



SYNONYMS



sā-she; ca-also; tataḥ-thereafter; tasya-of him; vīra-yūtha-pateḥ-the master of heroes; buddhi-by the intelligence; śīla-behavior; rūpa-beauty; vayaḥ-youth; śriyā-opulence; audāryeṇa-and by the magnanimity; parākṣipta-attracted; manāḥ-her mind; tena saha-with him; ayuta-ten thousand; ayuta-ten thousand; parivatsara-years; upalakṣaṇam-extending; kālam-time; jambūdvīpa-patinā-with the King of Jambūdvīpa; bhauma-earthly; svarga-heavenly; bhogān-pleasures; bubhuje-enjoyed.





Attracted by the intelligence, learning, youth, beauty, behavior, opulence and magnanimity of Āgnīdhra, the King of Jambūdvīpa and master of all heroes, Pūrvacitti lived with him for many thousands of years and luxuriously enjoyed both worldly and heavenly happiness.





By the grace of Lord Brahmā, King Āgnīdhra and the heavenly girl. Pūrvacitti, found their union quite suitable. Thus they enjoyed worldly and heavenly happiness for many thousands of years.





TEXT 19



tasyām u ha vā ātmajān sa rāja-vara āgnīdhro nābhi-kimpuruṣa-harivarṣelāvṛta-ramyaka-hiraṇmaya-kuru-bhadrāśva-ketumāla-saṁjñān nava putrān ajanayat.



SYNONYMS



tasyām-in her; u ha vā-certainly; ātma-jān-sons; saḥ-he; rāja-varaḥ-the best of kings; āgnīdhraḥ-Āgnīdhra; nābhi-Nābhi; kiṁpuruṣa-Kiṁpuruṣa; hari-varṣa-Harivarṣa; ilāvṛta-Ilāvṛta; ramyaka-Ramyaka; hiraṇmaya-Hiraṇmaya; kuru-Kuru; bhadrāśva-Bhadrāśva; ketu-māla-Ketumāla; saṁjñān-named; nava-nine; putrān-sons; ajanayat-begot.





In the womb of Pūrvacitti, Mahārāja Āgnīdhra, the best of kings, begot nine sons, named Nābhi, Kiṁpuruṣa, Harivarṣa, Ilāvṛta, Ramyaka, Hiraṇmaya, Kuru, Bhadrāśva and Ketumāla.





TEXT 20



sā sūtvātha sutān navānuvatsaraṁ gṛha evāpahāya pūrvacittir bhūya evājaṁ devam upatasthe.



SYNONYMS



sā-she; sūtvā-after giving birth to; atha-thereafter; sutān-sons; nava-nine; anuvatsaram-year after year; gṛhe-at home; eva-certainly; apahāya-leaving; pūrvacittiḥ-Pūrvacitti; bhūyaḥ-again; eva-certainly; ajam-Lord Brahmā; devam-the demigod; upatasthe-approached.





Pūrvacitti gave birth to these nine sons, one each year, but after they grew up, she left them at home and again approached Lord Brahmā to worship him.





There are many instances in which Apsarās, heavenly angels, have descended to this earth by the order of a superior demigod like Lord Brahmā or Lord Indra, have followed the demigod's order by marrying someone and giving birth to children, and have then returned to their celestial homes. For example, after Menakā, the celestial woman who had come to delude Viśvāmitra Muni, gave birth to the child Śakuntalā, she left both the child and her husband and returned to the heavenly planets. Pūrvacitti did not remain permanently with Mahārāja Āgnīdhra. After cooperating in his household affairs, she left Mahārāja Āgnīdhra and all nine sons and returned to Brahmā to worship him.





TEXT 21



āgnīdhra-sutās te mātur anugrahād autpattikenaiva saṁhanana-balopetāḥ pitrā vibhaktā ātma-tulya-nāmāni yathā-bhāgaṁ jambūdvīpa-varṣāṇi bubhujuḥ.



SYNONYMS



āgnīdhra-sutāḥ-the sons of Mahārāja Āgnīdhra; te-they; mātuḥ-of the mother; anugrahāt-by the mercy or by drinking the breast milk; autpattikena-naturally; eva-certainly; saṁhanana-well-built body; bala-strength; upetāḥ-obtained; pitrā-by the father; vibhaktāḥ-divided; ātma-tulya-following their own; nāmāni-possessing names; yathā-bhāgam-divided properly; jambūdvīpa-varṣāṇi-different parts of Jambūdvīpa (probably Asia and Europe combined together); bubhujuḥ-ruled.





Because of drinking the breast milk of their mother, the nine sons of Āgnīdhra naturally had strong, well-built bodies. Their father gave them each a kingdom in a different part of Jambūdvīpa. The kingdoms were named according to the names of the sons. Thus the sons of Āgnīdhra ruled the kingdoms they received from their father.





The ācāryas specifically mention that in this verse the words mātuḥ anugrahāt ("by the mercy of their mother") refer to the breast milk of their mother. In India it is a common belief that if a baby is fed his mother's milk for at least six months, his body will be very strong. Besides that, it is mentioned herein that all the sons of Āgnīdhra were endowed with the nature of their mother. Bhagavad-gītā (1.40) also declares, strīṣu duṣṭāsu vārṣṇeya jāyate varṇa-saṅkaraḥ: when women are polluted, varṇa-saṅkara, unqualified children, are generated, and when the varṇa-saṅkara population increases, the entire world becomes hellish. Therefore, according to Manu-saṁhitā, a woman needs a great deal of protection in order to remain pure and chaste so that her children can be fully engaged for the benefit of human society.





TEXT 22



āgnīdhro rājātṛptaḥ kāmānām apsarasam evānudinam adhi-manyamānas tasyāḥ salokatāṁ śrutibhir avārundha yatra pitaro mādayante.



SYNONYMS



āgnīdhraḥ-Āgnīdhra; rājā-the King; atṛptaḥ-not satisfied; kāmānām-with sense gratification; apsarasam-the celestial woman (Pūrvacitti); eva-certainly; anudinam-day after day; adhi-exceedingly; manyamānaḥ-thinking of; tasyāḥ-of her; sa-lokatām-promotion to the same planet; śrutibhiḥ-by the Vedas; avārundha-got; yatra-where; pitaraḥ-the forefathers; mādayante-take pleasure.





After Pūrvacitti's departure, King Āgnīdhra, his lusty desires not at all satisfied, always thought of her. Therefore, in accordance with the Vedic injunctions, the King, after his death, was promoted to the same planet as his celestial wife. That planet, which is called Pitṛloka, is where the pitās, the forefathers, live in great delight.





If one always thinks of something, he certainly gets a related body after death. Mahārāja Āgnīdhra was always thinking of Pitṛloka, the place where his wife had returned. Therefore after his death he achieved that same planet, probably to live with her again. Bhagavad-gītā also says:



yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ





"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6) We can naturally conclude that if we always think of Kṛṣṇa or become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, we can be promoted to the planet of Goloka Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa eternally lives.





TEXT 23



samparete pitari nava bhrātaro meru-duhitṝr merudevīṁ pratirūpām ugradaṁṣṭrīṁ latāṁ ramyāṁ śyāmāṁ nārīṁ bhadrāṁ devavītim iti saṁjñā navodavahan.



SYNONYMS



samparete pitari-after the departure of their father; nava-nine; bhrātaraḥ-brothers; meru-duhitṝḥ-the daughters of Meru; merudevīm-Merudevī; prati-rūpām-Pratirūpā; ugra-daṁṣṭrīm-Ugradaṁṣṭrī; latām-Latā; ramyām-Ramyā; śyāmām-Śyāmā; nārīm-Nārī; bhadrām-Bhadrā; deva-vītim-Devavīti; iti-thus; saṁjñāḥ-the names; nava-nine; udavahan-married.





After the departure of their father, the nine brothers married the nine daughters of Meru named Merudevī, Pratirūpā, Ugradaṁṣṭrī, Latā, Ramyā, Śyāmā, Nārī, Bhadrā and Devavīti.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Second Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Activities of Mahārāja Āgnīdhra."



Chapter Three



Ṛṣabhadeva's Appearance in the Womb of Merudevī, the Wife of King Nābhi





In this chapter the spotless character of King Nābhi, the oldest son of Āgnīdhra, is described. Wanting to have sons, Mahārāja Nābhi underwent severe austerities and penances. He performed many sacrifices along with his wife and worshiped Lord Viṣṇu, master of all sacrifices. Being very kind to His devotees, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was very pleased with the austerities of Mahārāja Nābhi. He personally appeared before the King in His four-handed feature, and the priests, who were performing the sacrifices, began to offer their prayers unto Him. They prayed for a son like the Lord, and Lord Viṣṇu agreed to take birth in the womb of Merudevī, the wife of King Nābhi, and incarnate as King Ṛṣabhadeva.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

nābhir apatya-kāmo 'prajayā merudevyā bhagavantaṁ yajña-puruṣam avahitātmāyajata.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; nābhiḥ-the son of Mahārāja Āgnīdhra; apatya-kāmaḥ-desiring to have sons; aprajayā-who had not given birth to any children; merudevyā-with Merudevī; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-puruṣam-Lord Viṣṇu, the master and enjoyer of all performances of sacrifice; avahita-ātmā-with great attention; ayajata-offered prayers and worshiped.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak: Mahārāja Nābhi, the son of Āgnīdhra, wished to have sons, and therefore he attentively began to offer prayers and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, the master and enjoyer of all sacrifices. Mahārāja Nābhi's wife, Merudevī, who had not given birth to any children at that time, also worshiped Lord Viṣṇu along with her husband.





TEXT 2



tasya ha vāva śraddhayā viśuddha-bhāvena yajataḥ pravargyeṣu pracaratsu dravya-deśa-kāla-mantrartvig-dakṣiṇā-vidhāna-yogopapattyā duradhigamo 'pi bhagavān bhāgavata-vātsalyatayā supratīka ātmānam aparājitaṁ nija-janābhipretārtha-vidhitsayā gṛhīta-hṛdayo hṛdayaṅgamaṁ mano-nayanānandanāvayavābhirāmam āviścakāra.



SYNONYMS



tasya-when he (Nābhi); ha vāva-certainly; śraddhayā-with great faith and devotion; viśuddha-bhāvena-with a pure, uncontaminated mind; yajataḥ-was worshiping; pravargyeṣu-while the fruitive activities called pravargya; pracaratsu-were being performed; dravya-the ingredients; deśa-place; kāla-time; mantra-hymns; ṛtvik-priests conducting the ceremony; dakṣiṇā-gifts to the priests; vidhāna-regulative principles; yoga-and of the means; upapattyā-by the performance; duradhigamaḥ-not obtainable; api-although; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhāgavata-vātsalyatayā-because of His being very affectionate to His devotee; su-pratīkaḥ-possessing a very beautiful form; ātmānam-Himself; aparājitam-not to be conquered by anyone; nija-jana-of His devotee; abhipreta-artha-the desire; vidhitsayā-to fulfill; gṛhīta-hṛdayaḥ-His heart being attracted; hṛdayaṅgamam-captivating; manaḥ-nayana-ānandana-pleasing to the mind and eyes; avayava-by the limbs; abhirāmam-beautiful; āviścakāra-manifested.





In the performance of a sacrifice, there are seven transcendental means to obtain the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: (1) by sacrificing valuable things or eatables, (2) by acting in terms of place, (3) by acting in terms of time, (4) by offering hymns, (5) by going through the priest, (6) by offering gifts to the priests and (7) by observing the regulative principles. However, one cannot always obtain the Supreme Lord through this paraphernalia. Nonetheless, the Lord is affectionate to His devotee; therefore when Mahārāja Nābhi, who was a devotee, worshiped and offered prayers to the Lord with great faith and devotion and with a pure uncontaminated mind, superficially performing some yajña in the line of pravargya, the kind Supreme Personality of Godhead, due to His affection for His devotees, appeared before King Nābhi in His unconquerable and captivating form with four hands. In this way, to fulfill the desire of His devotee, the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifested Himself in His beautiful body before His devotee. This body pleases the mind and eyes of the devotees.





In Bhagavad-gītā it is clearly said:



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram





"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55)



One can understand and see the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the process of devotional service, and not in any other way. Although Mahārāja Nābhi performed prescribed duties and sacrifices, it should still be considered that the Lord appeared before him not due to his sacrifices but because of his devotional service. It was for this reason that the Lord agreed to appear before him in His beautiful bodily features. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.30), the Supreme Lord in His original nature is very beautiful. Veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam: the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although blackish, is very, very beautiful.





TEXT 3



atha ha tam āviṣkṛta-bhuja-yugala-dvayaṁ hiraṇmayaṁ puruṣa-viśeṣaṁ kapiśa-kauśeyāmbara-dharam urasi vilasac-chrīvatsa-lalāmaṁ daravara-vanaruha-vana-mālācchūry-amṛta-maṇi-gadādibhir upalakṣitaṁ sphuṭa-kiraṇa-pravara-mukuṭa-kuṇḍala-kaṭaka-kaṭi-sūtra-hāra-keyūra-nūpurādy-aṅga-bhūṣaṇa-vibhūṣitam ṛtvik-sadasya-gṛha-patayo 'dhanā ivottama-dhanam upalabhya sabahu-mānam arhaṇenāvanata-śīrṣāṇa upatasthuḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; ha-certainly; tam-Him; āviṣkṛta-bhuja-yugala-dvayam-who manifested Himself with four arms; hiraṇmayam-very bright; puruṣa-viśeṣam-the topmost of all living beings, Puruṣottama; kapiśa-kauśeya-ambara-dharam-wearing a yellow silk garment; urasi-on the chest; vilasat-beautiful; śrīvatsa-called Śrīvatsa; lalāmam-possessing the mark; dara-vara-by a conchshell; vana-ruha-lotus flower; vana-mālā-garland of forest flowers; acchūri-disc; amṛta-maṇi-the Kaustubha gem; gadā-ādibhiḥ-and by a club and other symbols; upalakṣitam-symptomized; sphuṭa-kiraṇa-radiant; pravara-excellent; mukuṭa-helmet; kuṇḍala-earrings; kaṭaka-bracelets; kaṭi-sūtra-girdle; hāra-necklace; keyūra-armlets; nūpura-ankle bells; ādi-and so on; aṅga-of the body; bhūṣaṇa-with ornaments; vibhūṣitam-decorated; ṛtvik-the priests; sadasya-associates; gṛha-patayaḥ-and King Nābhi; adhanāḥ-poor persons; iva-like; uttama-dhanam-a great treasure; upalabhya-having achieved; sa-bahu-mānam-with great regard; arhaṇena-with ingredients for worship; avanata-bent; śīrṣāṇaḥ-their heads; upatasthuḥ-worshiped.





Lord Viṣṇu appeared before King Nābhi with four arms. He was very bright, and He appeared to be the best of all personalities. Around the lower portion of His body, He wore a yellow silken garment. On His chest was the mark of Śrīvatsa, which always displays beauty. He carried a conchshell, lotus flower, disc and club, and He wore a garland of forest flowers and the Kaustubha gem. He was beautifully decorated with a helmet, earrings, bangles, belt, pearl necklace, armlets, ankle bells and other bodily ornaments bedecked with radiant jewels. Seeing the Lord present before them, King Nābhi and his priests and associates felt just like poor people who have suddenly attained great riches. They received the Lord and respectfully bent their heads and offered Him things in worship.





It is distinctly mentioned here that the Supreme Personality of Godhead did not appear as an ordinary human being. He appeared before King Nābhi and his associates as the best of all personalities (Puruṣottama). As stated in the Vedas: Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is also a living being, but He is the supreme living being. In Bhagavad-gītā (7.7), Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself says. mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: "O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me." No one is more attractive or more authoritative than Lord Kṛṣṇa. That is one of the differences between God and an ordinary living being. According to this description of the transcendental body of Lord Viṣṇu, the Lord can easily be distinguished from all other living beings. Consequently Mahārāja Nābhi and his priests and associates all offered the Lord obeisances and began to worship Him with various things. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (6.22), yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. That is, "Upon gaining this, one thinks that there is no greater gain." When one realizes God and sees the Lord face to face, one certainly thinks that he has gained the best of all things. Raso 'py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate: when one experiences a higher taste, his consciousness is fixed. After seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one ceases to be attracted by anything material. One then remains steady in his worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXTS



ṛtvija ūcuḥ

arhasi muhur arhattamārhaṇam asmākam anupathānāṁ namo nama ity etāvat sad-upaśikṣitaṁ ko 'rhati pumān prakṛti-guṇa-vyatikara-matir anīśa īśvarasya parasya prakṛti-puruṣayor arvāktanābhir nāma-rūpākṛtibhī rūpa-nirūpaṇam; sakala-jana-nikāya-vṛjina-nirasana-śivatama-pravara-guṇa-gaṇaika-deśa-kathanād ṛte.



SYNONYMS



ṛtvijaḥ ūcuḥ-the priests said; arhasi-please (accept); muhuḥ-again and again; arhat-tama-O most exalted, worshipable person; arhaṇam-offering of worship; asmākam-of us; anupathānām-who are Your servants; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; iti-thus; etāvat-so far; sat-by exalted personalities; upaśikṣitam-instructed; kaḥ-what; arhati-is able (to make); pumān-man; prakṛti-of material nature; guṇa-of the modes; vyatikara-in the transformations; matiḥ-whose mind (is absorbed); anīśaḥ-who is most incapable; īśvarasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parasya-beyond; prakṛti-puruṣayoḥ-the jurisdiction of the three modes of material nature; arvāktanābhiḥ-which do not reach up to, or which are of this material world; nāma-rūpa-ākṛtibhiḥ-by names, forms and qualities; rūpa-of Your nature or position; nirūpaṇam-ascertainment, perception; sakala-all; jana-nikāya-of mankind; vṛjina-sinful actions; nirasana-which wipe out; śivatama-most auspicious; pravara-excellent; guṇa-gaṇa-of the transcendental qualities; eka-deśa-one part; kathanāt-by speaking; ṛte-except.





The priests began to offer prayers to the Lord, saying: O most worshipable one, we are simply Your servants. Although You are full in Yourself, please, out of Your causeless mercy, accept a little service from us, Your eternal servants. We are not actually aware of Your transcendental form, but we can simply offer our respectful obeisances again and again, as instructed by the Vedic literatures and authorized ācāryas. Materialistic living entities are very much attracted to the modes of material nature, and therefore they are never perfect, but You are above the jurisdiction of all material conceptions. Your name, form and qualities are all transcendental and beyond the conception of experimental knowledge. Indeed, who can conceive of You? In the material world we can perceive only material names and qualities. We have no other power than to offer our respectful obeisances and prayers unto You, the transcendental person. The chanting of Your auspicious transcendental qualities will wipe out the sins of all mankind. That is the most auspicious activity for us, and we can thus partially understand Your supernatural position.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do with material perception. Even the impersonalist Śaṅkarācārya says. nārāyaṇaḥ paro 'vyaktāt: "Nārāyaṇa. the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is beyond the material conception." We cannot concoct the form and attributes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We must simply accept the description given in Vedic literatures about the Lord's form and activities. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.29):



cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune." We can have some conception of the Absolute Truth, His form and His attributes simply by reading the descriptions given in Vedic literatures and authoritative statements given by exalted personalities like Brahmā, Nārada, Śukadeva Gosvāmī and others. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says, ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ: [BRS. 1.2.234] "We cannot conceive the name, form and qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through our material senses." Because of this, other names for the Lord are adhokṣaja and aprākṛta, which indicate that He is beyond any material senses. Out of His causeless mercy upon His devotees, the Lord appeared before Mahārāja Nābhi. Similarly, when we are engaged in the Lord's devotional service, the Lord reveals Himself to us. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ. This is the only way to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ: [Bg. 18.55] one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service. There is no other way. We have to hear from the authorities and from the śāstras and consider the Supreme Lord in terms of their statements. We cannot imagine or concoct forms and attributes of the Lord.





TEXT 6



parijanānurāga-viracita-śabala-saṁśabda-salila-sita-kisalaya-tulasikā-dūrvāṅkurair api sambhṛtayā saparyayā kila parama parituṣyasi.



SYNONYMS



parijana-by Your servants; anurāga-in great ecstasy; viracita-executed; śabala-with a faltering voice; saṁśabda-with prayers; salila-water; sita-kisalaya-twigs bearing new leaves; tulasikā-tulasī leaves; dūrvā-aṅkuraiḥ-and with newly grown grass; api-also; sambhṛtayā-performed; saparyayā-by worship; kila-indeed; parama-O Supreme Lord; parituṣyasi-You become satisfied.





O Supreme Lord, You are full in every respect. You are certainly very satisfied when Your devotees offer You prayers with faltering voices and in ecstasy bring You tulasī leaves, water, twigs bearing new leaves, and newly grown grass. This surely makes You satisfied.





One does not need great wealth, education or opulence to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one is fully absorbed in love and ecstasy, he need offer only a flower and a little water. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati: "If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower. fruit or water, I will accept it." (Bg. 9.26)



The Supreme Lord can be pleased only by devotional service: therefore it is said here that the Lord is surely satisfied by devotion and nothing else. Quoting from the Gautamīya-tantra, the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa states:



tulasī-dala-mātreṇa

jalasya culukena vā

vikrīṇīte svam ātmānaṁ

bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ





"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is very affectionate toward His devotees, sells Himself to a devotee who offers merely a tulasī leaf and a palmful of water." The Supreme Lord is causelessly merciful upon His devotee, so much so that even the poorest of men can offer Him a little water and a flower in devotion and thus please Him. This is due to His affectionate dealings with His devotees.





TEXT 7



athānayāpi na bhavata ijyayoru-bhāra-bharayā samucitam artham ihopalabhāmahe.



SYNONYMS



atha-otherwise; anayā-this; api-even; na-not; bhavataḥ-of Your exalted personality; ijyayā-by performance of sacrifice; urubhāra-bharayā-encumbered by much paraphernalia; samucitam-required; artham-use; iha-here; upalabhāmahe-we can see.





We have engaged in Your worship with many things and have offered sacrifices unto You, but we think that there is no need for so many arrangements to please Your Lordship.





Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says that if one is offered varied foods but has no appetite, the offering has no value. In a big sacrificial ceremony there may be many things accumulated to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but if there is no devotion, attachment or love for the Lord, the arrangement is useless. The Lord is complete in Himself, and He does not need anything from us. However, if we offer Him a little water, a flower and a tulasi leaf, He will accept them. Bhakti, devotional service, is the main way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is not a question of arranging huge sacrifices. The priests were regretful, thinking that they were not on the path of devotional service and that their sacrifice was not pleasing to the Lord.





TEXT 8



ātmana evānusavanam añjasāvyatirekeṇa bobhūyamānāśeṣa-puruṣārtha-svarūpasya kintu nāthāśiṣa āśāsānānām etad abhisaṁrādhana-mātraṁ bhavitum arhati.



SYNONYMS



ātmanaḥ-self-sufficiently; eva-certainly; anusavanam-at every moment; añjasā-directly; avyatirekeṇa-without stopping; bobhūyamāna-increasing; aśeṣa-unlimitedly; puruṣa-artha-the goals of life; sva-rūpasya-Your actual identity; kintu-but; nātha-O Lord; āśiṣaḥ-benedictions for material enjoyment; āśāsānānām-of us, who are always desiring; etat-this; abhisaṁrādhana-for getting Your mercy; mātram-only; bhavitum arhati-can be.





All of life's goals and opulences are directly, self-sufficiently, unceasingly and unlimitedly increasing in You at every moment. Indeed, You are unlimited enjoyment and blissful existence itself. As far as we are concerned, O Lord, we are always after material enjoyment. You do not need all these sacrificial arrangements, but they are meant for us so that we may be benedicted by Your Lordship. All these sacrifices are performed for our fruitive results, and they are not actually needed by You.





Being self-sufficient, the Supreme Lord does not need huge sacrifices. Fruitive activity for a more opulent life is for those who desire such material opulence for their interest. Yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ: [Bg. 3.9]) if we do not act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. we engage in māyā's activities. We may construct a gorgeous temple and spend thousands of dollars, but such a temple is not required by the Lord. The Lord has many millions of temples for His residence. and He does not need our attempt. He does not require opulent activity at all. Such engagement is meant for our benefit. If we engage our money in constructing a gorgeous temple, we are freed from the reactions of our endeavors. This is for our benefit. In addition, if we attempt to do something nice for the Supreme Lord, He is pleased with us and gives us His benediction. In conclusion, the gorgeous arrangements are not for the Lord's sake but for our own. If we somehow or other receive blessings and benedictions from the Lord, our consciousness can be purified and we can become eligible to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 9



tad yathā bāliśānāṁ svayam ātmanaḥ śreyaḥ param aviduṣāṁ parama-parama-puruṣa prakarṣa-karuṇayā sva-mahimānaṁ cāpavargākhyam upakalpayiṣyan svayaṁ nāpacita evetaravad ihopalakṣitaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tat-that; yathā-as; bāliśānām-of the fools; svayam-by Yourself; ātmanaḥ-own; śreyaḥ-welfare; param-ultimate; aviduṣām-of persons who do not know; parama-parama-puruṣa-O Lord of lords; prakarṣa-karuṇayā-by abundant causeless mercy; sva-mahimānam-Your personal glory; ca-and; apavarga-ākhyam-called apavarga (liberation); upakalpayiṣyan-desiring to give; svayam-personally; na apacitaḥ-not properly worshiped; eva-although; itara-vat-like an ordinary person; iha-here; upalakṣitaḥ-(You are) present and seen (by us).





O Lord of lords, we are completely ignorant of the execution of dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa, the process of liberation, because we do not actually know the goal of life. You have appeared personally before us like a person soliciting worship, but actually You are present here just so we can see You. You have come out of Your abundant and causeless mercy in order to serve our purpose, our interest, and give us the benefit of Your personal glory called apavarga, liberation. You have come, although You are not properly worshiped by us due to our ignorance.





Lord Viṣṇu was personally present at the sacrificial arena, but this does not mean that He had any interest in His own personal benefit. Similarly, the arcā-vigraha, the Deity in the temple, is present for the same purpose. Out of His causeless mercy, the Supreme Personality of Godhead presents Himself before us so that we can see Him. Since we have no transcendental vision, we cannot see the spiritual sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1] of the Lord; therefore, out of His causeless mercy He comes in a form we can see. We can only see material things like stone and wood, and therefore He accepts a form of stone and wood and thus accepts our service in the temple. This is an exhibition of the Lord's causeless mercy. Although He has no interest in such things, in order to receive our loving service, He agrees to act as He does. We cannot actually offer suitable paraphernalia for the Lord's worship because we are completely ignorant. It was out of His causeless mercy that the Lord appeared in the sacrificial arena of Mahārāja Nābhi.





TEXT 10



athāyam eva varo hy arhattama yarhi barhiṣi rājarṣer varadarṣabho bhavān nija-puruṣekṣaṇa-viṣaya āsīt.



SYNONYMS



atha-then; ayam-this; eva-certainly; varaḥ-benediction; hi-indeed; arhat-tama-O most worshipable of the worshipable; yarhi-because; barhiṣi-in the sacrifice; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of King Nābhi; varada-ṛṣabhaḥ-the best of the benefactors; bhavān-Your Lordship; nija-puruṣa-of Your devotees; īkṣaṇa-viṣayaḥ-the object of the sight; āsīt-has become.





O most worshipable of all, You are the best of all benefactors, and Your appearance at saintly King Nābhi's sacrificial arena is meant for our benediction. Because You have been seen by us, You have bestowed upon us the most valuable benediction.





Nija-puruṣa-īkṣaṇa-viṣaya. In Bhagavad-gītā (9.29) Kṛṣṇa says, samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu: "I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him."



The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal to everyone. In that sense, He has no enemies and no friends. Everyone is enjoying the fruitive reactions of his own work, and the Lord, within everyone's heart, is observing and giving everyone the desired result. However, just as the devotees are always anxious to see the Supreme Lord satisfied in every way, similarly the Supreme Lord is very anxious to present Himself before His devotees. Śrī Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8):



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge





"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium."



Thus Kṛṣṇa's appearance is for the deliverance and satisfaction of His devotees. Actually He does not advent Himself simply to kill the demons, for that can be done by His agents. Lord Viṣṇu's appearance at the sacrificial arena of Mahārāja Nābhi was just to please the King and his assistants. Otherwise there was no reason for His being present there.





TEXT 11



asaṅga-niśita-jñānānala-vidhūtāśeṣa-malānāṁ bhavat-svabhāvānām ātmārāmāṇāṁ munīnām anavarata-pariguṇita-guṇa-gaṇa parama-maṅgalāyana-guṇa-gaṇa-kathano 'si.



SYNONYMS



asaṅga-by detachment; niśita-strengthened; jñāna-of knowledge; anala-by the fire; vidhūta-removed; aśeṣa-unlimited; malānām-whose dirty things; bhavat-svabhāvānām-who have attained Your qualities; ātma-ārāmāṇām-who are self-satisfied; munīnām-of great sages; anavarata-incessantly; pariguṇita-recounted; guṇa-gaṇa-O Lord, whose spiritual qualities; parama-maṅgala-supreme bliss; āyana-produces; guṇa-gaṇa-kathanaḥ-He, the chanting of whose attributes; asi-You are.





Dear Lord, all the great sages who are thoughtful and saintly persons incessantly recount Your spiritual qualities. These sages have already burned up all the unlimited dirty things and, by the fire of knowledge, strengthened their detachment from the material world. Thus they have attained Your qualities and are self-satisfied. Yet even for those who feel spiritual bliss in chanting Your attributes, Your personal presence is very rare.





The priests in Mahārāja Nābhi's sacrificial arena appreciated the personal presence of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu, and they considered themselves very much obliged. The Lord's appearance is rare even for great saintly persons who have become completely detached from this material world and whose hearts are clean due to constantly chanting the glories of the Lord. Such people are satisfied by chanting the transcendental qualities of the Lord. The Lord's personal presence is not actually required. The priests are pointing out that the Lord's personal presence is very rare even for such elevated sages but that He was so kind to them that now He was personally present. Therefore the priests were very much obliged.





TEXT 12



atha kathañcit skhalana-kṣut-patana-jṛmbhaṇa-duravasthānādiṣu vivaśānāṁ naḥ smaraṇāya jvara-maraṇa-daśāyām api sakala-kaśmala-nirasanāni tava guṇa-kṛta-nāmadheyāni vacana-gocarāṇi bhavantu.



SYNONYMS



atha-still; kathañcit-somehow or other; skhalana-stumbling; kṣut-hunger; patana-falling down; jṛmbhaṇa-yawning; duravasthāna-because of being placed in an undesirable position; ādiṣu-and so on; vivaśānām-unable; naḥ-of ourselves; smaraṇāya-to remember; jvara-maraṇa-daśāyām-in the case of having a high fever at the time of death; api-also; sakala-all; kaśmala-sins; nirasanāni-which can dispel; tava-Your; guṇa-attributes; kṛta-activities; nāmadheyāni-names; vacana-gocarāṇi-possible to be uttered; bhavantu-let them become.





Dear Lord, we may not be able to remember Your name, form and qualities due to stumbling, hunger, falling down, yawning or being in a miserable diseased condition at the time of death when there is a high fever. We therefore pray unto You, O Lord, for You are very affectionate to Your devotees. Please help us remember You and utter Your holy names, attributes and activities, which can dispel all the reactions of our sinful lives.





The real success in life is ante nārāyaṇa-smṛti-remembering the holy name, attributes, activities and form of the Lord at the time of death. Although we may be engaged in the Lord's devotional service in the temple, material conditions are so tough and inevitable that we may forget the Lord at the time of death due to a diseased condition or mental derangement. Therefore we should pray to the Lord to be able to remember His lotus feet without fail at the time of death, when we are in such a precarious condition. In this regard, one may also see Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.2.9–10 and 14–15).





TEXT 13



kiñcāyaṁ rājarṣir apatya-kāmaḥ prajāṁ bhavādṛśīm āśāsāna īśvaram āśiṣāṁ svargāpavargayor api bhavantam upadhāvati prajāyām artha-pratyayo dhanadam ivādhanaḥ phalīkaraṇam.



SYNONYMS



kiñca-moreover; ayam-this; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-pious King (Nābhi); apatya-kāmaḥ-desiring offspring; prajām-a son; bhavādṛśīm-exactly like You; āśāsānaḥ-hoping for; īśvaram-the supreme controller; āśiṣām-of benedictions; svarga-apavargayoḥ-of the heavenly planets and liberation; api-although; bhavantam-You; upadhāvati-worships; prajāyām-children; artha-pratyayaḥ-regarding as the ultimate goal of life; dhana-dam-unto a person who can give immense wealth as charity; iva-like; adhanaḥ-a poor man; phalīkaraṇam-a little husk.





Dear Lord, here is the great King Nābhi, whose ultimate goal in life is to have a son like You. Your Lordship, his position is like that of a person approaching a very rich man and begging for a little grain. Mahārāja Nābhi is so desirous of having a son that he is worshiping You for a son, although You can offer him any exalted position, including elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation back to Godhead.





The priests were a little ashamed that King Nābhi was performing a great sacrifice just to ask the Lord's benediction for a son. The Lord could offer him promotion to the heavenly planets or the Vaikuṇṭha planets. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught us how to approach the Supreme Lord and ask Him for the ultimate benediction. He said: na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye. He did not want to ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. Material opulence means riches, a nice family, a good wife and many followers, but an intelligent devotee doesn't ask the Supreme Lord for anything material. His only prayer is: mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi. He wants to be engaged perpetually in the loving service of the Lord. He does not want promotion to the heavenly planets or mukti, liberation from material bondage. If this were the case, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would not have said, mama janmani janmani. It doesn't matter to a devotee whether or not he takes birth life after life, as long as he remains a devotee. Actually eternal liberty means returning home, back to Godhead. A devotee is never concerned about anything material. Although Nābhi Mahārāja wanted a son like Viṣṇu, wanting a son like God is also a form of sense gratification. A pure devotee wants only to engage in the Lord's loving service.





TEXT 14



ko vā iha te 'parājito 'parājitayā māyayānavasita-padavyānāvṛta-matir viṣaya-viṣa-rayānāvṛta-prakṛtir anupāsita-mahac-caraṇaḥ.



SYNONYMS



kaḥ vā-who is that person; iha-within this material world; te-of Your Lordship; aparājitaḥ-not conquered; aparājitayā-by the unconquerable; māyayā-illusory energy; anavasita-padavya-whose path cannot be ascertained; anāvṛta-matiḥ-whose intelligence is not bewildered; viṣaya-viṣa-of material enjoyment, which is like poison; raya-by the course; anāvṛta-not covered; prakṛtiḥ-whose nature; anupāsita-without worshiping; mahat-caraṇaḥ-the lotus feet of great devotees.





Dear Lord, unless one worships the lotus feet of great devotees, one will be conquered by the illusory energy, and his intelligence will be bewildered. Indeed, who has not been carried away by the waves of material enjoyment, which are like poison? Your illusory energy is unconquerable. No one can see the path of this material energy or tell how it is working.





Mahārāja Nābhi was inclined to performing great sacrifices for begetting a son. The son might be as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but such a material desire-be it great or insignificant-is brought about by the influence of māyā. A devotee does not at all desire anything for sense gratification. Devotion is therefore explained as devoid of material desires (anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya). Everyone is subjected to the influence of māyā and entangled in all kinds of material desire, and Mahārāja Nābhi was no exception. Freedom from māyā's influence is possible when one engages in the service of the great devotees (mahac-caraṇa-sevā). Without worshiping the lotus feet of a great devotee, one cannot be freed from māyā's influence. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore says, chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: "Who has been freed from māyā's clutches without serving the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava?" Māyā is aparājita, and her influence is also aparājita. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14):



daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī

mama māyā duratyayā





"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome."



Only a devotee can surpass māyā's great influence. It was no fault on Mahārāja Nābhi's part that he wanted a son. He wanted a son like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the best of all sons. By the association of the Lord's devotee, one no longer desires material opulence. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.54):



"sādhu-saṅga", "sādhu-saṅga" sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya





and [Cc. Madhya 22.51]:



mahat-kṛpā vinā kona karme 'bhakti' naya

kṛṣṇa-bhakti dūre rahu, saṁsāra nahe kṣaya





If one is serious about escaping māyā's influence and returning home, back to Godhead, one must associate with a sādhu (devotee). That is the verdict of all scriptures. By the slight association of a devotee, one can be freed from the clutches of māyā. Without the mercy of the pure devotee, one cannot get freedom by any means. Certainly a pure devotee's association is necessary in order to obtain the loving service of the Lord. One cannot be freed from māyā's clutches without sādhu-saṅga, the benediction of a great devotee. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.32) Prahlāda Mahārāja says:



naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat





One cannot become the Lord's pure devotee without taking the dust of a great devotee on his head (pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam). A pure devotee is niṣkiñcana; he has no material desire to enjoy the material world. One has to take shelter of such a pure devotee in order to attain his qualities. The pure devotee is always free from the clutches of māyā and her influence.





TEXT 15



yad u ha vāva tava punar adabhra-kartar iha samāhūtas tatrārtha-dhiyāṁ mandānāṁ nas tad yad deva-helanaṁ deva-devārhasi sāmyena sarvān prativoḍhum aviduṣām.



SYNONYMS



yat-because; u ha vāva-indeed; tava-Your; punaḥ-again; adabhra-kartaḥ-O Lord, who performs many activities; iha-here, in this arena of sacrifice; samāhūtaḥ-invited; tatra-therefore; artha-dhiyām-who aspire to fulfill material desires; mandānām-not very intelligent; naḥ-of us; tat-that; yat-which; deva-helanam-disrespect of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; deva-deva-Lord of lords; arhasi-please; sāmyena-because of Your equipoised position; sarvān-everything; prativoḍhum-tolerate; aviduṣām-of us, who are all ignorant.





O Lord, You perform many wonderful activities. Our only aim was to acquire a son by performing this great sacrifice; therefore our intelligence is not very sharp. We are not experienced in ascertaining life's goal. By inviting You to this negligible sacrifice for some material motive, we have certainly committed a great offense at Your lotus feet. Therefore, O Lord of lords, please excuse our offense because of Your causeless mercy and equal mind.





The priests were certainly unhappy to have called the Supreme Lord from Vaikuṇṭha for such an insignificant reason. A pure devotee never wants to see the Lord unnecessarily. The Lord is engaged in various activities, and the pure devotee does not want to see Him whimsically, for his own sense gratification. The pure devotee simply depends on the Lord's mercy, and when the Lord is pleased, he can see Him face to face. The Lord is unseen even by demigods like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. By calling on the Supreme Lord, the priests of Nābhi Mahārāja proved themselves unintelligent; nonetheless, the Lord came out of His causeless mercy. All of them therefore wanted to be excused by the Lord.



Worship of the Supreme Lord for material gain is not approved by authorities. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.16):



catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha





"O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me-the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute."



Initiation into bhakti begins when one is in a distressed condition or in want of money, or when one is inquisitive to understand the Absolute Truth. Nonetheless, people who approach the Supreme Lord in this way are not actually devotees. They are accepted as pious (sukṛtinaḥ) due to their inquiring about the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not knowing the various activities and engagements of the Lord, such people unnecessarily disturb the Lord for material gain. However, the Lord is so kind that even though disturbed, He fulfills the desires of such beggars. The pure devotee is anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya; he has no motive behind his worship. He is not conducted by the influence of māyā in the form of karma or jñāna. The pure devotee is always prepared to execute the order of the Lord without personal consideration. The ṛtvijaḥ, the priests at the sacrifice, knew very well the distinction between karma and bhakti, and because they considered themselves under the influence of karma, fruitive activity, they begged the Lord's pardon. They knew that the Lord had been invited to come for some paltry reason.





TEXT 16



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti nigadenābhiṣṭūyamāno bhagavān animiṣarṣabho varṣa-dharābhivāditābhivandita-caraṇaḥ sadayam idam āha.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; nigadena-by prayers in prose; abhiṣṭūyamānaḥ-being worshiped; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; animiṣa-ṛṣabhaḥ-the chief of all the demigods; varṣa-dhara-by King Nābhi, the Emperor of Bhārata-varṣa; abhivādita-worshiped; abhivandita-were bowed down to; caraṇaḥ-whose feet; sadayam-kindly; idam-this; āha-said.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The priests, who were even worshiped by King Nābhi, the Emperor of Bhārata-varṣa, offered prayers in prose [generally they were in poetry] and bowed down at the Lord's lotus feet. The Lord of lords, the ruler of the demigods, was very pleased with them, and He began to speak as follows.





TEXT 17



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

aho batāham ṛṣayo bhavadbhir avitatha-gīrbhir varam asulabham abhiyācito yad amuṣyātmajo mayā sadṛśo bhūyād iti mamāham evābhirūpaḥ kaivalyād athāpi brahma-vādo na mṛṣā bhavitum arhati mamaiva hi mukhaṁ yad dvija-deva-kulam.



SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aho-alas; bata-certainly I am pleased; aham-I; ṛṣayaḥ-O great sages; bhavadbhiḥ-by you; avitatha-gīrbhiḥ-whose words are all true; varam-for a benediction; asulabham-very difficult to achieve; abhiyācitaḥ-have been requested; yat-that; amuṣya-of King Nābhi; ātma-jaḥ-a son; mayā sadṛśaḥ-like Me; bhūyāt-there may be; iti-thus; mama-My; aham-I; eva-only; abhirūpaḥ-equal; kaivalyāt-because of being without a second; athāpi-nevertheless; brahma-vādaḥ-the words spoken by exalted brāhmaṇas; na-not; mṛṣā-false; bhavitum-to become; arhati-ought; mama-My; eva-certainly; hi-because; mukham-mouth; yat-that; dvija-deva-kulam-the class of pure brāhmaṇas.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: O great sages, I am certainly very pleased with your prayers. You are all truthful. You have prayed for the benediction of a son like Me for King Nābhi, but this is very difficult to obtain. Since I am the Supreme Person without a second and since no one is equal to Me, another personality like Me is not possible to find. In any case, because you are all qualified brāhmaṇas, your vibrations should not prove untrue. I consider the brāhmaṇas who are well qualified with brahminical qualities to be as good as My own mouth.





The word avitatha-gīrbhiḥ means "they whose spoken vibrations cannot be nullified." The brāhmaṇas (dvija, the twice-born), are given a chance by the śāstric regulations to become almost as powerful as the Supreme Lord. Whatever a brāhmaṇa speaks cannot be nullified or changed in any circumstance. According to the Vedic injunctions, a brāhmaṇa is the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore in all rituals a brāhmaṇa is offered food (brāhmaṇa-bhojana) because when a brāhmaṇa eats, it is considered that the Supreme Lord Himself eats. Similarly, whatever a brāhmaṇa speaks cannot be changed. It must act. The learned sages who were priests at Mahārāja Nābhi's sacrifice were not only brāhmaṇas but were so qualified that they were like devas, demigods, or God Himself. If this were not the case, how could they invite Lord Viṣṇu to come to the sacrificial arena? God is one, and God does not belong to this or that religion. In Kali-yuga, different religious sects consider their God to be different from the God of others, but that is not possible. God is one, and He is appreciated according to different angles of vision. In this verse the word kaivalyāt means that God has no competitor. There is only one God. In the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) it is said, na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate: "No one is found to be equal to Him or greater than Him." That is the definition of God.





TEXT 18



tata āgnīdhrīye 'ṁśa-kalayāvatariṣyāmy ātma-tulyam anupalabhamānaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-therefore; āgnīdhrīye-in the wife of Nābhi, the son of Āgnīdhra; aṁśa-kalayā-by an expansion of My personal form; avatariṣyāmi-I shall advent Myself; ātma-tulyam-My equal; anupalabhamānaḥ-not finding.





Since I cannot find anyone equal to Me, I shall personally expand Myself into a plenary portion and thus advent Myself in the womb of Merudevī, the wife of Mahārāja Nābhi, the son of Āgnīdhra.





This is an example of the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although He is one without a second, He expands Himself by svāṁśa, His personal expansion, and sometimes by vibhinnāṁśa, or His separated expansion. Lord Viṣṇu herein agrees to send His personal expansion as the son of Merudevī, the wife of Mahārāja Nābhi, who is the son of Āgnīdhra. The ṛtvijaḥ, the priests, knew that God is one, yet they prayed for the Supreme Lord to become the son of Mahārāja Nābhi to let the world know that the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is one without a second. When He incarnates, He expands Himself in different potencies.





TEXT 19



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti niśāmayantyā merudevyāḥ patim abhidhāyāntardadhe bhagavān.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; niśāmayantyāḥ-who was listening; merudevyāḥ-in the presence of Merudevī; patim-unto her husband; abhidhāya-having spoken; antardadhe-disappeared; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After saying this, the Lord disappeared. The wife of King Nābhi, Queen Merudevī, was sitting by the side of her husband, and consequently she could hear everything the Supreme Lord had spoken.





According to the Vedic injunctions, one should perform sacrifices in the company of one's own wife. Sapatnīko dharmam ācaret: religious rituals should be performed with one's wife; therefore Mahārāja Nābhi conducted his great sacrifice with his wife by his side.





TEXT 20



barhiṣi tasminn eva viṣṇudatta bhagavān paramarṣibhiḥ prasādito nābheḥ priya-cikīrṣayā tad-avarodhāyane merudevyāṁ dharmān darśayitu-kāmo vāta-raśanānāṁ śramaṇānām ṛṣīṇām ūrdhva-manthināṁ śuklayā tanuvāvatatāra.



SYNONYMS



barhiṣi-in the arena of sacrifice; tasmin-that; eva-in this way; viṣṇu-datta-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parama-ṛṣibhiḥ-by the great ṛṣis; prasāditaḥ-being pleased; nābheḥ priya-cikīrṣayā-to please King Nābhi; tat-avarodhāyane-in his wife; merudevyām-Merudevī; dharmān-the principles of religion; darśayitu-kāmaḥ-desiring to exhibit how to perform; vāta-raśanānām-of the sannyāsīs (who have almost no cloth); śramaṇānām-of the vānaprasthas; ṛṣīṇām-of the great sages; ūrdhva-manthinām-of the brahmacārīs; śuklayā tanuvā-in His original spiritual form, which is above the modes of material nature; avatatāra-appeared as an incarnation.





O Viṣṇudatta, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was pleased by the great sages at that sacrifice. Consequently the Lord decided to personally exhibit the method of executing religious principles [as observed by brahmacārīs, sannyāsīs, vānaprasthas and gṛhasthas engaged in rituals] and also satisfy Mahārāja Nābhi's desire. Consequently He appeared as the son of Merudevī in His original spiritual form, which is above the modes of material nature.





When the Supreme Lord appears or descends as an incarnation within this material world, He does not accept a body made of the three modes of material nature (sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa). Māyāvādī philosophers say that the impersonal God appears in this material world by accepting a body in the sattva-guṇa. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī states that the word śukla means "consisting of śuddha-sattva." Lord Viṣṇu descends in His śuddha-sattva form. Śuddha-sattva refers to the sattva-guṇa which is never contaminated. In this material world, even the mode of goodness (sattva-guṇa) is contaminated by tinges of rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. When sattva-guṇa is never contaminated by rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, it is called śuddha-sattva. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam (Bhāg. 4.3.23). That is the platform of vasudeva, whereby the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, can be experienced. In Bhagavad-gītā (4.7) Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself says:



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham





"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself."



Unlike ordinary living entities, the Supreme Lord is not forced by the modes of material nature to appear. He appears dharmān darśayitu-kāma-to show how to execute the functions of a human being. The word dharma is meant for human beings and is never used in connection with beings inferior to human beings, such as animals. Unfortunately, without being guided by the Supreme Lord, human beings sometimes manufacture a process of dharma by concoction. Actually dharma cannot be made by man. Dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam. (Bhāg. 6.3.19) Dharma is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as the law is given by the state government. Man-made dharma has no meaning. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam refers to man-made dharma as kaitava-dharma, cheating religion. The Supreme Lord sends an avatāra (incarnation) to teach human society the proper way to execute religious principles. Such religious principles are bhakti-mārga. As the Supreme Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. The son of Mahārāja Nābhi, Ṛṣabhadeva, appeared on this earth to preach the principles of religion. That will be explained in the Fifth Chapter of this Fifth Canto.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Third Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Ṛṣabhadeva's Appearance in the Womb of Merudevī, the wife of King Nābhi."



Chapter Four



The Characteristics of Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead





In this chapter, Ṛṣabhadeva, the son of Mahārāja Nābhi, begot a hundred sons, and during the reign of those sons the world was very happy in all respects. When Ṛṣabhadeva appeared as the son of Mahārāja Nābhi, He was appreciated by the people as the most exalted and beautiful personality of that age. His poise, influence, strength, enthusiasm, bodily luster and other transcendental qualities were beyond compare. The word ṛṣabha refers to the best, or the supreme. Due to the superexcellent attributes of the son of Mahārāja Nābhi, the King named his son Ṛṣabha, or "the best." His influence was incomparable. Although there was a scarcity of rain, Ṛṣabhadeva did not care for Indra, the King of heaven, who is in charge of supplying rain. Through His own potency, Ṛṣabhadeva sumptuously covered Ajanābha with ample rain. Upon receiving Ṛṣabhadeva, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as his son, King Nābhi began to raise Him very carefully. After that, he entrusted the ruling power to Him and, retiring from family life, lived at Badarikāśrama completely engaged in the worship of Vāsudeva, the Supreme Lord. To follow social customs, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva for a while became a student in the gurukula, and after returning. He followed the orders of His guru and accepted a wife named Jayantī, who had been given to Him by the King of heaven, Indra. He begot a hundred sons in the womb of Jayantī. Of these hundred sons, the eldest was known as Bharata. Since the reign of Mahārāja Bharata, this planet has been called Bhārata-varṣa. Ṛṣabhadeva's other sons were headed by Kuśāvarta, Ilāvarta, Brahmāvarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indraspṛk, Vidarbha and Kīkaṭa. There were also other sons named Kavi, Havi, Antarikṣa, Prabuddha, Pippalāyana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhājana. Instead of ruling the kingdom, these nine became mendicant preachers of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, following the religious precepts of the Bhāgavatam. Their characteristics and activities are described in the Eleventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam during the talks between Vasudeva and Nārada at Kurukṣetra. To teach the general populace, King Ṛṣabhadeva performed many sacrifices and taught His sons how to rule the citizens.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

atha ha tam utpattyaivābhivyajyamāna-bhagaval-lakṣaṇaṁ sāmyopaśama-vairāgyaiśvarya-mahā-vibhūtibhir anudinam edhamānānubhāvaṁ prakṛtayaḥ prajā brāhmaṇā devatāś cāvani-tala-samavanāyātitarāṁ jagṛdhuḥ.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha ha-thus (after the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared); tam-Him; utpattyā-from the beginning of His appearance; eva-even; abhivyajyamāna-distinctly manifested; bhagavat-lakṣaṇam-possessing the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sāmya-equal to everyone; upaśama-completely peaceful, in control of the senses and mind; vairāgya-renunciation; aiśvarya-opulences; mahā-vibhūtibhiḥ-with great attributes; anudinam-day after day; edhamāna-increasing; anubhāvam-His power; prakṛtayaḥ-the ministers; prajāḥ-the citizens; brāhmaṇāḥ-the learned scholars in full knowledge of Brahman; devatāḥ-the demigods; ca-and; avani-tala-the surface of the globe; samavanāya-to rule; atitarām-greatly; jagṛdhuḥ-desired.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: As soon as the Lord was born as the son of Mahārāja Nābhi, He manifested symptoms of the Supreme Lord, such as marks on the bottoms of His feet [the flag, thunderbolt, etc.]. This son was equal to everyone and very peaceful. He could control His senses and His mind, and, possessing all opulence, He did not hanker for material enjoyment. Endowed with all these attributes, the son of Mahārāja Nābhi became more powerful day after day. Due to this, the citizens, learned brāhmaṇas, demigods and ministers wanted Ṛṣabhadeva to be appointed ruler of the earth.





In these days of cheap incarnations, it is very interesting to note the bodily symptoms found in an incarnation. From the very beginning of His birth, it was observed that Ṛṣabhadeva's feet were marked with the transcendental signs (a flag, thunderbolt, lotus flower, etc.). In addition to this, as the Lord began to grow, He became very prominent. He was equal to everyone. He did not favor one person and neglect another. An incarnation of God must have the six opulences-wealth. strength, knowledge, beauty, fame and renunciation. It is said that although Ṛṣabhadeva was endowed with all opulences, He was not at all attached to material enjoyment. He was self-controlled and therefore liked by everyone. Due to His superexcellent qualities, everyone wanted Him to rule the earth. An incarnation of God has to be accepted by experienced people and by the symptoms described in the śāstras. An incarnation is not accepted simply by the adulation of foolish people.





TEXT 2



tasya ha vā itthaṁ varṣmaṇā varīyasā bṛhac-chlokena caujasā balena śriyā yaśasā vīrya-śauryābhyāṁ ca pitā ṛṣabha itīdaṁ nāma cakāra.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of Him; ha vā-certainly; ittham-thus; varṣmaṇā-by the bodily features; varīyasā-most exalted; bṛhat-ślokena-decorated with all the high qualities described by poets; ca-also; ojasā-by prowess; balena-by strength; śriyā-by beauty; yaśasā-by fame; vīrya-śauryābhyām-by influence and heroism; ca-and; pitā-the father (Mahārāja Nābhi); ṛṣabhaḥ-the best; iti-thus; idam-this; nāma-name; cakāra-gave.





When the son of Mahārāja Nābhi became visible, He evinced all good qualities described by the great poets-namely, a well-built body with all the symptoms of the Godhead, prowess, strength, beauty, name, fame, influence and enthusiasm. When the father, Mahārāja Nābhi, saw all these qualities, he thought his son to be the best of human beings or the supreme being. Therefore he gave Him the name Ṛṣabha.





To accept someone as God or an incarnation of God, one must observe the symptoms of God in his body. All the symptoms were found in the body of Mahārāja Nābhi's extraordinarily powerful son. His body was well structured, and He displayed all the transcendental qualities. He showed great influence, and He could control His mind and senses. Consequently He was named Ṛṣabha, which indicates that He was the supreme living being.





TEXT 3



yasya hīndraḥ spardhamāno bhagavān varṣe na vavarṣa tad avadhārya bhagavān ṛṣabhadevo yogeśvaraḥ prahasyātma-yogamāyayā sva-varṣam ajanābhaṁ nāmābhyavarṣat.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; hi-indeed; indraḥ-King Indra of heaven; spardhamānaḥ-being envious; bhagavān-very opulent; varṣe-on Bhārata-varṣa; na vavarṣa-did not pour water; tat-that; avadhārya-knowing; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabhadevaḥ-Ṛṣabhadeva; yoga-īśvaraḥ-the master of all mystic power; prahasya-smiling; ātma-yoga-māyayā-by His own spiritual potency; sva-varṣam-on His place; ajanābham-Ajanābha; nāma-named; abhyavarṣat-He poured water.





Indra, the King of heaven, who is very materially opulent, became envious of King Ṛṣabhadeva. Consequently he stopped pouring water on the planet known as Bhārata-varṣa. At that time the Supreme Lord, Ṛṣabhadeva, the master of all mystic power, understood King Indra's purpose and smiled a little. Then, by His own prowess, through yogamāyā [His internal potency], He profusely poured water upon His own place, which was known as Ajanābha.





We find the word bhagavān used twice in this verse. Both King Indra and Ṛṣabhadeva, the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, are described as bhagavān. Sometimes Nārada and Lord Brahmā are also addressed as bhagavān. The word bhagavān means that one is a very opulent and powerful person like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Nārada or Indra. They are all addressed as bhagavān due to their extraordinary opulence. King Ṛṣabhadeva is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord, and therefore He was the original Bhagavān. Consequently He is described herein as yogeśvara, which indicates that He has the most powerful spiritual potency. He is not dependent on King Indra for water. He can supply water Himself, and He did so in this case. In Bhagavad-gītā, it is stated: yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. Due to the performance of yajña, clouds of water are manifest in the sky. Clouds and rainfall are under the management of Indra, the heavenly King, but when Indra is neglectful, the Supreme Lord Himself, who is also known as yajña or yajña-pati, takes the task upon Himself. Consequently there was sufficient rainfall in the place named Ajanābha. When yajña-pati wants to, He can do anything without the help of any subordinate. Therefore the Supreme Lord is known as almighty. In the present age of Kali there will eventually be a great scarcity of water (anāvṛṣṭi), for the general populace, due to ignorance and the scarcity of yajñic ingredients, will neglect to perform yajñas. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam therefore advises: yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ. After all, yajña is meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age of Kali. there is great scarcity and ignorance; nonetheless, everyone can perform saṅkīrtana-yajña. Every family in every society can conduct saṅkīrtana-yajña at least every evening. In this way there will be no disturbance or scarcity of rain. It is essential for the people in this age to perform the saṅkīrtana-yajña in order to be materially happy and to advance spiritually.





TEXT 4



nābhis tu yathābhilaṣitaṁ suprajastvam avarudhyāti-pramoda-bhara-vihvalo gadgadākṣarayā girā svairaṁ gṛhīta-naraloka-sadharmaṁ bhagavantaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ māyā-vilasita-matir vatsa tāteti sānurāgam upalālayan parāṁ nirvṛtim upagataḥ.



SYNONYMS



nābhiḥ-King Nābhi; tu-certainly; yathā-abhilaṣitam-according to his desire; su-prajastvam-the most beautiful son; avarudhya-getting; ati-pramoda-of great jubilation; bhara-by an excess; vihvalaḥ-being overwhelmed; gadgada-akṣarayā-faltering in ecstasy; girā-with a voice; svairam-by His independent will; gṛhīta-accepted; nara-loka-sadharmam-acting as if a human being; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purāṇa-puruṣam-the oldest among living beings; māyā-by yogamāyā; vilasita-bewildered; matiḥ-his mentality; vatsa-my dear son; tāta-my darling; iti-thus; sa-anurāgam-with great affection; upalālayan-raising; parām-transcendental; nirvṛtim-bliss; upagataḥ-achieved.





Due to getting a perfect son according to his desire, King Nābhi was always overwhelmed with transcendental bliss and was very affectionate to his son. It was with ecstasy and a faltering voice that he addressed Him, "My dear son, my darling." This mentality was brought about by yogamāyā, whereby he accepted the Supreme Lord, the supreme father, as his own son. Out of His supreme good will, the Lord became his son and dealt with everyone as if He were an ordinary human being. Thus King Nābhi began to raise his transcendental son with great affection, and he was overwhelmed with transcendental bliss, joy and devotion.





The word māyā is used in the sense of illusion. Considering the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be his own son, Mahārāja Nābhi was certainly in illusion, but this was transcendental illusion. This illusion is required; otherwise how can one accept the supreme father as his own son? The Supreme Lord appears as the son of one of His devotees, just as Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared as the son of Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. These devotees could never think of their son as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for such appreciation would hamper their relationship of paternal love.





TEXT 5



viditānurāgam āpaura-prakṛti jana-pado rājā nābhir ātmajaṁ samaya-setu-rakṣāyām abhiṣicya brāhmaṇeṣūpanidhāya saha merudevyā viśālāyāṁ prasanna-nipuṇena tapasā samādhi-yogena nara-nārāyaṇākhyaṁ bhagavantaṁ vāsudevam upāsīnaḥ kālena tan-mahimānam avāpa.



SYNONYMS



vidita-known very well; anurāgam-popularity; āpaura-prakṛti-among all the citizens and government officers; jana-padaḥ-desiring to serve the people in general; rājā-the King; nābhiḥ-Nābhi; ātmajam-his son; samaya-setu-rakṣāyām-to protect the people strictly according to the Vedic principles of religious life; abhiṣicya-enthroning; brāhmaṇeṣu-to the learned brāhmaṇas; upanidhāya-entrusting; saha-with; merudevyā-his wife. Merudevī; viśālāyām-in Badarikāśrama; prasanna-nipuṇena-performed with great satisfaction and expertise; tapasā-by austerities and penances; samādhi-yogena-by full samādhi; nara-nārāyaṇa-ākhyam-named Nara-Nārāyaṇa; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevam-Kṛṣṇa; upāsīnaḥ-worshiping; kālena-in due course of time; tat-mahimānam-His glorious abode, the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭha; avāpa-achieved.





King Nābhi understood that his son, Ṛṣabhadeva, was very popular among the citizens and among government officers and ministers. Understanding the popularity of his son, Mahārāja Nābhi enthroned Him as the emperor of the world to give protection to the general populace in terms of the Vedic religious system. To do this, he entrusted Him into the hands of learned brāhmaṇas, who would guide Him in administrating the government. Then Mahārāja Nābhi and his wife, Merudevī, went to Badarikāśrama in the Himalaya Mountains, where the King engaged Himself very expertly in austerities and penances with great jubilation. In full samādhi he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nara-Nārāyaṇa, who is Kṛṣṇa in His plenary expansion. By doing so, in course of time Mahārāja Nābhi was elevated to the spiritual world known as Vaikuṇṭha.





When Mahārāja Nābhi saw that his son Ṛṣabhadeva was popular with the general populace and the governmental servants, he chose to install Him on the imperial throne. In addition, he wanted to entrust his son into the hands of the learned brāhmaṇas. This means that a monarch was supposed to govern strictly according to Vedic principles under the guidance of learned brāhmaṇas, who could advise Him according to the standard Vedic scriptures like Manu-smṛti and similar śāstras. It is the duty of the king to rule the citizens according to Vedic principles. According to Vedic principles, society is divided into four categories-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]. After dividing society in this way, it is the king's duty to see that everyone executes Vedic principles according to his caste. A brāhmaṇa must perform the duty of a brāhmaṇa without cheating the public. It is not that one attains the name of a brāhmaṇa without the qualifications. It is the king's duty to see that everyone engages in his occupational duty according to Vedic principles. In addition, retirement at the end of life is compulsory. Mahārāja Nābhi, although still a king. retired from family life and went with his wife to a place called Badarikāśrama in the Himalayas, where the Deity Nara-Nārāyaṇa is worshiped. The words prasanna-nipuṇena tapasā indicate that the King accepted all kinds of austerity very expertly and jubilantly. He did not at all mind leaving his comfortable life at home, although he was the emperor. Despite undergoing severe austerities and penances, he felt very pleased at Badarikāśrama, and he did everything there expertly. In this way, being fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness (samādhi-yoga). always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, Mahārāja Nābhi attained success at the end of his life and was promoted to the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭhaloka.



This is the way of Vedic life. One must stop the process of repeated birth and death and return home, back to Godhead. The words tan-mahimānam avāpa are significant in this regard. Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī says that mahimā means liberation in this life. We should act in such a way in this life that after giving up this body, we will become liberated from the bondage of repeated birth and death. This is called jīvan-mukti. Śrīla Vīrarāghava Ācārya states that in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad there are eight symptoms of a jīvan-mukta, a person who is already liberated even when living in this body. The first symptom of one so liberated is that he is freed from all sinful activity (apahata-pāpa). As long as one is under the clutches of māyā in the material energy, one has to engage in sinful activity. Bhagavad-gītā describes such people as duṣkṛtinaḥ, which indicates that they are always engaged in sinful activity. One who is liberated in this life does not commit any sinful activities. Sinful activity involves illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. Another symptom of a liberated person is vijara, which indicates that he is not subjected to the miseries of old age. Another symptom is vimṛtyu. A liberated person prepares himself in such a way that he does not take on any more material bodies, which are destined to die. In other words. he does not fall down again to repeat birth and death. Another symptom is viśoka, which indicates that he is callous to material distress and happiness. Another is vijighatsa, which indicates that he no longer desires material enjoyment. Another symptom is apipātā, which means that he has no desire other than to engage in the devotional service of Kṛṣṇa, his dearmost pursuable Lord. A further symptom is satya-kāma, which indicates that all his desires are directed to the Supreme Truth, Kṛṣṇa. He does not want anything else. He is satya-saṅkalpa. Whatever he desires is fulfilled by the grace of Kṛṣṇa. First of all, he does not desire anything for his material benefit, and secondly if he desires anything at all, he simply desires to serve the Supreme Lord. That desire is fulfilled by the Lord's grace. That is called satya-saṅkalpa. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī points out that the word mahimā means returning to the spiritual world, back home, back to Vaikuṇṭha. Śrī Śukadeva says that the word mahimā means that the devotee attains the qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called sadharma, or "the same quality." Just as Kṛṣṇa is never born and never dies, His devotees who return to Godhead never die and never take birth within the material world.





TEXT 6



yasya ha pāṇḍaveya ślokāv udāharanti--

ko nu tat karma rājarṣer

nābher anv ācaret pumān

apatyatām agād yasya

hariḥ śuddhena karmaṇā

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; ha-indeed; pāṇḍaveya-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; ślokau-two verses; udāharanti-recite; kaḥ-who; nu-then; tat-that; karma-work; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of the pious King; nābheḥ-Nābhi; anu-following; ācaret-could execute; pumān-a man; apatyatām-sonhood; agāt-accepted; yasya-whose; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śuddhena-pure, executed in devotional service; karmaṇā-by activities.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, to glorify Mahārāja Nābhi, the old sages composed two verses. One of them is this: "Who can attain the perfection of Mahārāja Nābhi? Who can attain his activities? Because of his devotional service, the Supreme Personality of Godhead agreed to become his son."





The words śuddhena karmaṇā are significant in this verse. If work is not carried out in devotional service, it is contaminated by the modes of material nature. That is explained in Bhagavad-gītā: yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ [Bg. 3.9]). Activities performed only for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord are pure and are not contaminated by the modes of material nature. All other activities are contaminated by the modes of ignorance and passion, as well as goodness. All material activities meant for satisfying the senses are contaminated, and Mahārāja Nābhi did not perform anything contaminated. He simply executed his transcendental activities even when performing yajña. Consequently he obtained the Supreme Lord as his son.





TEXT 7



brahmaṇyo 'nyaḥ kuto nābher

viprā maṅgala-pūjitāḥ

yasya barhiṣi yajñeśaṁ

darśayām āsur ojasā

SYNONYMS



brahmaṇyaḥ-a devotee of the brāhmaṇas; anyaḥ-any. other; kutaḥ-where is; nābheḥ-besides Mahārāja Nābhi; viprāḥ-the brāhmaṇas; maṅgala-pūjitāḥ-well worshiped and satisfied; yasya-of whom; barhiṣi-in the sacrificial arena; yajña-īśam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies; darśayām āsuḥ-showed; ojasā-by their brahminical prowess.





[The second prayer is this.] "Who is a better worshiper of brāhmaṇas than Mahārāja Nābhi? Because he worshiped the qualified brāhmaṇas to their full satisfaction, the brāhmaṇas, by their brahminical prowess, showed Mahārāja Nābhi the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, in person."





The brāhmaṇas engaged as priests in the sacrificial ceremony were not ordinary brāhmaṇas. They were so powerful that they could bring forth the Supreme Personality of Godhead by their prayers. Thus Mahārāja Nābhi was able to see the Lord face to face. Unless one is a Vaiṣṇava, he cannot call forth the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord does not accept an invitation unless one is a Vaiṣṇava. Therefore it is said in Padma Purāṇa:



ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ





"A scholarly brāhmaṇa expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit to become a spiritual master without being a Vaiṣṇava, but a person born in a family of a lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaiṣṇava." These brāhmaṇas were certainly very expert in chanting the Vedic mantras. They were competent in the performance of the Vedic rituals, and over and above this they were Vaiṣṇavas. Therefore by their spiritual powers they could call on the Supreme Personality of Godhead and enable their disciple, Mahārāja Nābhi, to see the Lord face to face. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that the word ojasā means "by dint of devotional service."





TEXT 8



atha ha bhagavān ṛṣabhadevaḥ sva-varṣaṁ karma-kṣetram anumanyamānaḥ pradarśita-gurukula-vāso labdha-varair gurubhir anujñāto gṛhamedhināṁ dharmān anuśikṣamāṇo jayantyām indra-dattāyām ubhaya-lakṣaṇaṁ karma samāmnāyāmnātam abhiyuñjann ātmajānām ātma-samānānāṁ śataṁ janayām āsa.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereupon (after the departure of his father); ha-indeed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabha-devaḥ-Ṛṣabhadeva; sva-His own; varṣam-kingdom; karma-kṣetram-the field of activities; anumanyamānaḥ-accepting as; pradarśita-shown as an example; guru-kula-vāsaḥ-lived at the gurukula; labdha-having achieved; varaiḥ-gifts; gurubhiḥ-by the spiritual masters; anujñātaḥ-being ordered; gṛha-medhinām-of the householders; dharmān-duties; anuśikṣamāṇaḥ-teaching by example; jayantyām-in His wife, Jayantī; indra-dattāyām-offered by Lord Indra; ubhaya-lakṣaṇam-of both types; karma-activities; samāmnāyāmnātam-mentioned in the scriptures; abhiyuñjan-performing; ātmajānām-sons; ātma-samānānām-exactly like Himself; śatam-one hundred; janayām āsa-begot.





After Nābhi Mahārāja departed for Badarikāśrama, the Supreme Lord, Ṛṣabhadeva, understood that His kingdom was His field of activities. He therefore showed Himself as an example and taught the duties of a householder by first accepting brahmacarya under the direction of spiritual masters. He also went to live at the spiritual masters' place, gurukula. After His education was finished, He gave gifts (guru-dakṣiṇā) to His spiritual masters and then accepted the life of a householder. He took a wife named Jayantī and begot one hundred sons who were as powerful and qualified as He Himself. His wife Jayantī had been offered to Him by Indra, the King of heaven. Ṛṣabhadeva and Jayantī performed householder life in an exemplary way, carrying out ritualistic activities ordained by the śruti and smṛti śāstra.





Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ṛṣabhadeva had nothing to do with material affairs. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: [Bg. 4.8] the purpose of an incarnation is to liberate His devotees and to stop the demoniac activities of nondevotees. These are the two functions of the Supreme Lord when He incarnates. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that in order to preach, one must live a practical life and show people how to do things. Āpani ācari' bhakti śikhāimu sabāre. One cannot teach others unless he behaves the same way himself. Ṛṣabhadeva was an ideal king, and He took His education in the gurukula, although He was already educated because the Supreme Lord is omniscient. Although Ṛṣabhadeva had nothing to learn from gurukula, He went there just to teach the people in general how to take an education from the right source, from Vedic teachers. He then entered householder life and lived according to the principles of Vedic knowledge-śruti and smṛti. In his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.10) Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, quoting the Skanda Purāṇa, states:



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[BRS śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate





"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.1011.2.101]



Human society must follow the instructions received from śruti and smṛti, Vedic literature. Practically applied in life this is worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to the pāñcarātrika-vidhi. Every human being must advance his spiritual life and at the end return home, back to Godhead. Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva strictly followed all these principles. He remained an ideal gṛhastha and taught His sons how to become perfect in spiritual life. These are some examples of how He ruled the earth and completed His mission as an incarnation.





TEXT 9



yeṣāṁ khalu mahā-yogī bharato jyeṣṭhaḥ śreṣṭha-guṇa āsīd yenedaṁ varṣaṁ bhāratam iti vyapadiśanti.



SYNONYMS



yeṣām-of whom; khalu-indeed; mahā-yogī-a very highly exalted devotee of the Lord; bharataḥ-Bharata; jyeṣṭhaḥ-the eldest; śreṣṭha-guṇaḥ-qualified with the best attributes; āsīt-was; yena-by whom; idam-this; varṣam-planet; bhāratam-Bhārata; iti-thus; vyapadiśanti-people call.





Of Ṛṣabhadeva's one hundred sons, the eldest, named Bharata, was a great, exalted devotee qualified with the best attributes. In his honor, this planet has become known as Bhārata-varṣa.





This planet known as Bhārata-varṣa is also called puṇya-bhūmi, the pious land. At the present moment Bhārata-bhūmi, or Bhārata-varṣa, is a small piece of land extending from the Himalaya Mountains to Cape Comorin. Sometimes this peninsula is called puṇya-bhūmi. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given special importance to the people of this land.



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra





"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India (Bhārata-varṣa) should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all other people." (Cc. Ādi 9.41) The inhabitants of this piece of land are very fortunate. They can purify their existence by accepting this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and go outside Bhārata-bhūmi (India) and preach this cult to benefit the whole world.





TEXT 10



tam anu kuśāvarta ilāvarto brahmāvarto malayaḥ ketur bhadrasena indraspṛg vidarbhaḥ kīkaṭa iti nava navati pradhānāḥ.



SYNONYMS



tam-him; anu-following; kuśāvarta-Kuśāvarta; ilāvartaḥ-Ilāvarta; brahmāvartaḥ-Brahmāvarta; malayaḥ-Malaya; ketuḥ-Ketu; bhadra-senaḥ-Bhadrasena; indra-spṛk-Indraspṛk; vidarbhaḥ-Vidarbha; kīkaṭaḥ-Kīkaṭa; iti-thus; nava-nine; navati-ninety; pradhānāḥ-older than.





Following Bharata, there were ninety-nine other sons. Among these were nine elderly sons, named Kuśāvarta, Ilāvarta, Brahmāvarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indraspṛk, Vidarbha and Kīkaṭa.





TEXTS 11–12



kavir havir antarikṣaḥ

prabuddhaḥ pippalāyanaḥ

āvirhotro 'tha drumilaś

camasaḥ karabhājanaḥupaśamāyanam upariṣṭād varṇayiṣyāmaḥ.

SYNONYMS



kaviḥ-Kavi; haviḥ-Havi; antarikṣaḥ-Antarikṣa; prabuddhaḥ-Prabuddha; pippalāyanaḥ-Pippalāyana; āvirhotraḥ-Avirhotra; atha-also; drumilaḥ-Drumila; camasaḥ-Camasa; karabhājanaḥ-Karabhājana; iti-thus; bhāgavata-dharma-darśanāḥ-authorized preachers of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; nava-nine; mahā-bhāgavatāḥ-highly advanced devotees; teṣām-of them; sucaritam-good characteristics; bhagavat-mahimā-upabṛṁhitam-accompanied by the glories of the Supreme Lord; vasudeva-nārada-saṁvādam-within the conversation between Vasudeva and Nārada; upaśamāyanam-which gives full satisfaction to the mind; upariṣṭāt-hereafter (in the Eleventh Canto); varṇayiṣyāmaḥ-I shall vividly explain.





In addition to these sons were Kavi, Havi, Antarikṣa, Prabuddha, Pippalāyana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhājana. These were all very exalted, advanced devotees and authorized preachers of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. These devotees were glorified due to their strong devotion to Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they were very exalted. To satisfy the mind perfectly, I [Śukadeva Gosvāmī] shall hereafter describe the characteristics of these nine devotees when I discuss the conversation between Nārada and Vasudeva.





TEXT 13



yavīyāṁsa ekāśītir jāyanteyāḥ pitur ādeśakarā mahā-śālīnā mahā-śrotriyā yajña-śīlāḥ karma-viśuddhā brāhmaṇā babhūvuḥ.



SYNONYMS



yavīyāṁsaḥ-younger; ekāśītiḥ-numbering eighty-one; jāyanteyāḥ-the sons of Jayantī, the wife of Ṛṣabhadeva; pituḥ-of their father; ādeśakarāḥ-following the order; mahā-śālīnāḥ-well behaved. well cultured; mahā-śrotriyāḥ-extremely learned in Vedic knowledge; yajña-śīlāḥ-expert in performing ritualistic ceremonies; karma-viśuddhāḥ-very pure in their activities; brāhmaṇāḥ-qualified brāhmaṇas; babhūvuḥ-became.





In addition to these nineteen sons mentioned above, there were eighty-one younger ones, all born of Ṛṣabhadeva and Jayantī. According to the order of their father, they became well cultured, well behaved, very pure in their activities and expert in Vedic knowledge and the performance of Vedic rituals. Thus they all became perfectly qualified brāhmaṇas.





From this verse we have good information of how the castes are qualified according to quality and work. Ṛṣabhadeva, a king, was certainly a kṣatriya. He had a hundred sons, and out of these, ten were engaged as kṣatriyas and ruled the planet. Nine sons became good preachers of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (mahā-bhāgavatas), and this indicates that they were above the position of brāhmaṇas. The other eighty-one sons became highly qualified brāhmaṇas. These are some practical examples of how one can become fit for a certain type of activity by qualification, not by birth. All the sons of Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva were kṣatriyas by birth, but by quality some of them became kṣatriyas, and some became brāhmaṇas. Nine became preachers of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (bhāgavata-dharma-darśanāḥ), which means that they were above the categories of kṣatriya and brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 14



bhagavān ṛṣabha-saṁjña ātma-tantraḥ svayaṁ nitya-nivṛttānartha-paramparaḥ kevalānandānubhava īśvara eva viparītavat karmāṇy ārabhamāṇaḥ kālenānugataṁ dharmam ācaraṇenopaśikṣayann atad-vidāṁ sama upaśānto maitraḥ kāruṇiko dharmārtha-yaśaḥ-prajānandāmṛtāvarodhena gṛheṣu lokaṁ niyamayat.



SYNONYMS



bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabha-Ṛṣabha; saṁjñaḥ-named; ātma-tantraḥ-fully independent; svayam-personally; nitya-eternally; nivṛtta-free from; anartha-of things not wanted (birth, old age, disease and death); paramparaḥ-the continual succession, one after another; kevala-only; ānanda-anubhavaḥ-full of transcendental bliss; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Lord, the controller; eva-indeed; viparīta-vat-just like the opposite; karmāṇi-material activities; ārabhamāṇaḥ-performing; kālena-in course of time; anugatam-neglected; dharmam-the varṇāśrama-dharma; ācaraṇena-by executing; upaśikṣayan-teaching; a-tat-vidām-persons who are in ignorance; samaḥ-equipoised; upaśāntaḥ-undisturbed by the material senses; maitraḥ-very friendly to everyone; kāruṇikaḥ-very merciful to all; dharma-religious principles; artha-economic development; yaśaḥ-reputation; prajā-sons and daughters; ānanda-material pleasure; amṛta-eternal life; avarodhena-for achieving; gṛheṣu-in household life; lokam-the people in general; niyamayat-He regulated.





Being an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was fully independent because His form was spiritual, eternal and full of transcendental bliss. He eternally had nothing to do with the four principles of material misery [birth, death, old age and disease]. Nor was He materially attached. He was always equipoised, and He saw everyone on the same level. He was unhappy to see others unhappy, and He was the well-wisher of all living entities. Although He was a perfect personality, the Supreme Lord and controller of all, He nonetheless acted as if He were an ordinary conditioned soul. Therefore He strictly followed the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma and acted accordingly. In due course of time, the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma had become neglected; therefore through His personal characteristics and behavior, He taught the ignorant public how to perform duties within the varṇāśrama-dharma. In this way He regulated the general populace in householder life, enabling them to develop religion and economic well-being and to attain reputations, sons and daughters, material pleasure and finally eternal life. By His instructions, He showed how people could remain householders and at the same time become perfect by following the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma.





The varṇāśrama-dharma is meant for imperfect, conditioned souls. It trains them to become spiritually advanced in order to return home, back to Godhead. A civilization that does not know the highest aim of life is no better than an animal society. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. A human society is meant for elevation to spiritual knowledge so that all of the people can be freed from the clutches of birth, death, old age and disease. The varṇāśrama-dharma enables human society to become perfectly fit for getting out of the clutches of māyā, and by following the regulative principles of varṇāśrama-dharma, one can become successful. In this regard, see Bhagavad-gītā (3.21–24).





TEXT 15



yad yac chīrṣaṇyācaritaṁ tat tad anuvartate lokaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yat yat-whatever; śīrṣaṇya-by the leading personalities; ācaritam-performed; tat tat-that; anuvartate-follow; lokaḥ-the people in general.





Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow.





A similar verse is also found in Bhagavad-gītā (3.21). It is essential for human society to have a section of men perfectly trained as qualified brāhmaṇas according to the instructions of Vedic knowledge. Those below the brahminical qualification-administrators, merchants and workers-should take instructions from those ideal people who are considered to be intellectuals. In this way, everyone can be elevated to the highest transcendental position and be freed from material attachment. The material world is described by Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself as duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15], a temporary place of misery. No one can stay here, even if he makes a compromise with misery. One has to give up this body and accept another, which may not even be a human body. As soon as one gets a material body, he becomes deha-bhṛt, or dehī. In other words, he is subjected to all the material conditions. The leaders of society must be so ideal that by following them one can be relieved from the clutches of material existence.





TEXT 16



yadyapi sva-viditaṁ sakala-dharmaṁ brāhmaṁ guhyaṁ brāhmaṇair darśita-mārgeṇa sāmādibhir upāyair janatām anuśaśāsa.



SYNONYMS



yadyapi-although; sva-viditam-known by Him; sakala-dharmam-which includes all different types of occupational duties; brāhmam-Vedic instruction; guhyam-very confidential; brāhmaṇaiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; darśita-mārgeṇa-by the path showed; sāma-ādibhiḥ-sāma, dama, titikṣā (controlling the mind. controlling the senses, practicing tolerance) and so on; upāyaiḥ-by the means; janatām-the people in general; anuśaśāsa-he ruled over.





Although Lord Ṛṣabhadeva knew everything about confidential Vedic knowledge, which includes information about all types of occupational duties, He still maintained Himself as a kṣatriya and followed the instructions of the brāhmaṇas as they related to mind control, sense control, tolerance and so forth. Thus He ruled the people according to the system of varṇāśrama-dharma, which enjoins that the brāhmaṇas instruct the kṣatriyas and the kṣatriyas administer to the state through the vaiśyas and śūdras.





Although Ṛṣabhadeva knew all the Vedic instructions perfectly well, He nonetheless followed the instructions of the brāhmaṇas in order to perfectly maintain the social order. The brāhmaṇas would give advice according to the śāstras, and all the other castes would follow. The word brahma means "perfect knowledge of all activities," and this knowledge is very confidentially described in the Vedic literatures. Men trained perfectly as brāhmaṇas should know all Vedic literature, and the benefit derived from this literature should be distributed to the general populace. The general populace should follow the perfect brāhmaṇa. In this way, one can learn how to control the mind and senses and thus gradually advance to spiritual perfection.





TEXT 17



dravya-deśa-kāla-vayaḥ-śraddhartvig-vividhoddeśopacitaiḥ sarvair api kratubhir yathopadeśaṁ śata-kṛtva iyāja.



SYNONYMS



dravya-the ingredients for performing yajña; deśa-the particular place, a holy place or a temple; kāla-the suitable time, such as springtime; vayaḥ-the age, especially youth; śraddhā-faith in goodness, not in passion and ignorance; ṛtvik-the priests; vividha-uddeśa-worshiping different demigods for different purposes; upacitaiḥ-enriched by; sarvaiḥ-all kinds of; api-certainly; kratubhiḥ-by sacrificial ceremonies; yathā-upadeśam-according to the instruction; śata-kṛtvaḥ-one hundred times; iyāja-He worshiped.





Lord Ṛṣabhadeva performed all kinds of sacrifices one hundred times according to the instructions of the Vedic literatures. Thus He satisfied Lord Viṣṇu in every respect. All the rituals were enriched by first-class ingredients. They were executed in holy places according to the proper time by priests who were all young and faithful. In this way Lord Viṣṇu was worshiped, and the prasāda was offered to all the demigods. Thus the functions and festivals were all successful.





It is said, kaumāra ācaret prājño dharmān bhāgavatān iha (Bhāg. 7.6.1). A ritual should be performed by young men, even boys, at a tender age in order for the ritual to be performed successfully. From childhood, people should be trained in Vedic culture, especially in devotional service. In this way, one can perfect one's life. A Vaiṣṇava does not disrespect the demigods, but on the other hand he is not so foolish that he accepts each and every demigod as the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is master of all demigods; therefore the demigods are His servants. The Vaiṣṇava accepts them as servants of the Supreme Lord, and he worships them directly. In the Brahma-saṁhitā, the important demigods-Lord Śiva, Lord Brahmā and even the incarnations and expansions of Lord Kṛṣṇa like Mahā-Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and all the other viṣṇu-tattvas, as well as the śakti-tattvas like Durgādevī-are all worshiped by the process of worshiping Govinda with the words govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **. A Vaiṣṇava worships the demigods in relation to Govinda, not independently. Vaiṣṇavas are not so foolish that they consider the demigods independent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya: the supreme master is Kṛṣṇa, and all others are His servants.





TEXT 18



bhagavatarṣabheṇa parirakṣyamāṇa etasmin varṣe na kaścana puruṣo vāñchaty avidyamānam ivātmano 'nyasmāt kathañcana kimapi karhicid avekṣate bhartary anusavanaṁ vijṛmbhita-snehātiśayam antareṇa.



SYNONYMS



bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabheṇa-King Ṛṣabha; parirakṣyamāṇe-being protected; etasmin-on this; varṣe-planet; na-not; kaścana-anyone; puruṣaḥ-even a common man; vāñchati-desires; avidyamānam-not existing in reality; iva-as if; ātmanaḥ-for himself; anyasmāt-from anyone else; kathañcana-by any means; kimapi-anything; karhicit-at any time; avekṣate-does care to see; bhartari-toward the master; anusavanam-always; vijṛmbhita-expanding; sneha-atiśayam-very great affection; antareṇa-within one's self.





No one likes to possess anything that is like a will-o'-the-wisp or a flower in the sky, for everyone knows very well that such things do not exist. When Lord Ṛṣabhadeva ruled this planet of Bhāratavarṣa, even common men did not want to ask for anything, at any time or by any means. No one ever asks for a will-o'-the-wisp. In other words, everyone was completely satisfied, and therefore there was no chance of anyone's asking for anything. The people were absorbed in great affection for the King. Since this affection was always expanding, they were not inclined to ask for anything.





In Bengal the word ghoḍā-ḍimba is used, which means "the egg of a horse." Since a horse never lays an egg, the word ghoḍā-ḍimba actually has no meaning. In Sanskrit there is a word kha-puṣpa, which means "the flower in the sky." No flower grows in the sky; therefore no one is interested in asking for kha-puṣpa or ghoḍā-ḍimba. During the reign of Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva, people were so well equipped that they did not want to ask for anything. They were immensely supplied with all necessities for life due to King Ṛṣabhadeva's good government. Consequently everyone felt full satisfaction and did not want anything. This is the perfection of government. If the citizens are unhappy due to bad government, the heads of government are condemned. During these democratic days, monarchy is disliked by the people, but here is an example of how an emperor of the whole world kept all the citizens fully satisfied by supplying the necessities of life and following the Vedic principles. Thus everyone was happy during the reign of Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 19



sa kadācid aṭamāno bhagavān ṛṣabho brahmāvarta-gato brahmarṣi-pravara-sabhāyāṁ prajānāṁ niśāmayantīnām ātmajān avahitātmanaḥ praśraya-praṇaya-bhara-suyantritān apy upaśikṣayann iti hovāca.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-He; kadācit-once; aṭamānaḥ-while on tour; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabhaḥ-Lord Ṛṣabha; brahmāvarta-gataḥ-when He reached the place known as Brahmāvarta (identified by some as Burma and by others as a place near Kanpura, Uttar Pradesh); brahma-ṛṣi-pravara-sabhāyām-in a meeting of first-class brāhmaṇas; prajānām-while the citizens; niśāmayantīnām-were hearing; ātmajān-His sons; avahita-ātmanaḥ-attentive; praśraya-of good behavior; praṇaya-of devotion; bhara-by an abundance; su-yantritān-well controlled; api-although; upaśikṣayan-teaching; iti-thus; ha-certainly; uvāca-said.





Once while touring the world, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Lord, reached a place known as Brahmāvarta. There was a great conference of learned brāhmaṇas at that place, and all the King's sons attentively heard the instructions of the brāhmaṇas there. At that assembly, within the hearing of the citizens, Ṛṣabhadeva instructed His sons, although they were already very well behaved, devoted and qualified. He instructed them so that in the future they could rule the world very perfectly. Thus he spoke as follows.





The instructions of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva to His sons are very valuable if one wants to live peacefully within this world, which is full of miseries. In the next chapter, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva gives His sons these valuable instructions.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Characteristics of Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead."



Chapter Five



Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's Teachings to His Sons





In this chapter there is a description of bhāgavata-dharma, religious principles in devotional service that transcend religious principles for liberation and the mitigation of material misery. It is stated in this chapter that a human being should not work hard like dogs and hogs for sense gratification. The human life is especially meant for the revival of our relationship with the Supreme Lord, and to this end all kinds of austerities and penances should be accepted. By austere activities, one's heart can be cleansed of material contamination, and as a result one can be situated on the spiritual platform. To attain this perfection, one has to take shelter of a devotee and serve him. Then the door of liberation will be open. Those who are materially attached to women and sense gratification gradually become entangled in material consciousness and suffer the miseries of birth, old age, disease and death. Those who are engaged in the general welfare of all and who are not attached to children and family are called mahātmās. Those who are engaged in sense gratification. who act piously or impiously, cannot understand the purpose of the soul. Therefore they should approach a highly elevated devotee and accept him as a spiritual master. By his association, one will be able to understand the purpose of life. Under the instructions of such a spiritual master, one can attain devotional service to the Lord, detachment from material things, and tolerance of material misery and distress. One can then see all living entities equally, and one becomes very eager to know about transcendental subject matters. Endeavoring persistently for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa, one becomes detached from wife, children and home. He is not interested in wasting time. In this way one becomes self-realized. A person advanced in spiritual knowledge does not engage anyone in material activity. And one who cannot deliver another person by instructing him in devotional service should not become a spiritual master, father, mother, demigod or husband. Instructing His one hundred sons, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva advised them to accept their eldest brother, Bharata, as their guide and lord, and thereby serve him. Of all living entities, the brāhmaṇas are the best, and above the brāhmaṇas the Vaiṣṇavas are situated in an even better position. Serving a Vaiṣṇava means serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes the characteristics of Bharata Mahārāja and the sacrificial performance executed by Lord Ṛṣabhadeva for the instruction of the general populace.





TEXT 1



ṛṣabha uvāca

nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛloke

kaṣṭān kāmān arhate viḍ-bhujāṁ ye

tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ

śuddhyed yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam

SYNONYMS



ṛṣabhaḥ uvāca-Lord Ṛṣabhadeva said; na-not; ayam-this; dehaḥ-body; deha-bhājām-of all living entities who have accepted material bodies; nṛ-loke-in this world; kaṣṭān-troublesome; kāmān-sense gratification; arhate-deserves; viṭ-bhujām-of stool-eaters; ye-which; tapaḥ-austerities and penances; divyam-divine; putrakāḥ-My dear sons; yena-by which; sattvam-the heart; śuddhyet-becomes purified; yasmāt-from which; brahma-saukhyam-spiritual happiness; tu-certainly; anantam-unending.





Lord Ṛṣabhadeva told His sons: My dear boys, of all the living entities who have accepted material bodies in this world, one who has been awarded this human form should not work hard day and night simply for sense gratification, which is available even for dogs and hogs that eat stool. One should engage in penance and austerity to attain the divine position of devotional service. By such activity, one's heart is purified, and when one attains this position, he attains eternal, blissful life, which is transcendental to material happiness and which continues forever.





In this verse Lord Ṛṣabhadeva tells His sons about the importance of human life. The word deha-bhāk refers to anyone who accepts a material body, but the living entity who is awarded the human form must act differently from animals. Animals like dogs and hogs enjoy sense gratification by eating stool. After undergoing severe hardships all day, human beings are trying to enjoy themselves at night by eating, drinking, having sex and sleeping. At the same time, they have to properly defend themselves. However, this is not human civilization. Human life means voluntarily practicing suffering for the advancement of spiritual life. There is, of course, suffering in the lives of animals and plants, which are suffering due to their past misdeeds. However, human beings should voluntarily accept suffering in the form of austerities and penances in order to attain the divine life. After attaining the divine life, one can enjoy happiness eternally. After all, every living entity is trying to enjoy happiness, but as long as one is encaged in the material body, he has to suffer different kinds of misery. A higher sense is present in the human form. We should act according to superior advice in order to attain eternal happiness and go back to Godhead.



It is significant in this verse that the government and the natural guardian, the father, should educate subordinates and raise them to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Devoid of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, every living being suffers in this cycle of birth and death perpetually. To relieve them from this bondage and enable them to become blissful and happy, bhakti-yoga should be taught. A foolish civilization neglects to teach people how to rise to the platform of bhakti-yoga. Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness a person is no better than a hog or dog. The instructions of Ṛṣabhadeva are very essential at the present moment. People are being educated and trained to work very hard for sense gratification, and there is no sublime aim in life. A man travels to earn his livelihood, leaving home early in the morning, catching a local train and being packed in a compartment. He has to stand for an hour or two in order to reach his place of business. Then again he takes a bus to get to the office. At the office he works hard from nine to five; then he takes two or three hours to return home. After eating, he has sex and goes to sleep. For all this hardship, his only happiness is a little sex. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Ṛṣabhadeva clearly states that human life is not meant for this kind of existence, which is enjoyed even by dogs and hogs. Indeed, dogs and hogs do not have to work so hard for sex. A human being should try to live in a different way and should not try to imitate dogs and hogs. The alternative is mentioned. Human life is meant for tapasya, austerity and penance. By tapasya, one can get out of the material clutches. When one is situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, devotional service, his happiness is guaranteed eternally. By taking to bhakti-yoga, devotional service, one's existence is purified. The living entity is seeking happiness life after life, but he can make a solution to all his problems simply by practicing bhakti-yoga. Then he immediately becomes eligible to return home, back to Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."





TEXT 2



mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimuktes

tamo-dvāraṁ yoṣitāṁ saṅgi-saṅgam

mahāntas te sama-cittāḥ praśāntā

vimanyavaḥ suhṛdaḥ sādhavo ye

SYNONYMS



mahat-sevām-service to the spiritually advanced persons called mahātmās; dvāram-the way; āhuḥ-they say; vimukteḥ-of liberation; tamaḥ-dvāram-the way to the dungeon of a dark, hellish condition of life; yoṣitām-of women; saṅgi-of associates; saṅgam-association; mahāntaḥ-highly advanced in spiritual understanding; te-they; sama-cittāḥ-persons who see everyone in a spiritual identity; praśāntāḥ-very peaceful, situated in Brahman or Bhagavān; vimanyavaḥ-without anger (one must distribute Kṛṣṇa consciousness to persons who are hostile without becoming angry at them); suhṛdaḥ-well-wishers of everyone; sādhavaḥ-qualified devotees, without abominable behavior; ye-they who.





One can attain the path of liberation from material bondage only by rendering service to highly advanced spiritual personalities. These personalities are impersonalists and devotees. Whether one wants to merge into the Lord's existence or wants to associate with the Personality of Godhead, one should render service to the mahātmās. For those who are not interested in such activities, who associate with people fond of women and sex, the path to hell is wide open. The mahātmās are equipoised. They do not see any difference between one living entity and another. They are very peaceful and are fully engaged in devotional service. They are devoid of anger, and they work for the benefit of everyone. They do not behave in any abominable way. Such people are known as mahātmās.





The human body is like a junction. One may either take the path of liberation or the path leading to a hellish condition. How one can take these paths is described herein. On the path of liberation, one associate; with mahātmās, and on the path of bondage one associates with those attached to sense gratification and women. There are two types of mahātmās-the impersonalist and the devotee. Although their ultimate goal is different, the process of emancipation is almost the same. Both want eternal happiness. One seeks happiness in impersonal Brahman, and the other seeks happiness in the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As described in the first verse: brahma-saukhyam. Brahman means spiritual or eternal; both the impersonalist and the devotee seek eternal blissful life. In any case, it is advised that one become perfect. In the words of Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.87):



asat-saṅga-tyāga,--ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra

'strī-saṅgī'--eka asādhu, 'kṛṣṇābhakta' āra





To remain unattached to the modes of material nature, one should avoid associating with those who are asat, materialistic. There are two kinds of materialists. One is attached to women and sense gratification, and the other is simply a nondevotee. On the positive side is association with mahātmās, and on the negative side is the avoidance of nondevotees and women-hunters.





TEXT 3



ye vā mayīśe kṛta-sauhṛdārthā

janeṣu dehambhara-vārtikeṣu

gṛheṣu jāyātmaja-rātimatsu

na prīti-yuktā yāvad-arthāś ca loke

SYNONYMS



ye-those who; vā-or; mayi-unto Me; īśe-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛta-sauhṛda-arthāḥ-very eager to develop love (in a relationship of dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or mādhurya); janeṣu-to people; dehambhara-vārtikeṣu-who are interested only in maintaining the body, not in spiritual salvation; gṛheṣu-to the home; jāyā-wife; ātma-ja-children; rāti-wealth or friends; matsu-consisting of; na-not; prīti-yuktāḥ-very attached; yāvat-arthāḥ-who live by collecting only as much as required; ca-and; loke-in the material world.





Those who are interested in reviving Kṛṣṇa consciousness and increasing their love of Godhead do not like to do anything that is not related to Kṛṣṇa. They are not interested in mingling with people who are busy maintaining their bodies, eating, sleeping, mating and defending. They are not attached to their homes, although they may be householders. Nor are they attached to wives, children, friends or wealth. At the same time, they are not indifferent to the execution of their duties. Such people are interested in collecting only enough money to keep the body and soul together.





Whether he is an impersonalist or a devotee, one who is actually interested in advancing spiritually should not mingle with those who are simply interested in maintaining the body by means of the so-called advancement of civilization. Those who are interested in spiritual life should not be attached to homely comforts in the company of wife. children, friends and so forth. Even if one is a gṛhastha and has to earn his livelihood, he should be satisfied by collecting only enough money to maintain body and soul together. One should not have more than that nor less than that. As indicated herein, a householder should endeavor to earn money for the execution of bhakti-yoga-śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam/ arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. A householder should lead such a life that he gets full opportunity to hear and chant. He should worship the Deity at home. observe festivals, invite friends in and give them prasāda. A householder should earn money for this purpose, not for sense gratification.





TEXT 4



nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti

na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

SYNONYMS



nūnam-indeed; pramattaḥ-mad; kurute-performs; vikarma-sinful activities forbidden in the scriptures; yat-when; indriya-prītaye-for sense gratification; āpṛṇoti-engages; na-not; sādhu-befitting; manye-I think; yataḥ-by which; ātmanaḥ-of the soul; ayam-this; asan-being temporary; api-although; kleśa-daḥ-giving misery; āsa-became possible; dehaḥ-the body.





When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he certainly becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all kinds of sinful activity. He does not know that due to his past misdeeds he has already received a body which, although temporary, is the cause of his misery. Actually the living entity should not have taken on a material body, but he has been awarded the material body for sense gratification. Therefore I think it not befitting an intelligent man to involve himself again in the activities of sense gratification by which he perpetually gets material bodies one after another.





Begging, borrowing and stealing to live for sense gratification is condemned in this verse because such consciousness leads one to a dark, hellish condition. The four sinful activities are illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. These are the means by which one gets another material body that is full of miseries. In the Vedas it is said: asaṅgo hy ayaṁ puruṣaḥ. The living entity is not really connected with this material world, but due to his tendency to enjoy the material senses. he is put into the material condition. One should perfect his life by associating with devotees. He should not become further implicated in the material body.





TEXT 5



parābhavas tāvad abodha-jāto

yāvan na jijñāsata ātma-tattvam

yāvat kriyās tāvad idaṁ mano vai

karmātmakaṁ yena śarīra-bandhaḥ

SYNONYMS



parābhavaḥ-defeat, misery; tāvat-so long; abodha-jātaḥ-produced from ignorance; yāvat-as long as; na-not; jijñāsate-inquires about; ātma-tattvam-the truth of the self; yāvat-as long as; kriyāḥ-fruitive activities; tāvat-so long; idam-this; manaḥ-mind; vai-indeed; karma-ātmakam-absorbed in material activities; yena-by which; śarīra-bandhaḥ-bondage in this material body.





As long as one does not inquire about the spiritual values of life, one is defeated and subjected to miseries arising from ignorance. Be it sinful or pious, karma has its resultant actions. If a person is engaged in any kind of karma, his mind is called karmātmaka, colored with fruitive activity. As long as the mind is impure, consciousness is unclear, and as long as one is absorbed in fruitive activity, he has to accept a material body.





Generally people think that one should act very piously in order to be relieved from misery, but this is not a fact. Even though one engages in pious activity and speculation. he is nonetheless defeated. His only aim should be emancipation from the clutches of māyā and all material activities. Speculative knowledge and pious activity do not solve the problems of material life. One should be inquisitive to understand his spiritual position. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.37):



yathaidhāṁsi samiddho 'gnir

bhasmasāt kurute 'rjuna

jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi

bhasmasāt kurute tathā





"As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities."



Unless one understands the self and its activities, one has to be considered in material bondage. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32) it is also said: ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ. A person who doesn't have knowledge of devotional service may think himself liberated, but actually he is not. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ: [SB 10.2.32] such people may approach the impersonal Brahman effulgence, but they fall down again into material enjoyment because they have no knowledge of devotional service. As long as one is interested in karma and jñāna, he continues enduring the miseries of material life-birth, old age, disease and death. Karmīs certainly take on one body after another. As far as jñānīs are concerned, unless they are promoted to the topmost understanding, they must return to the material world. As explained in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19): bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate. The point is to know Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, as everything and surrender unto Him. Karmīs do not know this, but a devotee who is one hundred percent engaged in the devotional service of the Lord knows fully what is karma and jñāna; therefore a pure devotee is no longer interested in karma or jñāna. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Madhya 19.167]. The real bhakta is untouched by any tinge of karma and jñāna. His only purpose in life is to serve the Lord.





TEXT 6



evaṁ manaḥ karma-vaśaṁ prayuṅkte

avidyayātmany upadhīyamāne

prītir na yāvan mayi vāsudeve

na mucyate deha-yogena tāvat

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; manaḥ-the mind; karma-vaśam-subjugated by fruitive activities; prayuṅkte-acts; avidyayā-by ignorance; ātmani-when the living entity; upadhīyamāne-is covered; prītiḥ-love; na-not; yāvat-as long as; mayi-unto Me; vāsudeve-Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa; na-not; mucyate-is delivered; deha-yogena-from contact with the material body; tāvat-so long.





When the living entity is covered by the mode of ignorance, he does not understand the individual living being and the supreme living being, and his mind is subjugated to fruitive activity. Therefore, until one has love for Lord Vāsudeva, who is none other than Myself, he is certainly not delivered from having to accept a material body again and again.





When the mind is polluted by fruitive activity, the living entity wants to be elevated from one material position to another. Generally everyone is involved in working hard day and night to improve his economic condition. Even when one understands the Vedic rituals, he becomes interested in promotion to heavenly planets, not knowing that one's real interest lies in returning home, back to Godhead. By acting on the platform of fruitive activity, one wanders throughout the universe in different species and forms. Unless he comes in contact with a devotee of the Lord, a guru, he does not become attached to the service of Lord Vāsudeva. Knowledge of Vāsudeva requires many births to understand. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19): vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ. After struggling for existence for many births one may take shelter at the lotus feet of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. When this happens. one actually becomes wise and surrenders unto Him. That is the only way to stop the repetition of birth and death. This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 19.151) in the instructions given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī at Daśāśvamedha-ghāṭa.



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja





The living entity wanders throughout different planets in different forms and bodies, but if by chance he comes in contact with a bona fide spiritual master, by the grace of the spiritual master he receives Lord Kṛṣṇa's shelter, and his devotional life begins.





TEXT 7



yadā na paśyaty ayathā guṇehāṁ

svārthe pramattaḥ sahasā vipaścit

gata-smṛtir vindati tatra tāpān

āsādya maithunyam agāram ajñaḥ

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; na-not; paśyati-sees; ayathā-unnecessary; guṇa-īhām-endeavor to satisfy the senses; sva-arthe-in self-interest; pramattaḥ-mad; sahasā-very soon; vipaścit-even one advanced in knowledge; gata-smṛtiḥ-being forgetful; vindati-gets; tatra-there; tāpān-material miseries; āsādya-getting; maithunyam-based on sexual intercourse; agāram-a home; ajñaḥ-being foolish.





Even though one may be very learned and wise, he is mad if he does not understand that the endeavor for sense gratification is a useless waste of time. Being forgetful of his own interest, he tries to be happy in the material world, centering his interests around his home, which is based on sexual intercourse and which brings him all kinds of material miseries. In this way one is no better than a foolish animal.





In the lowest stage of devotional life, one is not an unalloyed devotee. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam: [Madhya 19.167] to be an unalloyed devotee, one must be freed from all material desires and untouched by fruitive activity and speculative knowledge. On the lower platform, one may sometimes be interested in philosophical speculation with a tinge of devotion. However, at that stage one is still interested in sense gratification and is contaminated by the modes of material nature. The influence of māyā is so strong that even a person advanced in knowledge actually forgets that he is Kṛṣṇa's eternal servant. Therefore he remains satisfied in his householder life, which is centered around sexual intercourse. Conceding to a life of sex, he agrees to suffer all kinds of material miseries. Due to ignorance, one is thus bound by the chain of material laws.





TEXT 8



puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti

SYNONYMS



puṁsaḥ-of a male; striyāḥ-of a female; mithunī-bhāvam-attraction for sexual life; etam-this; tayoḥ-of both of them; mithaḥ-between one another; hṛdaya-granthim-the knot of the hearts; āhuḥ-they call; ataḥ-thereafter; gṛha-by home; kṣetra-field; suta-children; āpta-relatives; vittaiḥ-and by wealth; janasya-of the living being; mohaḥ-illusion; ayam-this; aham-I; mama-mine; iti-thus.





The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of material existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together the hearts of the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body, home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and thinks in terms of "I and mine."





Sex serves as the natural attraction between man and woman, and when they are married, their relationship becomes more involved. Due to the entangling relationship between man and woman, there is a sense of illusion whereby one thinks, "This man is my husband," or "This woman is my wife." This is called hṛdaya-granthi, "the hard knot in the heart." This knot is very difficult to undo, even though a man and woman separate either for the principles of varṇāśrama or simply to get a divorce. In any case, the man always thinks of the woman, and the woman always thinks of the man. Thus a person becomes materially attached to family, property and children, although all of these are temporary. The possessor unfortunately identifies with his property and wealth. Sometimes, even after renunciation, one becomes attached to a temple or to the few things that constitute the property of a sannyāsī, but such attachment is not as strong as family attachment. The attachment to the family is the strongest illusion. In the Satya-saṁhitā, it is stated:



brahmādyā yājñavalkādyā

mucyante strī-sahāyinaḥ

bodhyante kecanaiteṣāṁ

viśeṣam ca vido viduḥ





Sometimes it is found among exalted personalities like Lord Brahmā that the wife and children are not a cause of bondage. On the contrary, the wife actually helps further spiritual life and liberation. Nonetheless, most people are bound by the knots of the marital relationship, and consequently they forget their relationship with Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 9



yadā mano-hṛdaya-granthir asya

karmānubaddho dṛḍha āślatheta

tadā janaḥ samparivartate 'smād

muktaḥ paraṁ yāty atihāya hetum

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; manaḥ-the mind; hṛdaya-granthiḥ-the knot in the heart; asya-of this person; karma-anubaddhaḥ-bound by the results of his past deeds; dṛḍhaḥ-very strong; āślatheta-becomes slackened; tadā-at that time; janaḥ-the conditioned soul; samparivartate-turns away; asmāt-from this attachment for sex life; muktaḥ-liberated; param-to the transcendental world; yāti-goes; atihāya-giving up; hetum-the original cause.





When the strong knot in the heart of a person implicated in material life due to the results of past action is slackened, one turns away from his attachment to home, wife and children. In this way, one gives up the basic principle of illusion [I and mine] and becomes liberated. Thus one goes to the transcendental world.





When, by associating with sādhus and engaging in devotional service. one is gradually freed from the material conception due to knowledge. practice and detachment, the knot of attachment in the heart is slackened. Thus one can get freed from conditional life and become eligible to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXTS 10–13



haṁse gurau mayi bhaktyānuvṛtyā

vitṛṣṇayā dvandva-titikṣayā ca

sarvatra jantor vyasanāvagatyā

jijñāsayā tapasehā-nivṛttyā

mat-karmabhir mat-kathayā ca nityaṁ



mad-deva-saṅgād guṇa-kīrtanān me

nirvaira-sāmyopaśamena putrā

jihāsayā deha-gehātma-buddheḥ

adhyātma-yogena vivikta-sevayā



prāṇendriyātmābhijayena sadhryak

sac-chraddhayā brahmacaryeṇa śaśvad

asampramādena yamena vācām

sarvatra mad-bhāva-vicakṣaṇena



jñānena vijñāna-virājitena

yogena dhṛty-udyama-sattva-yukto

liṅgaṁ vyapohet kuśalo 'ham-ākhyam

SYNONYMS



haṁse-who is a paramahaṁsa, or the most exalted. spiritually advanced person; gurau-to the spiritual master; mayi-unto Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyā-by devotional service; anuvṛtyā-by following; vitṛṣṇayā-by detachment from sense gratification; dvandva-of the dualities of the material world; titikṣayā-by tolerance; ca-also; sarvatra-everywhere; jantoḥ-of the living entity; vyasana-the miserable condition of life; avagatyā-by realizing; jijñāsayā-by inquiring about the truth; tapasā-by practicing austerities and penances; īhā-nivṛttyā-by giving up the endeavor for sense enjoyment; mat-karmabhiḥ-by working for Me; mat-kathayā-by hearing topics about Me; ca-also; nityam-always; mat-deva-saṅgāt-by association with My devotees; guṇa-kīrtanāt me-by chanting and glorifying My transcendental qualities; nirvaira-being without enmity; sāmya-seeing everyone equally by spiritual understanding; upaśamena-by subduing anger, lamentation and so on; putrāḥ-O sons; jihāsayā-by desiring to give up; deha-with the body; geha-with the home; ātma-buddheḥ-identification of the self; adhyātma-yogena-by study of the revealed scriptures; vivikta-sevayā-by living in a solitary place; prāṇa-the life air; indriya-the senses; ātma-the mind; abhijayena-by controlling; sadhryak-completely; sat-śraddhayā-by developing faith in the scriptures; brahmacaryeṇa-by observing celibacy; śaśvat-always; asampramādena-by not being bewildered; yamena-by restraint; vācām-of words; sarvatra-everywhere; mat-bhāva-thinking of Me; vicakṣaṇena-by observing; jñānena-by development of knowledge; vijñāna-by practical application of knowledge; virājitena-illumined; yogena-by practice of bhakti-yoga; dhṛti-patience; udyama-enthusiasm; sattva-discretion; yuktaḥ-endowed with; liṅgam-the cause of material bondage; vyapohet-one can give up; kuśalaḥ-in full auspiciousness; aham-ākhyam-false ego, false identification with the material world.





O My sons, you should accept a highly elevated paramahaṁsa, a spiritually advanced spiritual master. In this way, you should place your faith and love in Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You should detest sense gratification and tolerate the duality of pleasure and pain, which are like the seasonal changes of summer and winter. Try to realize the miserable condition of living entities, who are miserable even in the higher planetary systems. Philosophically inquire about the truth. Then undergo all kinds of austerities and penances for the sake of devotional service. Give up the endeavor for sense enjoyment and engage in the service of the Lord. Listen to discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and always associate with devotees. Chant about and glorify the Supreme Lord, and look upon everyone equally on the spiritual platform. Give up enmity and subdue anger and lamentation. Abandon identifying the self with the body and the home, and practice reading the revealed scriptures. Live in a secluded place and practice the process by which you can completely control your life air, mind and senses. Have full faith in the revealed scriptures, the Vedic literatures, and always observe celibacy. Perform your prescribed duties and avoid unnecessary talks. Always thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, acquire knowledge from the right source. Thus practicing bhakti-yoga, you will patiently and enthusiastically be elevated in knowledge and will be able to give up the false ego.





In these four verses, Ṛṣabhadeva tells His sons how they can be freed from the false identification arising from false ego and material conditional life. One gradually becomes liberated by practicing as mentioned above. All these prescribed methods enable one to give up the material body (liṅgaṁ vyapohet) and be situated in his original spiritual body. First of all one has to accept a bona fide spiritual master. This is advocated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu: śrī-guru-pādāśrayaḥ. To be freed from the entanglement of the material world, one has to approach a spiritual master. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12]. By questioning the spiritual master and by serving him, one can advance in spiritual life. When one engages in devotional service, naturally the attraction for personal comfort-for eating, sleeping and dressing-is reduced. By associating with the devotee, a spiritual standard is maintained. The word mad-deva-saṅgāt is very important. There are many so-called religions devoted to the worship of various demigods, but here good association means association with one who simply accepts Kṛṣṇa as his worshipable Deity.



Another important item is dvandva-titikṣā. As long as one is situated in the material world, there must be pleasure and pain arising from the material body. As Kṛṣṇa advises in Bhagavad-gītā, tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata. One has to learn how to tolerate the temporary pains and pleasures of this material world. One must also be detached from his family and practice celibacy. Sex with one's wife according to the scriptural injunctions is also accepted as brahmacarya (celibacy), but illicit sex is opposed to religious principles, and it hampers advancement in spiritual consciousness. Another important word is vijñāna-virājita. Everything should be done very scientifically and consciously. One should be a realized soul. In this way, one can give up the entanglement of material bondage.



As Śrī Madhvācārya points out, the sum and substance of these four ślokas is that one should refrain from acting out of a desire for sense gratification and should instead always engage in the Lord's loving service. In other words, bhakti-yoga is the acknowledged path of liberation. Śrīla Madhvācārya quotes from the Adhyātma:



ātmano 'vihitaṁ karma

varjayitvānya-karmaṇaḥ

kāmasya ca parityāgo

nirīhety āhur uttamāḥ





One should perform activities only for the benefit of the soul; any other activity should be given up. When a person is situated in this way, he is said to be desireless. Actually a living entity cannot be totally desireless, but when he desires the benefit of the soul and nothing else, he is said to be desireless.



Spiritual knowledge is jñāna-vijñāna-samanvitam. When one is fully equipped with jñāna and vijñāna, he is perfect. Jñāna means that one understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, to be the Supreme Being. Vijñāna refers to the activities that liberate one from the ignorance of material existence. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.31): jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me yad vijñāna-samanvitam. Knowledge of the Supreme Lord is very confidential, and the supreme knowledge by which one understands Him furthers the liberation of all living entities. This knowledge is vijñāna. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."





TEXT 14



karmāśayaṁ hṛdaya-granthi-bandham

avidyayāsāditam apramattaḥ

anena yogena yathopadeśaṁ

samyag vyapohyoparameta yogāt

SYNONYMS



karma-āśayam-the desire for fruitive activities; hṛdaya-granthi-the knot in the heart; bandham-bondage; avidyayā-because of ignorance; āsāditam-brought about; apramattaḥ-not being covered by ignorance or illusion, very careful; anena-by this; yogena-practice of yoga; yathā-upadeśam-as advised; samyak-completely; vyapohya-becoming free from; uparameta-one should desist; yogāt-from the practice of yoga, the means of liberation.





As I have advised you, My dear sons, you should act accordingly. Be very careful. By these means you will be freed from the ignorance of the desire for fruitive activity, and the knot of bondage in the heart will be completely severed. For further advancement, you should also give up the means. That is, you should not become attached to the process of liberation itself.





The process of liberation is brahma jijñāsā, the search for the Absolute Truth. Generally brahma jijñāsā is called neti neti, the process by which one analyzes existence to search out the Absolute Truth. This method continues as long as one is not situated in his spiritual life. Spiritual life is brahma-bhūta, the self-realized state. In the words of Bhagavad-gītā (18.54):



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām





"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state. he attains pure devotional service unto Me."



The idea is to enter into the parā bhakti, the transcendental devotional service of the Supreme Lord. To attain this, one must analyze ones existence, but when one is actually engaged in devotional service, he should not bother seeking out knowledge. By simply engaging in devotional service undeviatingly, one will always remain in the liberated condition.



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





(Bg. 14.26)



The unflinching execution of devotional service is in itself brahma-bhūta. Another important feature in this connection is anena yogena yathopadeśam. The instructions received from the spiritual master must be followed immediately. One should not deviate from or surpass the instructions of the spiritual master. One should not be simply intent on consulting books but should simultaneously execute the spiritual master's order (yathopadeśam). Mystic power should be achieved to enable one to give up the material conception, but when one actually engages in devotional service, one does not need to practice the mystic yoga system. The point is that one can give up the practice of yoga, but devotional service cannot be given up. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.10):



ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ





Even those who are liberated (ātmārāma) must always engage in devotional service. One may give up the practice of yoga when one is self-realized, but at no stage can one give up devotional service. All other activities for self-realization, including yoga and philosophical speculation, may be given up, but devotional service must be retained at all times.





TEXT 15



putrāṁś ca śiṣyāṁś ca nṛpo gurur vā

mal-loka-kāmo mad-anugrahārthaḥ

itthaṁ vimanyur anuśiṣyād ataj-jñān

na yojayet karmasu karma-mūḍhān

kaṁ yojayan manujo 'rthaṁ labheta

nipātayan naṣṭa-dṛśaṁ hi garte

SYNONYMS



putrān-the sons; ca-and; śiṣyān-the disciples; ca-and; nṛpaḥ-the king; guruḥ-the spiritual master; vā-or; mat-loka-kāmaḥ-desiring to go to My abode; mat-anugraha-arthaḥ-thinking that to achieve My mercy is the aim of life; ittham-in this manner; vimanyuḥ-free from anger; anuśiṣyāt-should instruct; a-tat-jñān-bereft of spiritual knowledge; na-not; yojayet-should engage; karmasu-in fruitive activities; karma-mūḍhān-simply engaged in pious or impious activities; kam-what; yojayan-engaging; manu-jaḥ-a man; artham-benefit; labheta-can achieve; nipātayan-causing to fall; naṣṭa-dṛśam-one who is already bereft of his transcendental sight; hi-indeed; garte-in the hole.





If one is serious about going back home, back to Godhead, he must consider the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the summum bonum and chief aim of life. If he is a father instructing his sons, a spiritual master instructing his disciples, or a king instructing his citizens, he must instruct them as I have advised. Without being angry, he should continue giving instructions, even if his disciple, son or citizen is sometimes unable to follow his order. Ignorant people who engage in pious and impious activities should be engaged in devotional service by all means. They should always avoid fruitive activity. If one puts into the bondage of karmic activity his disciple, son or citizen who is bereft of transcendental vision, how will one profit? It is like leading a blind man to a dark well and causing him to fall in.





It is stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.26):



na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed

ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām

joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi

vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran





"Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to fruitive action. They should be encouraged not to refrain from work, but to work in the spirit of devotion."





TEXT 16



lokaḥ svayaṁ śreyasi naṣṭa-dṛṣṭir

yo 'rthān samīheta nikāma-kāmaḥ

anyonya-vairaḥ sukha-leśa-hetor

ananta-duḥkhaṁ ca na veda mūḍhaḥ

SYNONYMS



lokaḥ-people; svayam-personally; śreyasi-of the path of auspiciousness; naṣṭa-dṛṣṭiḥ-who have lost sight; yaḥ-who; arthān-things meant for sense gratification; samīheta-desire; nikāma-kāmaḥ-having too many lusty desires for sense enjoyment; anyonya-vairaḥ-being envious of one another; sukha-leśa-hetoḥ-simply for temporary material happiness; ananta-duḥkham-unlimited sufferings; ca-also; na-do not; veda-know; mūḍhaḥ-foolish.





Due to ignorance, the materialistic person does not know anything about his real self-interest, the auspicious path in life. He is simply bound to material enjoyment by lusty desires, and all his plans are made for this purpose. For temporary sense gratification, such a person creates a society of envy, and due to this mentality, he plunges into the ocean of suffering. Such a foolish person does not even know about this.





The word naṣṭa-dṛṣṭiḥ, meaning "one who has no eyes to see the future," is very significant in this verse. Life goes on from one body to another, and the activities performed in this life are enjoyed or suffered in the next life, if not later in this life. One who is unintelligent, who has no eyes to see the future, simply creates enmity and fights with others for sense gratification. As a result, one suffers in the next life, but due to being like a blind man, he continues to act in such a way that he suffers unlimitedly. Such a person is a mūḍha, one who simply wastes his time and does not understand the Lord's devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.25):



nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya

yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ

mūḍho 'yaṁ nābhijānāti

loko mām ajam avyayam





"I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered by My eternal creative potency [yogamāyā]; and so the deluded world knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible."



In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad it is also said: avidyāyām antare vartamānāḥ svayaṁ dhīrāḥ paṇḍitaṁ manyamānāḥ. Although ignorant, people still go to other blind men for leadership. As a result. both are subjected to miserable conditions. The blind lead the blind into the ditch.





TEXT 17



kas taṁ svayaṁ tad-abhijño vipaścid

avidyāyām antare vartamānam

dṛṣṭvā punas taṁ saghṛṇaḥ kubuddhiṁ

prayojayed utpathagaṁ yathāndham

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-who is that person; tam-him; svayam-personally; tat-abhijñaḥ-knowing spiritual knowledge; vipaścit-a learned scholar; avidyāyām antare-in ignorance; vartamānam-existing; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; punaḥ-again; tam-him; sa-ghṛṇaḥ-very merciful; ku-buddhim-who is addicted to the path of saṁsāra; prayojayet-would engage; utpatha-gam-who is proceeding on the wrong path; yathā-like; andham-a blind man.





If someone is ignorant and addicted to the path of saṁsāra, how can one who is actually learned, merciful and advanced in spiritual knowledge engage him in fruitive activity and thus further entangle him in material existence? If a blind man is walking down the wrong path, how can a gentleman allow him to continue on his way to danger? How can he approve this method? No wise or kind man can allow this.





TEXT 18



gurur na sa syāt sva-jano na sa syāt

pitā na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt

daivaṁ na tat syān na patiś ca sa syān

na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum

SYNONYMS



guruḥ-a spiritual master; na-not; saḥ-he; syāt-should become; sva-janaḥ-a relative; na-not; saḥ-such a person; syāt-should become; pitā-a father; na-not; saḥ-he; syāt-should become; jananī-a mother; na-not; sā-she; syāt-should become; daivam-the worshipable deity; na-not; tat-that; syāt-should become; na-not; patiḥ-a husband; ca-also; saḥ-he; syāt-should become; na-not; mocayet-can deliver; yaḥ-who; samupeta-mṛtyum-one who is on the path of repeated birth and death.





"One who cannot deliver his dependents from the path of repeated birth and death should never become a spiritual master, a father, a husband, a mother or a worshipable demigod.





There are many spiritual masters, but Ṛṣabhadeva advises that one should not become a spiritual master if he is unable to save his disciple from the path of birth and death. Unless one is a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he cannot save himself from the path of repeated birth and death. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]. One can stop birth and death only by returning home, back to Godhead. However, who can go back to Godhead unless he understands the Supreme Lord in truth? Janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ [Bg. 4.9].



We have many instances in history illustrating Ṛṣabhadeva's instructions. Śukrācārya was rejected by Bali Mahārāja due to his inability to save Bali Mahārāja from the path of repeated birth and death. Śukrācārya was not a pure devotee, he was more or less inclined to fruitive activity, and he objected when Bali Mahārāja promised to give everything to Lord Viṣṇu. Actually one is supposed to give everything to the Lord because everything belongs to the Lord. Consequently, the Supreme Lord advises in Bhagavad-gītā (9.27):



yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam





"O son of Kuntī, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an offering unto Me." This is bhakti. Unless one is devoted, he cannot give everything to the Supreme Lord. Unless one can do so, he cannot become a spiritual master, husband, father or mother. Similarly, the wives of the brāhmaṇas who were performing sacrifices gave up their relatives just to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. This is an example of a wife rejecting a husband who cannot deliver her from the impending dangers of birth and death. Similarly, Prahlāda Mahārāja rejected his father, and Bharata Mahārāja rejected his mother (jananī na sā syāt). The word daivam indicates a demigod or one who accepts worship from a dependent. Ordinarily, the spiritual master, husband, father, mother or superior relative accepts worship from an inferior relative, but here Ṛṣabhadeva forbids this. First the father, spiritual master or husband must be able to release the dependent from repeated birth and death. If he cannot do this, he plunges himself into the ocean of reproachment for his unlawful activities. Everyone should be very responsible and take charge of his dependents just as a spiritual master takes charge of his disciple or a father takes charge of his son. All these responsibilities cannot be discharged honestly unless one can save the dependent from repeated birth and death.





TEXT 19



idaṁ śarīraṁ mama durvibhāvyaṁ

sattvaṁ hi me hṛdayaṁ yatra dharmaḥ

pṛṣṭhe kṛto me yad adharma ārād

ato hi mām ṛṣabhaṁ prāhur āryāḥ

SYNONYMS



idam-this; śarīram-transcendental body, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha; mama-My; durvibhāvyam-inconceivable; sattvam-with no tinge of the material modes of nature; hi-indeed; me-My; hṛdayam-heart; yatra-wherein; dharmaḥ-the real platform of religion, bhakti-yoga; pṛṣṭhe-on the back; kṛtaḥ-made; me-by Me; yat-because; adharmaḥ-irreligion; ārāt-far away; ataḥ-therefore; hi-indeed; mām-Me; ṛṣabham-the best of the living beings; prāhuḥ-call; āryāḥ-those who are advanced in spiritual life, or the respectable superiors.





My transcendental body [sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] looks exactly like a human form, but it is not a material human body. It is inconceivable. I am not forced by nature to accept a particular type of body; I take on a body by My own sweet will. My heart is also spiritual, and I always think of the welfare of My devotees. Therefore within My heart can be found the process of devotional service, which is meant for the devotees. Far from My heart have I abandoned irreligion [adharma] and nondevotional activities. They do not appeal to Me. Due to all these transcendental qualities, people generally pray to Me as Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all living entities.





In this verse the words idaṁ śarīraṁ mama durvibhāvyam are very significant. Generally we experience two energies-material energy and spiritual energy. We have some experience of the material energy (earth. water, air, fire, ether, mind, intelligence and ego) because in the material world everyone's body is composed of these elements. Within the material body is the spirit soul, but we cannot see it with the material eyes. When we see a body full of spiritual energy, it is very difficult for us to understand how the spiritual energy can have a body. It is said that Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's body is completely spiritual; therefore for a materialistic person, it is very difficult to understand. For a materialistic person, the completely spiritual body is inconceivable. We have to accept the version of the Vedas when our experimental perception cannot understand a subject. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā: īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. The Supreme Lord has a body with form, but that body is not composed of material elements. It is made of spiritual bliss, eternity and living force. By the inconceivable energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord can appear before us in His original spiritual body, but because we have no experience of the spiritual body, we are sometimes bewildered and see the form of the Lord as material. The Māyāvādī philosophers are completely unable to conceive of a spiritual body. They say that the spirit is always impersonal, and whenever they see something personal, they take it for granted that it is material. In Bhagavad-gītā (9.11) it is said:



avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram





"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be."



Unintelligent people think that the Supreme Lord accepts a body composed of the material energy. We can easily understand the material body, but we cannot understand the spiritual body. Therefore Ṛṣabhadeva says: idaṁ śarīraṁ mama durvibhāvyam. In the spiritual world, everyone has a spiritual body. There is no conception of material existence there. In the spiritual world there is only service and the receiving of service. There is only sevya, sevā, and sevaka-the person served, the process of service and the servant. These three items are completely spiritual, and therefore the spiritual world is called absolute. There is no tinge of material contamination there. Being completely transcendental to the material conception, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva states that His heart is composed of dharma. Dharma is explained in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66): sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja. In the spiritual world, every living entity is surrendered to the Supreme Lord and is completely on the spiritual platform. Although there are servitors, the served and service, all are spiritual and variegated. At the present moment, due to our material conception. everything is durvibhāvya, inconceivable. Being the Supreme, the Lord is called Ṛṣabha, the best. In terms of the Vedic language, nityo nityānām. We are also spiritual. but we are subordinate. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, is the foremost living entity. The word ṛṣabha means "the chief," or "the supreme," and indicates the Supreme Being, or God Himself.





TEXT 20



tasmād bhavanto hṛdayena jātāḥ

sarve mahīyāṁsam amuṁ sanābham

akliṣṭa-buddhyā bharataṁ bhajadhvaṁ

śuśrūṣaṇaṁ tad bharaṇaṁ prajānām

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore (because I am the Supreme); bhavantaḥ-you; hṛdayena-from My heart; jātāḥ-born; sarve-all; mahīyāṁsam-the best; amum-that; sa-nābham-brother; akliṣṭa-buddhyā-with your intelligence, without material contamination; bharatam-Bharata; bhajadhvam-just try to serve; śuśrūṣaṇam-service; tat-that; bharaṇam prajānām-ruling over the citizens.





My dear boys, you are all born of My heart, which is the seat of all spiritual qualities. Therefore you should not be like materialistic and envious men. You should accept your eldest brother, Bharata, who is exalted in devotional service. If you engage yourselves in Bharata's service, your service to him will include My service, and you will rule the citizens automatically.





In this verse the word hṛdaya indicates the heart, which is also called uraḥ, the chest. The heart is situated within the chest, and although instrumentally the son is born with the aid of the genitals, he is actually born from within the heart. According to the heart's situation. the semen takes the form of a body. Therefore according to the Vedic system, when one begets a child his heart should be purified through the ritualistic ceremony known as garbhādhāna. Ṛṣabhadeva's heart was always uncontaminated and spiritual. Consequently all the sons born from the heart of Ṛṣabhadeva were spiritually inclined. Nonetheless. Ṛṣabhadeva suggested that His eldest son was superior, and He advised the others to serve him. All the brothers of Bharata Mahārāja were advised by Ṛṣabhadeva to adhere to Bharata's service. The question may be asked why one should be attached to family members, for in the beginning it was advised that one should not be attached to home and family. However, it is also advised, mahīyasām pāda-rajo-'bhiṣeka-one has to serve the mahīyān, one who is very spiritually advanced. Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ: [SB 5.5.2] by serving the mahat, the exalted devotee, one's path for liberation is open. The family of Ṛṣabhadeva should not be compared to an ordinary materialistic family. Bharata Mahārāja, Ṛṣabhadeva's eldest son, was specifically very exalted. For this reason the other sons were advised to serve him for his pleasure. That was to be their duty.



The Supreme Lord was advising Bharata Mahārāja to be the chief ruler of the planet. This is the real plan of the Supreme Lord. In the Battle of Kurukṣetra, we find that Lord Kṛṣṇa wanted Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira to be the supreme emperor of this planet. He never wanted Duryodhana to take the post. As stated in the previous verse, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's heart is hṛdayaṁ yatra dharmaḥ. The characteristic dharma is also explained in Bhagavad-gītā: surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To protect dharma (paritrāṇāya sādhūnām), the Lord always wants the ruler of the earth to be a devotee. Then everything goes on nicely for the benefit of everyone. As soon as a demon rules the earth, everything becomes chaotic. At the present moment, the world is inclined toward the democratic process, but the people in general are all contaminated by the modes of passion and ignorance. Consequently they cannot select the right person to head the government. The president is selected by the votes of ignorant śūdras; therefore another śūdra is elected, and immediately the entire government becomes polluted. If people strictly followed the principles of Bhagavad-gītā, they would elect a person who is the Lord's devotee. Then automatically there would be good government. Ṛṣabhadeva therefore recommended Bharata Mahārāja as the emperor of this planet. Serving a devotee means serving the Supreme Lord, for a devotee always represents the Lord. When a devotee is in charge, the government is always congenial and beneficial for everyone.





TEXTS 21–22



bhūteṣu vīrudbhya uduttamā ye

sarīsṛpās teṣu sabodha-niṣṭhāḥ

tato manuṣyāḥ pramathās tato 'pi

gandharva-siddhā vibudhānugā ye

devāsurebhyo maghavat-pradhānā



dakṣādayo brahma-sutās tu teṣām

bhavaḥ paraḥ so 'tha viriñca-vīryaḥ

sa mat-paro 'haṁ dvija-deva-devaḥ

SYNONYMS



bhūteṣu-among things generated (with and without symptoms of life); vīrudbhyaḥ-than the plants; uduttamāḥ-far superior; ye-those who; sarīsṛpāḥ-moving entities like worms and snakes; teṣu-of them; sa-bodha-niṣṭhāḥ-those who have developed intelligence; tataḥ-than them; manuṣyāḥ-the human beings; pramathāḥ-the ghostly spirits; tataḥ api-better than them; gandharva-the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka (appointed singers in the planets of the demigods); siddhāḥ-the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, who have all mystic powers; vibudha-anugāḥ-the Kinnaras; ye-those who; deva-the demigods; asurebhyaḥ-than the asuras; maghavat-pradhānāḥ-headed by Indra; dakṣa-ādayaḥ-beginning with Dakṣa; brahma-sutāḥ-the direct sons of Brahmā; tu-then; teṣām-of them; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; paraḥ-the best; saḥ-he (Lord Śiva); atha-moreover; viriñca-vīryaḥ-producing from Lord Brahmā; saḥ-he (Brahmā); mat-paraḥ-My devotee; aham-I; dvija-deva-devaḥ-a worshiper of the brāhmaṇas, or the Lord of the brāhmaṇas.





Of the two energies manifest [spirit and dull matter], beings possessing living force [vegetables, grass, trees and plants] are superior to dull matter [stone, earth, etc.]. Superior to nonmoving plants and vegetables are worms and snakes, which can move. Superior to worms and snakes are animals that have developed intelligence. Superior to animals are human beings, and superior to human beings are ghosts because they have no material bodies. Superior to ghosts are the Gandharvas, and superior to them are the Siddhas. Superior to the Siddhas are the Kinnaras, and superior to them are the asuras. Superior to the asuras are the demigods, and of the demigods, Indra, the King of heaven, is supreme. Superior to Indra are the direct sons of Lord Brahmā, sons like King Dakṣa, and supreme among Brahmā's sons is Lord Śiva. Since Lord Śiva is the son of Lord Brahmā, Brahmā is considered superior, but Brahmā is also subordinate to Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because I am inclined to the brāhmaṇas, the brāhmaṇas are best of all.





In this verse the brāhmaṇas are given a position superior to that of the Supreme Lord. The idea is that the government should be conducted under the guidance of the brāhmaṇas. Although Ṛṣabhadeva recommended His eldest son, Bharata, as emperor of the earth, he still had to follow the instructions of the brāhmaṇas in order to govern the world perfectly. The Lord is worshiped as brahmaṇya-deva. The Lord is very fond of devotees, or brāhmaṇas. This does not refer to so-called caste brāhmaṇas, but to qualified brāhmaṇas. A brāhmaṇa should be qualified with the eight qualities mentioned in text 24, such as śama, dama, satya and titikṣā. The brāhmaṇas should always be worshiped. and under their guidance the ruler should discharge his duty and rule the citizens. Unfortunately, in this age of Kali, the executive is not selected by very intelligent people, nor is he guided by qualified brāhmaṇas. Consequently, chaos results. The mass of people should be educated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that according to the democratic process they can select a first-class devotee like Bharata Mahārāja to head the government. If the head of the state is headed by qualified brāhmaṇas, everything is completely perfect.



In this verse, the evolutionary process is indirectly mentioned. The modern theory that life evolves from matter is to some extent supported in this verse because it is stated, bhūteṣu vīrudbhyaḥ. That is, the living entities evolve from vegetables, grass, plants and trees, which are superior to dull matter. In other words, matter also has the potency to manifest living entities in the form of vegetables. In this sense, life comes out of matter, but matter also comes out of life. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (10.8), ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: "I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me."



There are two energies-material and spiritual-and both originally come from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme living being. Although it may be said that in the material world a living force is generated from matter, it must be admitted that originally matter is generated from the supreme living being. Nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām. The conclusion is that everything, both material and spiritual, is generated from the Supreme Being. From the evolutionary point of view, perfection is reached when the living entity attains the platform of a brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa is a worshiper of the Supreme Brahman, and the Supreme Brahman worships the brāhmaṇa. In other words, the devotee is subordinate to the Supreme Lord, and the Lord is inclined to see to the satisfaction of His devotee. A brāhmaṇa is called dvija-deva, and the Lord is called dvija-deva-deva. He is the Lord of brāhmaṇas.



The evolutionary process is also explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya, Chapter Nineteen), wherein it is said that there are two types of living entities-moving and nonmoving. Among moving entities. there are birds, beasts. aquatics, human beings and so on. Of these. the human beings are supposed to be the best, but they are few. Of these small numbers of human beings, there are many low-class human beings like mlecchas, Pulindas, bauddhas and śabaras. The human being elevated enough to accept the Vedic principles is superior. Among those who accept the Vedic principles generally known as varṇāśrama (presently known as the Hindu system), few actually follow these principles. Of those who actually follow the Vedic principles, most perform fruitive activity or pious activity for elevation to a high position. Manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye: [Bg. 7.3] out of many attached to fruitive activity, one may be a jñānī-that is, one philosophically inclined and superior to the karmīs. Yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ: [Bg. 7.3] out of many jñānīs, one may be liberated from material bondage, and out of many millions of liberated jñānīs, one may become a devotee of Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 23



na brāhmaṇais tulaye bhūtam anyat

paśyāmi viprāḥ kim ataḥ paraṁ tu

yasmin nṛbhiḥ prahutaṁ śraddhayāham

aśnāmi kāmaṁ na tathāgni-hotre

SYNONYMS



na-not; brāhmaṇaiḥ-with the brāhmaṇas; tulaye-I count as equal; bhūtam-entity; anyat-other; paśyāmi-I can see; viprāḥ-O assembled brāhmaṇas; kim-anything; ataḥ-to the brāhmaṇas; param-superior; tu-certainly; yasmin-through whom; nṛbhiḥ-by people; prahutam-food offered after ritualistic ceremonies are properly performed; śraddhayā-with faith and love; aham-I; aśnāmi-eat; kāmam-with full satisfaction; na-not; tathā-in that way; agni-hotre-in the fire sacrifice.





O respectful brāhmaṇas, as far as I am concerned, no one is equal or superior to the brāhmaṇas in this world. I do not find anyone comparable to them. When people know My motive after performing rituals according to the Vedic principles, they offer food to Me with faith and love through the mouth of a brāhmaṇa. When food is thus offered unto Me, I eat it with full satisfaction. Indeed, I derive more pleasure from food offered in that way than from the food offered in the sacrificial fire.





According to the Vedic system, after the sacrificial ceremony the brāhmaṇas are invited to eat the remnants of the offered food. When the brāhmaṇas eat the food, it is to be considered directly eaten by the Supreme Lord. Thus no one can be compared to qualified brāhmaṇas. The perfection of evolution is to be situated on the brahminical platform. Any civilization not based on brahminical culture or guided by brāhmaṇas is certainly a condemned civilization. Presently human civilization is based on sense gratification, and consequently more and more people are becoming addicted to different types of things. No one respects brahminical culture. Demoniac civilization is attached to ugra-karma, horrible activities, and big industries are created to satisfy unfathomable lusty desires. Consequently the people are greatly harassed by governmental taxation. The people are irreligious and do not perform the sacrifices recommended in Bhagavad-gītā. Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ: [Bg. 3.14] by the performance of sacrifice, clouds form and rain falls. Due to sufficient rainfall, there is sufficient production of food. Guided by the brāhmaṇas, society should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gītā. Then people will become very happy. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni: when animals and man are sufficiently fed with grains, they become stronger, their hearts become tranquil and their brains peaceful. They can then advance in spiritual life, life's ultimate destination.





TEXT 24



dhṛtā tanūr uśatī me purāṇī

yeneha sattvaṁ paramaṁ pavitram

śamo damaḥ satyam anugrahaś ca

tapas titikṣānubhavaś ca yatra

SYNONYMS



dhṛtā-maintained by transcendental education; tanūḥ-body; uśatī-free from material contamination; me-My; purāṇī-eternal; yena-by whom; iha-in this material world; sattvam-the mode of goodness; paramam-supreme; pavitram-purified; śamaḥ-control of the mind; damaḥ-control of the senses; satyam-truthfulness; anugrahaḥ-mercy; ca-and; tapaḥ-austerity; titikṣā-tolerance; anubhavaḥ-realization of God and the living entity; ca-and; yatra-wherein.





The Vedas are My eternal transcendental sound incarnation. Therefore the Vedas are śabda-brahma. In this world, the brāhmaṇas thoroughly study all the Vedas, and because they assimilate the Vedic conclusions, they are also to be considered the Vedas personified. The brāhmaṇas are situated in the supreme transcendental mode of nature-sattva-guṇa. Because of this, they are fixed in mind control [śama], sense control [dama], and truthfulness [satya]. They describe the Vedas in their original sense, and out of mercy [anugraha] they preach the purpose of the Vedas to all conditioned souls. They practice penance [tapasya] and tolerance [titikṣā], and they realize the position of the living entity and the Supreme Lord [anubhava]. These are the eight qualifications of the brāhmaṇas. Therefore among all living entities, no one is superior to the brāhmaṇas.





This is a true description of a brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa is one who has assimilated the Vedic conclusions by practicing mind and sense control. He speaks the true version of all the Vedas. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (15.15): vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ. By studying all the Vedas, one should come to understand the transcendental position of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One who actually assimilated the essence of the Vedas can preach the truth. He is compassionate to conditioned souls who are suffering the threefold miseries of this conditional world due to their not being Kṛṣṇa conscious. A brāhmaṇa should take pity on the people and preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness in order to elevate them. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, personally descends into this universe from the spiritual kingdom to teach conditioned souls about the values of spiritual life. He tries to induce them to surrender unto Him. Similarly, the brāhmaṇas do the same thing. After assimilating the Vedic instructions, they assist the Supreme Lord in His endeavor to deliver conditioned souls. The brāhmaṇas are very dear to the Supreme Lord due to their high sattva-guṇa qualities, and they also engage in welfare activities for all conditioned souls in the material world.





TEXT 25



matto 'py anantāt parataḥ parasmāt

svargāpavargādhipater na kiñcit

yeṣāṁ kim u syād itareṇa teṣām

akiñcanānāṁ mayi bhakti-bhājām

SYNONYMS



mattaḥ-from Me; api-even; anantāt-unlimited in strength and opulence; parataḥ parasmāt-higher than the highest; svarga-apavarga-adhipateḥ-able to bestow happiness obtainable by living in the heavenly kingdom. by liberation, or by enjoyment of material comfort and then liberation; na-not; kiñcit-anything; yeṣām-of whom; kim-what need; u-oh; syāt-can there be; itareṇa-with any other; teṣām-of them; akiñcanānām-without needs or without possessions; mayi-unto Me; bhakti-bhājām-executing devotional service.





I am fully opulent, almighty and superior to Lord Brahmā and Indra, the King of the heavenly planets. I am also the bestower of all happiness obtained in the heavenly kingdom and by liberation. Nonetheless, the brāhmaṇas do not seek material comforts from Me. They are very pure and do not want to possess anything. They simply engage in My devotional service. What is the need of their asking for material benefits from anyone else?





The perfect brahminical qualification is stated herein: akiñcanānāṁ mayi bhakti-bhājām. The brāhmaṇas are always engaged in the devotional service of the Lord: consequently they have no material wants, nor do they possess material things. In Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 11.8), Caitanya Mahāprabhu explains the position of pure Vaiṣṇavas who are anxious to return home, back to Godhead. Niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya. Those who actually want to return back to Godhead are niṣkiñcana-that is, they have no desire for material comfort. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu advises, sandarśanaṁ viṣayinām atha yoṣitāṁ ca hā hanta hanta visa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu: material opulence and sense gratification through the association of women are more dangerous than poison. Brāhmaṇas who are pure Vaiṣṇavas always engage in the Lord's service and are devoid of any desire for material gain. The brāhmaṇas do not worship demigods like Lord Brahmā, Indra or Lord Śiva for any material comfort. They do not even ask the Supreme Lord for material profit; therefore it is concluded that the brāhmaṇas are the supreme living entities of this world. Śrī Kapiladeva also confirms this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.29.33):



tasmān mayy arpitāśeṣa-

kriyārthātmā nirantaraḥ

mayy arpitātmanaḥ puṁso

mayi sannyasta-karmaṇaḥ

na paśyāmi paraṁ bhūtam

akartuḥ sama-darśanāt





The brāhmaṇas are always dedicated to the Lord's service with their bodies, words and mind. There is no better person than a brāhmaṇa who thus engages himself and dedicates himself to the Supreme Lord.





TEXT 26



sarvāṇi mad-dhiṣṇyatayā bhavadbhiś

carāṇi bhūtāni sutā dhruvāṇi

sambhāvitavyāni pade pade vo

vivikta-dṛgbhis tad u hārhaṇaṁ me

SYNONYMS



sarvāṇi-all; mat-dhiṣṇyatayā-because of being My sitting place; bhavadbhiḥ-by you; carāṇi-that move; bhūtāni-living entities; sutāḥ-My dear sons; dhruvāṇi-that do not move; sambhāvitavyāni-to be respected; pade pade-at every moment; vaḥ-by you; vivikta-dṛgbhiḥ-possessing clear vision and understanding (that the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Paramātmā feature is situated everywhere); tat u-that indirectly; ha-certainly; arhaṇam-offering respect; me-unto Me.





My dear sons, you should not envy any living entity-be he moving or nonmoving. Knowing that I am situated in them, you should offer respect to all of them at every moment. In this way, you offer respect to Me.





In this verse the word vivikta-dṛgbhiḥ, meaning without envy, is used. All living entities are the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Paramātmā feature. As confirmed in Brahma-saṁhitā: aṇḍāntara-sthaṁ paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham. The Lord is situated in this universe as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. He is also situated within every atom. According to the Vedic statement: īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam. The Supreme Lord is situated everywhere, and wherever He is situated is His temple. We even offer respects to a temple from a distant place, and all living entities should similarly be offered respect. This is different from the theory of pantheism, which holds that everything is God. Everything has a relationship with God because God is situated everywhere. We should not make any particular distinction between the poor and the rich like the foolish worshipers of daridra-nārāyaṇa. Nārāyaṇa is present in the rich as well as the poor. One should not simply think Nārāyaṇa is situated among the poor. He is everywhere. An advanced devotee will offer respects to everyone-even to cats and dogs.



vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ





"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned and gentle brāhmaṇa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]." (Bg. 5.18) This sama-darśinaḥ, equal vision, should not be mistaken to mean that the individual is the same as the Supreme Lord. They are always distinct. Every individual person is different from the Supreme Lord. It is a mistake to equate the individual living entity with the Supreme Lord on the plea of vivikta-dṛk, sama-dṛk. The Lord is always in an exalted position, even though He agrees to live everywhere. Śrīla Madhvācārya, quoting Padma Purāṇa, states: vivikta-dṛṣṭi jīvānāṁ dhiṣṇyatayā parameśvarasya bheda-dṛṣṭiḥ. "One who has clear vision and who is devoid of envy can see that the Supreme Lord is separate from all living entities, although He is situated in every living entity." Madhvācārya further quotes from Padma Purāṇa:



upapādayet parātmānaṁ

jīvebhyo yaḥ pade pade

bhedenaiva na caitasmāt

priyo viṣṇos tu kaścana





"One who sees the living entity and the Supreme Lord as always distinct is very dear to the Lord." Padma Purāṇa also states, yo hareś caiva jīvānāṁ bheda-vaktā hareḥ priyaḥ: "One who preaches that the living entities are separate from the Supreme Lord is very dear to Lord Viṣṇu."





TEXT 27



mano-vaco-dṛk-karaṇehitasya

sākṣāt-kṛtaṁ me paribarhaṇaṁ hi

vinā pumān yena mahā-vimohāt

kṛtānta-pāśān na vimoktum īśet

SYNONYMS



manaḥ-mind; vacaḥ-words; dṛk-sight; karaṇa-of the senses; īhitasya-of all activities (for maintenance of body, society, friendship and so on); sākṣāt-kṛtam-directly offered; me-of Me; paribarhaṇam-worship; hi-because; vinā-without; pumān-any person; yena-which; mahā-vimohāt-from the great illusion; kṛtānta-pāśāt-exactly like the stringent rope of Yamarāja; na-not; vimoktum-to become free; īśet-becomes able.





The true activity of the sense organs-mind, sight, words and all the knowledge-gathering and working senses-is to engage fully in My service. Unless his senses are thus engaged, a living entity cannot think of getting out of the great entanglement of material existence, which is exactly like Yamarāja's stringent rope.





As stated in the Nārada-pañcarātra:



sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ

tat-paratvena nirmalam

hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-

sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate

[Cc. Madhya 19.170]





This is the conclusion of bhakti. All the time, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva has been stressing devotional service, and now He is concluding by saying that all the senses should be engaged in the Lord's service. There are five senses by which we gather knowledge and five senses with which we work. These ten senses and the mind should be fully engaged in the Lord's service. Without engaging them in this way, one cannot get out of the clutches of māyā.





TEXT 28



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam anuśāsyātmajān svayam anuśiṣṭān api lokānuśāsanārthaṁ mahānubhāvaḥ parama-suhṛd bhagavān ṛṣabhāpadeśa upaśama-śīlānām uparata-karmaṇāṁ mahā-munīnāṁ bhakti-jñāna-vairāgya-lakṣaṇaṁ pāramahaṁsya-dharmam upaśikṣamāṇaḥ sva-tanaya-śata-jyeṣṭhaṁ parama-bhāgavataṁ bhagavaj-jana-parāyaṇaṁ bharataṁ dharaṇi-pālanāyābhiṣicya svayaṁ bhavana evorvarita-śarīra-mātra-parigraha unmatta iva gagana-paridhānaḥ prakīrṇa-keśa ātmany āropitāhavanīyo brahmāvartāt pravavrāja.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; anuśāsya-after instructing; ātma-jān-His sons; svayam-personally; anuśiṣṭān-highly educated in culture; api-although; loka-anuśāsana-artham-just to instruct the people; mahā-anubhāvaḥ-the great personality; parama-suhṛt-everyone's sublime well-wisher; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabha-apadeśaḥ-who is celebrated and known as Ṛṣabhadeva; upaśama-śīlānām-of persons who have no desire for material enjoyment; uparata-karmaṇām-who are no longer interested in fruitive activities; mahā-munīnām-who are sannyāsīs; bhakti-devotional service; jñāna-perfect knowledge; vairāgya-detachment; lakṣaṇam-characterized by; pāramahaṁsya-of the best of human beings; dharmam-the duties; upaśikṣamāṇaḥ-instructing; sva-tanaya-of His sons; śata-hundred; jyeṣṭham-the eldest; parama-bhāgavatam-a topmost devotee of the Lord; bhagavat-jana-parāyaṇam-a follower of the devotees of the Lord, brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas; bharatam-Bharata Mahārāja; dharaṇi-pālanāya-with a view to ruling the world; abhiṣicya-placing on the throne; svayam-personally; bhavane-at home; eva-although; urvarita-remaining; śarīra-mātra-the body only; parigrahaḥ-accepting; unmattaḥ-a madman; iva-exactly like; gagana-paridhānaḥ-taking the sky as His dress; prakīrṇa-keśaḥ-having scattered hair; ātmani-in Himself; āropita-keeping; āhavanīyaḥ-the Vedic fire; brahmāvartāt-from the place known as Brahmāvarta; pravavrāja-began to travel all over the world.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus the great well-wisher of everyone, the Supreme Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, instructed His own sons. Although they were perfectly educated and cultured, He instructed them just to set an example of how a father should instruct his sons before retiring from family life. Sannyāsīs, who are no longer bound by fruitive activity and who have taken to devotional service after all their material desires have been vanquished, also learn by these instructions. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva instructed His one hundred sons, of whom the eldest, Bharata, was a very advanced devotee and a follower of Vaiṣṇavas. In order to rule the whole world, the Lord enthroned His eldest son on the royal seat. Thereafter, although still at home, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva lived like a madman, naked and with disheveled hair. Then the Lord took the sacrificial fire within Himself, and He left Brahmāvarta to tour the whole world.





Actually the instructions given to Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's sons were not exactly meant for His sons because they were already educated and highly advanced in knowledge. Rather, these instructions were meant for sannyāsīs who intend to become advanced devotees. Sannyāsīs must abide by Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's instructions while on the path of devotional service. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva retired from family life and lived like a naked madman even while still with His family.





TEXT 29



jaḍāndha-mūka-badhira-piśāconmādakavad-avadhūta-veṣo 'bhibhāṣyamāṇo 'pi janānāṁ gṛhīta-mauna-vratas tūṣṇīṁ babhūva.



SYNONYMS



jaḍa-idle; andha-blind; mūka-dumb; badhira-deaf; piśāca-ghost; unmādaka-a madman; vat-like; avadhūta-veṣaḥ-appearing like an avadhūta (having no concern with the material world); abhibhāṣyamāṇaḥ-being thus addressed (as deaf, dumb and blind); api-although; janānām-by the people; gṛhīta-took; mauna-of silence; vrataḥ-the vow; tūṣṇīm babhūva-He remained silent.





After accepting the feature of avadhūta, a great saintly person without material cares, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva passed through human society like a blind, deaf and dumb man, an idle stone, a ghost or a madman. Although people called Him such names, He remained silent and did not speak to anyone.





The word avadhūta refers to one who does not care for social conventions, particularly the varṇāśrama-dharma. However, such a person may be situated fully within himself and be satisfied with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, on whom he meditates. In other words, one who has surpassed the rules and regulations of varṇāśrama-dharma is called avadhūta. Such a person has already surpassed the clutches of māyā, and he lives completely separate and independent.





TEXT 30



tatra tatra pura-grāmākara-kheṭa-vāṭa-kharvaṭa-śibira-vraja-ghoṣa-sārtha-giri-vanāśramādiṣv anupatham avanicarāpasadaiḥ paribhūyamāno makṣikābhir iva vana-gajas tarjana-tāḍanāvamehana-ṣṭhīvana-grāva-śakṛd-rajaḥ-prakṣepa-pūti-vāta-duruktais tad avigaṇayann evāsat-saṁsthāna etasmin dehopalakṣaṇe sad-apadeśa ubhayānubhava-svarūpeṇa sva-mahimāvasthānenāsamāropitāhaṁ-mamābhimānatvād avikhaṇḍita-manāḥ pṛthivīm eka-caraḥ paribabhrāma.



SYNONYMS



tatra tatra-here and there; pura-cities; grāma-villages; ākara-mines; kheṭa-agricultural places; vāṭa-gardens; kharvaṭa-villages in valleys; śibira-military encampments; vraja-cow pens; ghoṣa-residential places of cowherd men; sārtha-resting places for pilgrims; giri-hills; vana-forests; āśrama-in the residential places of hermits; ādiṣu-and so on; anupatham-as He passed through; avanicara-apasadaiḥ-by undesirable elements, wicked persons; paribhūyamānaḥ-being surrounded; makṣikābhiḥ-by flies; iva-like; vana-gajaḥ-an elephant coming from the forest; tarjana-by threats; tāḍana-beating; avamehana-passing urine on the body; ṣṭhīvana-spitting on the body; grāva-śakṛt-stones and stool; rajaḥ-dust; prakṣepa-throwing; pūti-vāta-passing air over the body; duruktaiḥ-and by bad words; tat-that; avigaṇayan-without caring about; eva-thus; asat-saṁsthāne-habitat not fit for a gentleman; etasmin-in this; deha-upalakṣaṇe-in the shape of the material body; sat-apadeśe-called real; ubhaya-anubhava-svarūpeṇa-by understanding the proper situation of the body and the soul; sva-mahima-in His personal glory; avasthānena-by being situated; asamāropita-aham-mama-abhimānatvāt-from not accepting the misconception of "I and mine"; avikhaṇḍita-manāḥ-undisturbed in mind; pṛthivīm-all over the world; eka-caraḥ-alone; paribabhrāma-He wandered.





Ṛṣabhadeva began to tour through cities, villages, mines, countrysides, valleys, gardens, military camps, cow pens, the homes of cowherd men, transient hotels, hills, forests and hermitages. Wherever He traveled, all bad elements surrounded Him, just as flies surround the body of an elephant coming from a forest. He was always being threatened, beaten, urinated upon and spat upon. Sometimes people threw stones, stool and dust at Him, and sometimes people passed foul air before Him. Thus people called Him many bad names and gave Him a great deal of trouble, but He did not care about this, for He understood that the body is simply meant for such an end. He was situated on the spiritual platform, and, being in His spiritual glory, He did not care for all these material insults. In other words, He completely understood that matter and spirit are separate, and He had no bodily conception. Thus, without being angry at anyone, He walked through the whole world alone.





Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says: deha-smṛti nāhi yāra, saṁsāra bandhana kāhāṅ tāra. When a person fully realizes that the material body and world are temporary, he is not concerned with pain and pleasures of the body. As Śrī Kṛṣṇa advises in Bhagavad-gītā (2.14):



mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata





"O son of Kuntī, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed."



As far as Ṛṣabhadeva is concerned, it has already been explained: idaṁ śarīraṁ mama durvibhāvyam. He did not at all possess a material body; and therefore He was tolerant of all the trouble offered to Him by the bad elements in society. Consequently He could tolerate people's throwing stool and dust upon Him and beating Him. His body was transcendental and consequently did not at all suffer pain. He was always situated in His spiritual bliss. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61):



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā





"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna. and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy."



Since the Lord is situated in everyone's heart, He is in the heart of hogs and dogs also. If hogs and dogs in their material bodies live in filthy places, one should not think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Paramātmā feature also lives in a filthy place. Although Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was maltreated by the bad elements of the world. He was not at all affected. Therefore it is stated here. sva-mahima-avasthānena: "He was situated in His own glory." He was never saddened due to being insulted in the many ways described above.





TEXT 31



ati-sukumāra-kara-caraṇoraḥ-sthala-vipula-bāhv-aṁsa-gala-vadanādy-avayava-vinyāsaḥ prakṛti-sundara-svabhāva-hāsa-sumukho nava-nalina-dalāyamāna-śiśira-tārāruṇāyata-nayana-ruciraḥ sadṛśa-subhaga-kapola-karṇa-kaṇṭha-nāso vigūḍha-smita-vadana-mahotsavena pura-vanitānāṁ manasi kusuma-śarāsanam upadadhānaḥ parāg-avalambamāna-kuṭila-jaṭila-kapiśa-keśa-bhūri-bhāro 'vadhūta-malina-nija-śarīreṇa graha-gṛhīta ivādṛśyata.



SYNONYMS



ati-su-kumāra-very delicate; kara-hands; caraṇa-feet; uraḥ-sthala-chest; vipula-long; bāhu-arms; aṁsa-shoulders; gala-neck; vadana-face; ādi-and so on; avayava-limbs; vinyāsaḥ-properly situated; prakṛti-by nature; sundara-lovely; sva-bhāva-natural; hāsa-with smiling; su-mukhaḥ-His beautiful mouth; nava-nalina-dalāyamāna-appearing like the petals of a new lotus flower; śiśira-taking away all miseries; tāra-the irises; aruṇa-reddish; āyata-spread wide; nayana-with eyes; ruciraḥ-lovely; sadṛśa-such; subhaga-beauty; kapola-forehead; karṇa-ears; kaṇṭha-neck; nāsaḥ-His nose; vigūḍha-smita-by deep smiling; vadana-by His face; mahā-utsavena-appearing like a festival; pura-vanitānām-of women within household life; manasi-in the heart; kusuma-śarāsanam-Cupid; upadadhānaḥ-awakening; parāk-all around; avalambamāna-spread; kuṭila-curly; jaṭila-matted; kapiśa-brown; keśa-of hair; bhūri-bhāraḥ-possessing a great abundance; avadhūta-neglected; malina-dirty; nija-śarīreṇa-by His body; graha-gṛhītaḥ-haunted by a ghost; iva-as if; adṛśyata-He appeared.





Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's hands, feet and chest were very long. His shoulders, face and limbs were all very delicate and symmetrically proportioned. His mouth was beautifully decorated with His natural smile, and He appeared all the more lovely with His reddish eyes spread wide like the petals of a newly grown lotus flower covered with dew in the early morning. The irises of His eyes were so pleasing that they removed all the troubles of everyone who saw Him. His forehead, ears, neck, nose and all His other features were very beautiful. His gentle smile always made His face beautiful, so much so that He even attracted the hearts of married women. It was as though they had been pierced by arrows of Cupid. About His head was an abundance of curly, matted brown hair. His hair was disheveled because His body was dirty and not taken care of. He appeared as if He were haunted by a ghost.





Although Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's body was very much neglected, His transcendental features were so attractive that even married women were attracted to Him. His beauty and dirtiness combined to make His beautiful body appear as though it were haunted by a ghost.





TEXT 32



yarhi vāva sa bhagavān lokam imaṁ yogasyāddhā pratīpam ivācakṣāṇas tat-pratikriyā-karma bībhatsitam iti vratam ājagaram-āsthitaḥ śayāna evāśnāti pibati khādaty avamehati hadati sma ceṣṭamāna uccarita ādigdhoddeśaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yarhi vāva-when; saḥ-He; bhagavān-the Personality of Godhead; lokam-the people in general; imam-this; yogasya-to the performance of yoga; addhā-directly; pratīpam-antagonistic; iva-like; ācakṣāṇaḥ-observed; tat-of that; pratikriyā-for counteraction; karma-activity; bībhatsitam-abominable; iti-thus; vratam-the behavior; ājagaram-of a python (to stay in one place); āsthitaḥ-accepting; śayānaḥ-lying down; eva-indeed; aśnāti-eats; pibati-drinks; khādati-chews; avamehati-passes urine; hadati-passes stool; sma-thus; ceṣṭamānaḥ-rolling; uccarite-i n the stool and urine; ādigdha-uddeśaḥ-His body thus smeared.





When Lord Ṛṣabhadeva saw that the general populace was very antagonistic to His execution of mystic yoga, He accepted the behavior of a python in order to counteract their opposition. Thus He stayed in one place and lay down. While lying down, He ate and drank, and He passed stool and urine and rolled in it. Indeed, He smeared His whole body with His own stool and urine so that opposing elements might not come and disturb Him.





According to one's destiny, one enjoys allotted happiness and distress, even though one keeps himself in one place. This is the injunction of the śāstras. When one is spiritually situated, he may stay in one place, and all his necessities will be supplied by the arrangement of the supreme controller. Unless one is a preacher, there is no need to travel all over the world. A person can stay in one place and execute devotional service suitably according to time and circumstance. When Ṛṣabhadeva saw that He was simply being disturbed by traveling throughout the world, He decided to lie down in one place like a python. Thus He ate, drank, and He passed stool and urine and smeared His body with them so that people would not disturb Him.





TEXT 33



tasya ha yaḥ purīṣa-surabhi-saugandhya-vāyus taṁ deśaṁ daśa-yojanaṁ samantāt surabhiṁ cakāra.



SYNONYMS



tasya-His; ha-indeed; yaḥ-which; purīṣa-of the stool; surabhi-by the aroma; saugandhya-possessing a good fragrance; vāyuḥ-the air; tam-that; deśam-country; daśa-up to ten; yojanam-yojanas (one yojana equals eight miles); samantāt-all around; surabhim-aromatic; cakāra-made.





Because Lord Ṛṣabhadeva remained in that condition, the public did not disturb Him, but no bad aroma emanated from His stool and urine. Quite the contrary, His stool and urine were so aromatic that they filled eighty miles of the countryside with a pleasant fragrance.





From this we can certainly assume that Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was transcendentally blissful. His stool and urine were so completely different from material stool and urine that they were aromatic. Even in the material world, cow dung is accepted as purified and antiseptic. A person can keep stacks of cow dung in one place, and it will not create a bad odor to disturb anyone. We can take it for granted that in the spiritual world, stool and urine are also pleasantly scented. Indeed, the entire atmosphere became very pleasant due to Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's stool and urine.





TEXT 34



evaṁ go-mṛga-kāka-caryayā vrajaṁs tiṣṭhann āsīnaḥ śayānaḥ kāka-mṛga-go-caritaḥ pibati khādaty avamehati sma.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; go-of cows; mṛga-deer; kāka-crows; caryayā-by the activities; vrajan-moving; tiṣṭhan-standing; āsīnaḥ-sitting; śayānaḥ-lying down; kāka-mṛga-go-caritaḥ-behaving exactly like the crows, deer and cows; pibati-drinks; khādati-eats; avamehati-passes urine; sma-He did so.





In this way Lord Ṛṣabhadeva followed the behavior of cows, deer and crows. Sometimes He moved or walked, and sometimes He sat down in one place. Sometimes He lay down, behaving exactly like cows, deer and crows. In that way, He ate, drank, passed stool and urine and cheated the people in this way.





Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva possessed a transcendental, spiritual body. Since the general public could not appreciate His behavior and mystic yoga practice, they began to disturb Him. To cheat them, He behaved like crows, cows and deer.





TEXT 35



iti nānā-yoga-caryācaraṇo bhagavān kaivalya-patir ṛṣabho 'virata-parama-mahānandānubhava ātmani sarveṣāṁ bhūtānām ātma-bhūte bhagavati vāsudeva ātmano 'vyavadhānānanta-rodara-bhāvena siddha-samastārtha-paripūrṇo yogaiśvaryāṇi vaihāyasa-mano-javāntardhāna-parakāya-praveśa-dūra-grahaṇādīni yadṛcchayopagatāni nāñjasā nṛpa hṛdayenābhyanandat.



SYNONYMS



iti-thus; nānā-various; yoga-of mystic yoga; caryā-performances; ācaraṇaḥ-practicing; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaivalya-patiḥ-the master of kaivalya, oneness, or the giver of sāyujya-mukti; ṛṣabhaḥ-Lord Ṛṣabha; avirata-incessantly; parama-supreme; mahā-great; ānanda-anubhavaḥ-feeling transcendental bliss; ātmani-in the Supreme Soul; sarveṣām-of all; bhūtānām-living entities; ātma-bhūte-situated in the heart; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeve-Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva; ātmanaḥ-of Himself; avyavadhāna-by the nondifference of constitution; ananta-unlimited; rodara-like crying, laughing and shivering; bhāvena-by the symptoms of love; siddha-completely perfect; samasta-all; artha-with desirable opulences; paripūrṇaḥ-full; yoga-aiśvaryāṇi-the mystic powers; vaihāyasa-flying in the sky; manaḥ-java-traveling at the speed of mind; antardhāna-the ability to disappear; parakāya-praveśa-the ability to enter another's body; dūra-grahaṇa-the ability to perceive things far, far away; ādīni-and others; yadṛcchayā-without difficulty, automatically; upagatāni-achieved; na-not; añjasā-directly; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; hṛdayena-within the heart; abhyanandat-accepted.





O King Parīkṣit, just to show all the yogīs the mystic process, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the partial expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa, performed wonderful activities. Actually He was the master of liberation and was fully absorbed in transcendental bliss, which increased a thousandfold. Lord Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva, the son of Vasudeva, is the original source of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva. There is no difference in Their constitution, and consequently Lord Ṛṣabhadeva awakened the loving symptoms of crying, laughing and shivering. He was always absorbed in transcendental love. Due to this, all mystic powers automatically approached Him, such as the ability to travel in outer space at the speed of mind, to appear and disappear, to enter the bodies of others, and to see things far, far away. Although He could do all this, He did not exercise these powers.





In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 19.149) it is said:



kṛṣṇa-bhakta--niṣkāma, ataeva 'śānta'

bhukti-mukti-siddhi-kāmī--sakali 'aśānta'





The word śānta means completely peaceful. Unless all one's desires are fulfilled, one cannot be peaceful. Everyone is trying to fulfill his aspirations and desires, be they material or spiritual. Those in the material world are aśānta (without peace) because they have so many desires to fulfill. The pure devotee, however, is without desire. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya: a pure devotee is completely free from all kinds of material desire. Karmīs, on the other hand, are simply full of desires because they try to enjoy sense gratification. They are not peaceful in this life, nor the next, during the past, present or future. Similarly, jñānīs are always aspiring after liberation and trying to become one with the Supreme. Yogīs are aspiring after many siddhis (powers)-aṇimā, laghimā, prāpti, etc. However, a devotee is not at all interested in these things because he is fully dependent on the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is yogeśvara, the possessor of all mystic powers (siddhis), and He is ātmārāma, fully self-satisfied. The yoga-siddhis are described in this verse. One can fly in outer space without the aid of a machine, and he can travel at the speed of mind. This means that as soon as a yogī desires to go somewhere within this universe or even beyond this universe, he can do so immediately. One cannot estimate the speed of mind, for within a second the mind can go many millions of miles. Sometimes yogīs enter into the bodies of other people and act as they desire when their bodies are not working properly. When the body becomes old, a perfect yogī can find a young, able body. Giving up his old body, the yogī can enter into the young body and act as he pleases. Being a plenary expansion of Lord Vāsudeva, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva possessed all these mystic yoga powers, but He was satisfied with His devotional love of Kṛṣṇa, which was evinced by the ecstatic symptoms, such as crying, laughing and shivering.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fifth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam entitled "Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's Teachings to His Sons."



Chapter Six



The Activities of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva





This chapter tells how Lord Ṛṣabhadeva left His body. He was not attached to His body even when it was being burned up in a forest fire. When the seed of fruitive activity is burned by the fire of knowledge, the spiritual properties and mystic powers are automatically manifest, yet bhakti-yoga is not affected by these mystic powers. An ordinary yogī is captivated by mystic powers and his progress checked; therefore a perfect yogī does not welcome them. Because the mind is restless and undependable, it must remain always under control. Even the mind of the advanced yogī Saubhari created such a disturbance that he lost his yogic mystic powers. Due to a restless mind, even a very advanced yogī can fall down. The mind is so restless that it induces even a perfect yogī to be controlled by the senses. Therefore Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, for the instruction of all yogīs, showed the process of quitting the body. While traveling in South India, through the provinces of Karṇāṭa, Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva arrived in the neighborhood of Kuṭakācala. Suddenly there was a forest fire that burned the forest and Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's body to ashes. The pastimes of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva as a liberated soul were known by the King of Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka. This King's name was Arhat. He later became captivated by the illusory energy, and in this condition he set forth the basic principles of Jainism. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva set forth the principles of religion that can free one from material bondage, and He put an end to all kinds of atheistic activities. On this earth, the place known as Bhārata-varṣa was a very pious land because the Supreme Lord appeared there when He wanted to incarnate.

Lord Ṛṣabhadeva neglected all the mystic powers for which the so-called yogīs hanker. Because of the beauty of devotional service, devotees are not at all interested in so-called mystic power. The master of all yogic power, Lord Kṛṣṇa, can exhibit all powers on behalf of His devotee. Devotional service is more valuable than yogic mystic powers. Devotees who are sometimes misled aspire for liberation and mystic powers. The Supreme Lord gives these devotees whatever they desire, but they cannot attain the most important function of devotional service. Devotional service to the Lord is guaranteed for those who do not desire liberation and mystic power.





TEXT 1



rājovāca

na nūnaṁ bhagava ātmārāmāṇāṁ yoga-samīrita-jñānāvabharjita-karma-bījānām aiśvaryāṇi punaḥ kleśadāni bhavitum arhanti yadṛc-chayopagatāni.



SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit inquired; na-not; nūnam-indeed; bhagavaḥ-O most powerful Śukadeva Gosvāmī; ātmārāmāṇām-of pure devotees simply engaged in devotional service; yoga-samīrita-achieved by practice of yoga; jñāna-by knowledge; avabharjita-burned; karma-bījānām-of those whose seeds of fruitive activities; aiśvaryāṇi-the mystic powers; punaḥ-again; kleśadāni-sources of distress; bhavitum-to become; arhanti-are able; yadṛcchayā-automatically; upagatāni-achieved.





King Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My dear Lord, for those who are completely pure in heart, knowledge is attained by the practice of bhakti-yoga, and attachment for fruitive activity is completely burned to ashes. For such people, the powers of mystic yoga automatically arise. They do not cause distress. Why, then, did Ṛṣabhadeva neglect them?





A pure devotee is constantly engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whatever is necessary for the discharge of devotional service is automatically attained, though it may appear to be the result of mystic yoga power. Sometimes a yogī displays a little yogic power by manufacturing gold. A little quantity of gold captivates foolish people, and thus the yogī gets many followers, who are willing to accept such a tiny person as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a yogī may also advertise himself as Bhagavān. However, a devotee does not have to exhibit such magical wonders. Without practicing the mystic yogic process, he achieves even greater opulence all over the world. Under the circumstances, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva refused to manifest mystic yogic perfections, and Mahārāja Parīkṣit asked why He did not accept them, since, for a devotee, they are not at all disturbing. A devotee is never distressed or satisfied by material opulence. His concern is how to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, by the grace of the Supreme Lord, a devotee achieves extraordinary opulence, he utilizes the opportunity for the Lord's service. He is not disturbed by the opulence.





TEXT 2



ṛṣir uvāca

satyam uktaṁ kintv iha vā eke na manaso 'ddhā viśrambham anavasthānasya śaṭha-kirāta iva saṅgacchante.



SYNONYMS



ṛṣiḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; satyam-the correct thing; uktam-have said; kintu-but; iha-in this material world; vā-either; eke-some; na-not; manasaḥ-of the mind; addhā-directly; viśrambham-faithful; anavasthānasya-being unsteady; śaṭha-very cunning; kirātaḥ-a hunter; iva-like; saṅgacchante-become.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied: My dear King, you have spoken correctly. However, after capturing animals, a cunning hunter does not put faith in them, for they might run away. Similarly, those who are advanced in spiritual life do not put faith in the mind. Indeed, they always remain vigilant and watch the mind's action.





In Bhagavad-gītā (18.5) Lord Kṛṣṇa says:



yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma

na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat

yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva

pāvanāni manīṣiṇām





"Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls."



Even one who has renounced the world and has taken sannyāsa should not renounce chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Renunciation does not mean that one has to renounce saṅkīrtana-yajña. Similarly, one should not renounce charity or tapasya. The yoga system for control of the mind and senses must be strictly followed. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva showed how severe types of tapasya could be performed, and He set an example for all others.





TEXT 3



tathā coktam--

na kuryāt karhicit sakhyaṁ

manasi hy anavasthite

yad-viśrambhāc cirāc cīrṇaṁ

caskanda tapa aiśvaram

SYNONYMS



tathā-so; ca-and; uktam-it is said; na-never; kuryāt-should do; karhicit-at any time or with anyone; sakhyam-friendship; manasi-in the mind; hi-certainly; anavasthite-which is very restless; yat-in which; viśrambhāt-from placing too much faith; cirāt-for a long time; cīrṇam-practiced; caskanda-became disturbed; tapaḥ-the austerity; aiśvaram-of great personalities like Lord Śiva and the great sage Saubhari.





All the learned scholars have given their opinion. The mind is by nature very restless, and one should not make friends with it. If we place full confidence in the mind, it may cheat us at any moment. Even Lord Śiva became agitated upon seeing the Mohinī form of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and Saubhari Muni also fell down from the mature stage of yogic perfection.





The first business of one trying to advance in spiritual life is to control the mind and senses. As Śrī Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7):



mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati





Although the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and are therefore in a transcendental position, they are still suffering in this material world and struggling for existence due to the mind and the senses. To get out of this false struggle for existence and become happy in the material world, one has to control the mind and senses and be detached from material conditions. One should never neglect austerities and penances; one should always perform them. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva personally showed us how to do this. In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.19.17) it is specifically stated:



mātrā svasrā duhitrā vā

nāviviktāsano bhavet

balavān indriya-grāmo

vidvāṁsam api karṣati





A gṛhastha, vānaprastha, sannyāsī and brahmacārī should be very careful when associating with women. One is forbidden to sit down in a solitary place even with one's mother, sister or daughter. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement it has been very difficult to disassociate ourselves from women in our society, especially in Western countries. We are therefore sometimes criticized, but nonetheless we are trying to give everyone a chance to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and thus advance spiritually. If we stick to the principle of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra offenselessly, then, by the grace of Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, we may be saved from the allurement of women. However, if we are not very strict in chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, we may at any time fall victim to women.





TEXT 4



nityaṁ dadāti kāmasya

cchidraṁ tam anu ye 'rayaḥ

yoginaḥ kṛta-maitrasya

patyur jāyeva puṁścalī

SYNONYMS



nityam-always; dadāti-gives; kāmasya-of lust; chidram-facility; tam-that (lust); anu-following; ye-those; arayaḥ-enemies; yoginaḥ-of the yogīs or persons trying to advance in spiritual life; kṛta-maitrasya-having put faith in the mind; patyuḥ-of the husband; jāyā iva-like the wife; puṁścalī-who is unchaste or easily carried away by other men.





An unchaste woman is very easily carried away by paramours, and it sometimes happens that her husband is violently killed by her paramours. If the yogī gives his mind a chance and does not restrain it, his mind will give facility to enemies like lust, anger and greed, and they will doubtlessly kill the yogī.





In this verse the word puṁścalī refers to a woman who is easily carried away by men. Such a woman is never to be trusted. Unfortunately, in the present age, women are never controlled. According to the directions of the śāstras, women are never to be given freedom. When a child, a woman must be strictly controlled by her father. When she is young, she must be strictly controlled by her husband, and when she is old, she must be controlled by her elderly sons. If she is given independence and allowed to mingle unrestrictedly with men, she will be spoiled. A spoiled woman, being manipulated by paramours, might even kill her husband. This example is given here because a yogī desiring to get free from material conditions must always keep his mind under control. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura used to say that in the morning our first business should be to beat the mind with shoes a hundred times. and, before going to bed, to beat the mind a hundred times with a broomstick. In this way one's mind can be kept under control. An uncontrolled mind and an unchaste wife are the same. An unchaste wife can kill her husband at any time, and an uncontrolled mind, followed by lust, anger, greed, madness, envy and illusion, can certainly kill the yogī. When the yogī is controlled by the mind, he falls down into the material condition. One should be very careful of the mind, just as a husband should be careful of an unchaste wife.





TEXT 5



kāmo manyur mado lobhaḥ

śoka-moha-bhayādayaḥ

karma-bandhaś ca yan-mūlaḥ

svīkuryāt ko nu tad budhaḥ

SYNONYMS



kāmaḥ-lust; manyuḥ-anger; madaḥ-pride; lobhaḥ-greed; śoka-lamentation; moha-illusion; bhaya-fear; ādayaḥ-all these together; karma-bandhaḥ-bondage to fruitive activities; ca-and; yat-mūlaḥ-the origin of which; svīkuryāt-would accept; kaḥ-who; nu-indeed; tat-that mind; budhaḥ-if one is learned.





The mind is the root cause of lust, anger, pride, greed, lamentation, illusion and fear. Combined, these constitute bondage to fruitive activity. What learned man would put faith in the mind?





The mind is the original cause of material bondage. It is followed by many enemies, such as anger, pride, greed, lamentation, illusion and fear. The best way to control the mind is to engage it always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ). Since the followers of the mind bring about material bondage, we should be very careful not to trust the mind.





TEXT 6



athaivam akhila-loka-pāla-lalāmo 'pi vilakṣaṇair jaḍavad avadhūta-veṣa-bhāṣā-caritair avilakṣita-bhagavat-prabhāvo yogināṁ sāmparāya-vidhim anuśikṣayan sva-kalevaraṁ jihāsur ātmany ātmānam asaṁvyavahitam anarthāntara-bhāvenānvīkṣamāṇa uparatānuvṛttir upararāma.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; evam-in this way; akhila-loka-pāla-lalāmaḥ-the head of all kings and monarchs of the universe; api-although; vilakṣaṇaiḥ-various; jaḍa-vat-as if stupid; avadhūta-veṣa-bhāṣā-caritaiḥ-by the dress, language and characteristics of an avadhūta; avilakṣita-bhagavat-prabhāvaḥ-hiding the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (keeping Himself like an ordinary human being); yoginām-of the yogīs; sāmparāya-vidhim-the method of giving up this material body; anuśikṣayan-teaching; sva-kalevaram-His own personal body, which is not at all material; jihāsuḥ-desiring to give up like an ordinary human being; ātmani-unto Vāsudeva, the original person; ātmānam-Himself, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, being an āveśa-avatāra of Lord Viṣṇu; asaṁvyavahitam-without intervention by the illusory energy; anartha-antara-bhāvena-Himself in the status of Viṣṇu; anvīkṣamāṇaḥ-always seeing; uparata-anuvṛttiḥ-who was acting as if giving up His material body; upararāma-ceased His pastimes as the King of this planet.





Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was the head of all kings and emperors within this universe, but assuming the dress and language of an avadhūta, He acted as if dull and materially bound. Consequently no one could observe His divine opulence. He adopted this behavior just to teach yogīs how to give up the body. Nonetheless, He maintained His original position as a plenary expansion of Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. Remaining always in that state, He gave up His pastimes as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva within the material world. If, following in the footsteps of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, one can give up his subtle body, there is no chance that one will accept a material body again.





As Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."



This is possible simply by keeping oneself an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. One must understand his constitutional position and the constitutional position of the Supreme Lord as well. Both have the same spiritual identity. Maintaining oneself as a servant of the Supreme Lord, one should avoid rebirth in this material world. If one keeps himself spiritually fit and thinks of himself as an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord, he will be successful at the time he has to give up the material body.





TEXT 7



tasya ha vā evaṁ mukta-liṅgasya bhagavata ṛṣabhasya yogamāyā-vāsanayā deha imāṁ jagatīm abhimānābhāsena saṅkramamāṇaḥ koṅka-veṅka-kuṭakān dakṣiṇa-karṇāṭakān deśān yadṛcchayopagataḥ kuṭakācalopavana āsya kṛtāśma-kavala unmāda iva mukta-mūrdhajo 'saṁvīta eva vicacāra.





tasya-of Him (Lord Ṛṣabhadeva); ha vā-as it were; evam-thus; mukta-liṅgasya-who had no identification with the gross and subtle body; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabhasya-of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; yoga-māyā-vāsanayā-by the accomplishment of yogamāyā for the purpose of the Lord's pastimes; dehaḥ-body; imām-this; jagatīm-earth; abhimāna-ābhāsena-with the apparent conception of having a body of material elements; saṅkramamāṇaḥ-traveling; koṅka-veṅka-kuṭakān-Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka; dakṣiṇa-in South India; karṇāṭakān-in the province of Karṇāṭa; deśān-all the countries; yadṛcchayā-of His own accord; upagataḥ-reached; kuṭakācala-upavane-a forest near Kuṭakācala; āsya-within the mouth; kṛta-aśma-kavalaḥ-having put a mouthful of stone; unmādaḥ iva-just like a madman; mukta-mūrdhajaḥ-having scattered hair; asaṁvītaḥ-naked; eva-just; vicacāra-traveled.





Actually Lord Ṛṣabhadeva had no material body, but due to yogamāyā, He considered His body material, and therefore, because He played like an ordinary human being, He gave up the mentality of identifying with it. Following this principle, He began to wander all over the world. While traveling, He came to the province of Karṇāṭa in South India and passed through Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka. He had no plan to travel this way, but He arrived near Kuṭakācala and entered a forest there. He placed stones within His mouth and began to wander through the forest, naked and with His hair disheveled like a madman.





TEXT 8



atha samīra-vega-vidhūta-veṇu-vikarṣaṇa-jātogra-dāvānalas tad vanam ālelihānaḥ saha tena dadāha.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; samīra-vega-by the force of the wind; vidhūta-tossed about; veṇu-of bamboos; vikarṣaṇa-by the rubbing; jāta-produced; ugra-fierce; dāva-analaḥ-a forest fire; tat-that; vanam-forest near Kuṭakācala; ālelihānaḥ-devouring all around; saha-with; tena-that body; dadāha-burned to ashes.





While He was wandering about, a wild forest fire began. This fire was caused by the friction of bamboos, which were being blown by the wind. In that fire, the entire forest near Kuṭakācala and the body of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva were burnt to ashes.





Such a forest fire can burn the external bodies of animals, but Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was not burned, although He apparently seemed so. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva is the Supersoul of all living entities within the forest, and His soul is never burned by fire. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, adāhyo 'yam-the soul is never burned by fire. Due to Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's presence, all the animals in the forest were also liberated from material encagement.





TEXT 9



yasya kilānucaritam upākarṇya koṅka-veṅka-kuṭakānāṁ rājārhan-nāmopaśikṣya kalāv adharma utkṛṣyamāṇe bhavitavyena vimohitaḥ sva-dharma-patham akuto-bhayam apahāya kupatha-pākhaṇḍam asamañjasaṁ nija-manīṣayā mandaḥ sampravartayiṣyate.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom (Lord Ṛṣabhadeva); kila anucaritam-pastimes as a paramahaṁsa, above all regulative varṇāśrama principles; upākarṇya-hearing; koṅka-veṅka-kuṭakānām-of Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka; rājā-the King; arhat-nāma-whose name was Arhat (now known as the Jain); upaśikṣya-imitating the activities of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva in His paramahaṁsa feature; kalau-in this age of Kali; adharme utkṛṣyamāṇe-because of increasing irreligious life; bhavitavyena-by that which was about to happen; vimohitaḥ-bewildered; sva-dharma-patham-the path of religion; akutaḥ-bhayam-which is free from all kinds of fearful danger; apahāya-giving up (such practices as cleanliness, truthfulness, control of the senses and mind, simplicity, the principles of religion, and practical application of knowledge); ku-patha-pākhaṇḍam-the wrong path of atheism; asamañjasam-improper or against the Vedic literature; nija-manīṣayā-by his own fertile brain; mandaḥ-most foolish; sampravartayiṣyate-will introduce.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued speaking to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, the King of Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka whose name was Arhat, heard of the activities of Ṛṣabhadeva and, imitating Ṛṣabhadeva's principles, introduced a new system of religion. Taking advantage of Kali-yuga, the age of sinful activity, King Arhat, being bewildered, gave up the Vedic principles, which are free from risk, and concocted a new system of religion opposed to the Vedas. That was the beginning of the Jain dharma. Many other so-called religions followed this atheistic system.





When Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa was present on this planet, a person named Pauṇḍraka imitated the four-handed Nārāyaṇa and declared himself the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He desired to compete with Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, during the time of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the King of Koṅka and Veṅka acted like a paramahaṁsa and imitated Lord Ṛṣabhadeva. He introduced a system of religion and took advantage of the fallen condition of the people in this age of Kali. It is said in Vedic literatures that people in this age will be more inclined to accept anyone as the Supreme Lord and accept any religious system opposed to Vedic principles. The people in this age are described as mandāḥ sumanda-matayaḥ. Generally they have no spiritual culture, and therefore they are very fallen. Due to this, they will accept any religious system. Due to their misfortune. they forget the Vedic principles. Following non-Vedic principles in this age, they think themselves the Supreme Lord and thus spread the cult of atheism all over the world.





TEXT 10



yena ha vāva kalau manujāpasadā deva-māyā-mohitāḥ sva-vidhi-niyoga-śauca-cāritra-vihīnā deva-helanāny apavratāni nija-nijecchayā gṛhṇānā asnānānācamanāśauca-keśolluñcanādīni kalinādharma-bahulenopahata-dhiyo brahma-brāhmaṇa-yajña-puruṣa-loka-vidūṣakāḥ prāyeṇa bhaviṣyanti.



SYNONYMS



yena-by which pseudo religious system; ha vāva-certainly; kalau-in this age of Kali; manuja-apasadāḥ-the most condemned men; deva-māyā-mohitāḥ-bewildered by the external energy, or illusory energy, of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sva-vidhi-niyoga-śauca-cāritra-vihīnāḥ-without character, cleanliness, and the rules and regulations given according to one's own duty in life; deva-helanāni-negligent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; apavratāni-impious vows; nija-nija-icchayā-by their own desires; gṛhṇānāḥ-accepting; asnāna-anācamana-aśauca-keśa-ulluñcana-ādīni-concocted religious principles such as no bathing, no washing of the mouth, being unclean and plucking out the hair; kalinā-by the age of Kali; adharma-bahulena-with an abundance of irreligion; upahata-dhiyaḥ-whose pure consciousness is destroyed; brahma-brāhmaṇa-yajña-puruṣa-loka-vidūṣakāḥ-blasphemous toward the Vedas, the strict brāhmaṇas, ritualistic ceremonies such as sacrifice, and toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees; prāyeṇa-almost entirely; bhaviṣyanti-will become.





People who are lowest among men and bewildered by the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord will give up the original varṇāśrama-dharma and its rules and regulations. They will abandon bathing three times daily and worshiping the Lord. Abandoning cleanliness and neglecting the Supreme Lord, they will accept nonsensical principles. Not regularly bathing or washing their mouths regularly, they will always remain unclean, and they will pluck out their hair. Following a concocted religion, they will flourish. During this age of Kali, people are more inclined to irreligious systems. Consequently these people will naturally deride Vedic authority, the followers of Vedic authority, the brāhmaṇas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the devotees.





Presently the hippies in the Western countries fit this description. They are irresponsible and unregulated. They do not bathe, and they deride standard Vedic knowledge. They concoct new life-styles and religions. There are many hippie groups at the present moment, but they all originated from King Arhat, who imitated the activities of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, who was situated on the paramahaṁsa stage. King Arhat did not care for the fact that although Lord Ṛṣabhadeva acted like a madman, His stool and urine were nonetheless aromatic, so much so that they nicely scented the countryside for miles around. The followers of King Arhat went under the name Jains, and they were later followed by many others, particularly by the hippies, who are more or less offshoots of Māyāvāda philosophy because they think themselves the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such people do not respect the real followers of Vedic principles, the ideal brāhmaṇas. Nor do they have respect for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brahman. Due to the influence of this age of Kali, they are apt to concoct false religious systems.





TEXT 11



te ca hy arvāktanayā nija-loka-yātrayāndha-paramparayāśvastās tamasy andhe svayam eva prapatiṣyanti.



SYNONYMS



te-those people not following the Vedic principles; ca-and; hi-certainly; arvāktanayā-deviating from the eternal principles of Vedic religion; nija-loka-yātrayā-by a practice arrived at by their own mental concoction; andha-paramparayā-by a disciplic succession of blind. ignorant people; āśvastāḥ-being encouraged; tamasi-into the darkness of ignorance; andhe-blindness; svayam eva-themselves; prapatiṣyanti-will fall down.





Low-class people, due to their gross ignorance, introduce a system of religion that deviates from the Vedic principles. Following their own mental concoctions, they automatically fall down into the darkest regions of existence.





In this connection, one may see Bhagavad-gītā, Chapter Sixteen. where there is a description of the downfall of the asuras (16.16 and 16.23).





TEXT 12



ayam avatāro rajasopapluta-kaivalyopaśikṣaṇārthaḥ.



SYNONYMS



ayam avatāraḥ-this incarnation (Lord Ṛṣabhadeva); rajasā-by the mode of passion; upapluta-overwhelmed; kaivalya-upaśikṣaṇa-arthaḥ-to teach people the path of liberation.





In this age of Kali, people are overwhelmed by the modes of passion and ignorance. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva incarnated Himself to deliver them from the clutches of māyā.





The symptoms of Kali-yuga are predicted in the Twelfth Canto, Third Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Lāvaṇyaṁ keśa-dhāraṇam. It is predicted how fallen souls will behave. They will keep their hair long and consider themselves very beautiful, or they will pluck out their hair as the Jains do. They will keep themselves unclean and will not wash their mouths. Jains refer to Lord Ṛṣabhadeva as their original preceptor. If such people are serious followers of Ṛṣabhadeva, they must also take His instructions. In the Fifth Chapter of this canto, Ṛṣabhadeva gave His one hundred sons instructions whereby they could become free from the clutches of māyā. If one actually follows Ṛṣabhadeva, he will certainly be delivered from the clutches of māyā and return home, back to Godhead. If one strictly follows the instructions of Ṛṣabhadeva given in the Fifth Chapter, he will certainly be liberated. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva incarnated specifically to deliver these fallen souls.





TEXT 13



tasyānuguṇān ślokān gāyanti--

aho bhuvaḥ sapta-samudravatyā

dvīpeṣu varṣeṣv adhipuṇyam etat

gāyanti yatratya-janā murāreḥ

karmāṇi bhadrāṇy avatāravanti

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Him (Lord Ṛṣabhadeva); anuguṇān-conforming to the instructions for liberation; ślokān-verses; gāyanti-chant; aho-oh; bhuvaḥ-of this earthly planet; sapta-samudra-vatyāḥ-possessing seven seas; dvīpeṣu-among the islands; varṣeṣu-among the lands; adhipuṇyam-more pious than any other island; etat-this (Bhārata-varṣa); gāyanti-sing about; yatratya-janāḥ-the people of this tract of land; murāreḥ-of Murāri, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karmāṇi-the activities; bhadrāṇi-all-auspicious; avatāravanti-in many incarnations such as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva.





Learned scholars chant about the transcendental qualities of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva in this way: "Oh, this earthly planet contains seven seas and many islands and lands, of which Bhārata-varṣa is considered the most pious. People of Bhārata-varṣa are accustomed to glorifying the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His incarnations as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva and others. All these activities are very auspicious for the welfare of humanity.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]





As stated in this verse, Bhārata-varṣa is a most pious land. The followers of Vedic literature understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different incarnations, and they are privileged to glorify the Lord by following the directions of Vedic literature. After realizing the glories of human life. such people should take up the mission to spread the importance of human life throughout the whole world. This is the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The word adhipuṇyam indicates that there are certainly many other pious men throughout the world, but the people of Bhārata-varṣa are even more pious. Therefore they are fit to spread Kṛṣṇa Consciousness throughout the world for the benefit of all human society. Śrīla Madhvācārya also recognizes the land of Bhārata-varṣa: viśeṣād bhārate puṇyam. Throughout the world, there is no question of bhagavad-bhakti or devotional service, but the people of Bhārata-varṣa can easily understand the devotional service of the Lord. Thus every inhabitant of Bhārata-varṣa can perfect his life by discharging bhagavad-bhakti and then preaching this cult throughout the world for the benefit of everyone.





TEXT 14



aho nu vaṁśo yaśasāvadātaḥ

praiyavrato yatra pumān purāṇaḥ

kṛtāvatāraḥ puruṣaḥ sa ādyaś

cacāra dharmaṁ yad akarma-hetum

SYNONYMS



aho-oh; nu-indeed; vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty; yaśasā-with widespread fame; avadātaḥ-fully pure; praiyavrataḥ-related to King Priyavrata; yatra-wherein; pumān-the Supreme Person; purāṇaḥ-the original; kṛta-avatāraḥ-descended as an incarnation; puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saḥ-He; ādyaḥ-the original person; cacāra-executed; dharmam-religious principles; yat-from which; akarma-hetum-the cause of the end of fruitive activities.





"Oh, what shall I say of the dynasty of Priyavrata, which is pure and very much celebrated. In that dynasty, the Supreme Person, the original Personality of Godhead, descended as an incarnation and executed religious principles that could free one from the results of fruitive activity.





There are many dynasties in human society wherein the Supreme Lord descends as an incarnation. Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared in the Yadu dynasty, and Lord Rāmacandra appeared in the Ikṣvāku, or Raghu, dynasty. Similarly, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva appeared in the dynasty of King Priyavrata. All these dynasties are very famous, and of them the dynasty of Priyavrata is most famous.





TEXT 15



ko nv asya kāṣṭhām aparo 'nugacchen

mano-rathenāpy abhavasya yogī

yo yoga-māyāḥ spṛhayaty udastā

hy asattayā yena kṛta-prayatnāḥ

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-who; nu-indeed; asya-of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; kāṣṭhām-the example; aparaḥ-else; anugacchet-can follow; manaḥ-rathena-by the mind; api-even; abhavasya-of the unborn; yogī-the mystic; yaḥ-who; yoga-māyāḥ-the mystic perfections of yoga; spṛhayati-desires; udastāḥ-rejected by Ṛṣabhadeva; hi-certainly; asattayā-by the quality of being insubstantial; yena-by whom, Ṛṣabhadeva; kṛta-prayatnāḥ-although eager to serve.





"Who is that mystic yogī who can follow the examples of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva even with his mind? Lord Ṛṣabhadeva rejected all kinds of yogic perfection, which other yogīs hanker to attain. Who is that yogī who can compare to Lord Ṛṣabhadeva?"





Generally yogīs desire the yogic perfections of aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, prākāmya, prāpti, īśitva, vaśitva and kāmāvasāyitā. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, however, never aspired for all these material things. Such siddhis (perfections) are presented by the illusory energy of the Lord. The real purpose of the yoga system is to achieve the favor and shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but this purpose is covered by the illusory energy of yogamāyā. So-called yogīs are therefore allured by the superficial material perfections of aṇimā, laghimā, prāpti and so forth. Consequently ordinary yogīs cannot compare to Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 16



iti ha sma sakala-veda-loka-deva-brāhmaṇa-gavāṁ parama-guror bhagavata ṛṣabhākhyasya viśuddhācaritam īritaṁ puṁsāṁ samasta-duścaritābhiharaṇaṁ parama-mahā-maṅgalāyanam idam anuśraddhayopacitayānuśṛṇoty āśrāvayati vāvahito bhagavati tasmin vāsudeva ekāntato bhaktir anayor api samanuvartate.



SYNONYMS



iti-thus; ha sma-indeed; sakala-all; veda-of knowledge; loka-of people in general; deva-of the demigods; brāhmaṇa-of the brāhmaṇas; gavām-of the cows; parama-the supreme; guroḥ-master; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabha-ākhyasya-whose name was Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; viśuddha-pure; ācaritam-activities; īritam-now explained; puṁsām-of every living entity; samasta-all; duścarita-sinful activities; abhiharaṇam-destroying; parama-foremost; mahā-great; maṅgala-of auspiciousness; ayanam-the shelter; idam-this; anuśraddhayā-with faith; upacitayā-increasing; anuśṛṇoti-hears from the authority; āśrāvayati-speaks to others; vā-or; avahitaḥ-being attentive; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmin-unto Him; vāsudeve-to Lord Vāsudeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa; eka-antataḥ-unflinching; bhaktiḥ-devotion; anayoḥ-of both groups, the listeners and the speakers; api-certainly; samanuvartate-factually begins.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Lord Ṛṣabhadeva is the master of all Vedic knowledge, human beings, demigods, cows and brāhmaṇas. I have already explained His pure, transcendental activities, which will vanquish the sinful activities of all living entities. This narration of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva's pastimes is the reservoir of all auspicious things. Whoever attentively hears or speaks of them, following in the footsteps of the ācāryas, will certainly attain unalloyed devotional service at the lotus feet of Lord Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





The teachings of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva are for the people of all yugas-Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga and especially Kali-yuga. These instructions are so powerful that even in this age of Kali, one can attain perfection simply by explaining the instructions, following in the footsteps of the ācāryas or listening to the instructions with great attention. If one does so, one can attain the platform of pure devotional service to Lord Vāsudeva. The pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees are recorded in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam so that those who recite these pastimes and listen to them will become purified. Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. As a matter of principle, devotees should read, speak and hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam persistently, twenty-four hours daily if possible. That is the recommendation of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. adi 17.31]. One should either chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra or read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and thereby try to understand the characteristics and instructions of the Supreme Lord, who appeared as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, Lord Kapila and Lord Kṛṣṇa. In this way one can become fully aware of the transcendental nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, one who knows the transcendental nature of the Lord's birth and activities attains liberation from material bondage and returns to Godhead.





TEXT 17



yasyām eva kavaya ātmānam avirataṁ vividha-vṛjina-saṁsāra-paritāpopatapyamānam anusavanaṁ snāpayantas tayaiva parayā nirvṛtyā hy apavargam ātyantikaṁ parama-puruṣārtham api svayam āsāditaṁ no evādriyante bhagavadīyatvenaiva parisamāpta-sarvārthāḥ.



SYNONYMS



yasyām eva-in which (Kṛṣṇa consciousness or the nectar of devotional service); kavayaḥ-the advancement of learned scholars or philosophers in spiritual life; ātmānam-the self; aviratam-constantly; vividha-various; vṛjina-full of sins; saṁsāra-in material existence; paritāpa-from miserable conditions; upatapyamānam-suffering; anusavanam-without stopping; snāpayantaḥ-bathing; tayā-by that; eva-certainly; parayā-great; nirvṛtyā-with happiness; hi-certainly; apavargam-liberation; ātyantikam-uninterrupted; parama-puruṣa-artham-the best of all human achievements; api-although; svayam-itself; āsāditam-obtained; no-not; eva-certainly; ādriyante-endeavor to achieve; bhagavadīyatvena eva-because of a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parisamāpta-sarva-arthāḥ-those who have ended all kinds of material desires.





Devotees always bathe themselves in devotional service in order to be relieved from the various tribulations of material existence. By doing this, the devotees enjoy supreme bliss, and liberation personified comes to serve them. Nonetheless, they do not accept that service, even if it is offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. For the devotees, liberation [mukti] is very unimportant because, having attained the Lord's transcendental loving service, they have attained everything desirable and have transcended all material desires.





Devotional service unto the Lord is the highest attainment for anyone desiring liberation from the tribulations of material existence. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (6.22), yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ: "Gaining this, one thinks there is no greater gain." When one attains the service of the Lord, which is non-different from the Lord, one does not desire anything material. Mukti means relief from material existence. Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura says: muktiḥ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate 'smān. For a devotee, mukti is not a very great achievement. Mukti means being situated in one's constitutional position. The constitutional position of every living being is that of the Lord's servant; therefore when a living entity is engaged in the Lord's loving service, he has already attained mukti. Consequently a devotee does not aspire for mukti, even if it is offered by the Supreme Lord Himself.





TEXT 18



rājan patir gurur alaṁ bhavatāṁ yadūnāṁ

daivaṁ priyaḥ kula-patiḥ kva ca kiṅkaro vaḥ

astv evam aṅga bhagavān bhajatāṁ mukundo

muktiṁ dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam

SYNONYMS



rājan-O my dear King; patiḥ-maintainer; guruḥ-spiritual master; alam-certainly; bhavatām-of you; yadūnām-the Yadu dynasty; daivam-the worshipable Deity; priyaḥ-very dear friend; kula-patiḥ-the master of the dynasty; kva ca-sometimes even; kiṅkaraḥ-servant; vaḥ-of you (the Pāṇḍavas); astu-to be sure; evam-thus; aṅga-O King; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhajatām-of those devotees engaged in service; mukundaḥ-the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; muktim-liberation; dadāti-delivers; karhicit-at any time; sma-indeed; na-not; bhakti-yogam-loving devotional service.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, the Supreme Person, Mukunda, is actually the maintainer of all the members of the Pāṇḍava and Yadu dynasties. He is your spiritual master, worshipable Deity, friend, and the director of your activities. To say nothing of this, He sometimes serves your family as a messenger or servant. This means He worked just as ordinary servants do. Those engaged in getting the Lord's favor attain liberation from the Lord very easily, but He does not very easily give the opportunity to render direct service unto Him.





While instructing Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Śukadeva Gosvāmī thought it wise to encourage the King because the King might be thinking of the glorious position of various royal dynasties. Especially glorious is the dynasty of Priyavrata, in which the Supreme Lord Ṛṣabhadeva incarnated. Similarly, the family of Uttānapāda Mahārāja, the father of Mahārāja Dhruva, is also glorious due to King Pṛthu's taking birth in it. The dynasty of Mahārāja Raghu is glorified because Lord Rāmacandra appeared in that family. As far as the Yadu and Kuru dynasties are concerned, they existed simultaneously, but of the two, the Yadu dynasty was more glorious due to the appearance of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Mahārāja Parīkṣit might have been thinking that the Kuru dynasty was not as fortunate as the others because the Supreme Lord did not appear in that family, neither as Kṛṣṇa, Lord Rāmacandra, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva or Mahārāja Pṛthu. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja was encouraged by Śukadeva Gosvāmī in this particular verse.



The Kuru dynasty may be considered more glorious due to the presence of devotees like the five Pāṇḍavas, who rendered unalloyed devotional service. Although Lord Kṛṣṇa did not appear in the Kuru dynasty. He was so obligated to the Pāṇḍavas' devotional service that He acted as a maintainer of the family and spiritual master of the Pāṇḍavas. Although He took birth in the Yadu dynasty, Lord Kṛṣṇa was more affectionate to the Pāṇḍavas. By His actions, Lord Kṛṣṇa proved that He was more inclined to the Kuru dynasty than the Yadu dynasty. Indeed, Lord Kṛṣṇa, indebted to the Pāṇḍavas' devotional service, sometimes acted as their messenger, and He guided them through many dangerous situations. Therefore Mahārāja Parīkṣit should not have been saddened because Lord Kṛṣṇa did not appear in his family. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always inclined toward His pure devotees, and by His action it is clear that liberation is not very important for the devotees. Lord Kṛṣṇa easily gives one liberation, but He does not so easily give one the facility to become a devotee. Muktiṁ dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam. Directly or indirectly, it is proved that bhakti-yoga is the basis for the supreme relationship with the Supreme Lord. It is far superior to liberation. For a pure devotee of the Lord, mukti is automatically attained.





TEXT 19



nityānubhūta-nija-lābha-nivṛtta-tṛṣṇaḥ

śreyasy atad-racanayā cira-supta-buddheḥ

lokasya yaḥ karuṇayābhayam ātma-lokam

ākhyān namo bhagavate ṛṣabhāya tasmai

SYNONYMS



nitya-anubhūta-due to being always conscious of His real identity; nija-lābha-nivṛtta-tṛṣṇaḥ-who was complete in Himself and had no other desire to fulfill; śreyasi-in life's genuine welfare; a-tat-racanayā-by expanding activities in the material field, mistaking the body for the self; cira-for a long time; supta-sleeping; buddheḥ-whose intelligence; lokasya-of men; yaḥ-who (Lord Ṛṣabhadeva); karuṇayā-by His causeless mercy; abhayam-fearlessness; ātma-lokam-the real identity of the self; ākhyāt-instructed; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabhāya-unto Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; tasmai-unto Him.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, was fully aware of His true identity; therefore He was self-sufficient, and He did not desire external gratification. There was no need for Him to aspire for success, since He was complete in Himself. Those who unnecessarily engage in bodily conceptions and create an atmosphere of materialism are always ignorant of their real self-interest. Out of His causeless mercy, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva taught the self's real identity and the goal of life. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who appeared as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva.





This is the summary of this chapter, in which the activities of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva are described. Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva is complete in Himself. We living entities, as parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, should follow the instructions of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva and become self-sufficient. We should not create unnecessary demands due to the bodily conception. When one is self-realized, he is sufficiently satisfied due to being situated in his original spiritual position. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (18.54): Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati. This is the goal of all living entities. Even though one may be situated within this material world, he can become fully satisfied and devoid of hankering and lamentation simply by following the instructions of the Lord as set forth in Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Satisfaction through self-realization is called svarūpānanda. The conditioned soul, eternally sleeping in darkness, does not understand his self-interest. He simply tries to become happy by making material adjustments, but this is impossible. It is therefore said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum: [SB 7.5.31] due to gross ignorance, the conditioned soul does not know that his real self-interest is to take shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu. To try to become happy by adjusting the material atmosphere is a useless endeavor. Indeed, it is impossible. By His personal behavior and instructions, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva enlightened the conditioned soul and showed him how to become self-sufficient in his spiritual identity.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Activities of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva."



Chapter Seven



The Activities of King Bharata





In this chapter, the activities of King Bharata Mahārāja, the emperor of the whole world, are described. Bharata Mahārāja performed various ritualistic ceremonies (Vedic yajñas) and satisfied the Supreme Lord by his different modes of worship. In due course of time, he left home and resided in Hardwar and passed his days in devotional activities. Being ordered by his father, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, Bharata Mahārāja married Pañcajanī, the daughter of Viśvarūpa. After this, he ruled the whole world peacefully. Formerly this planet was known as Ajanābha, and after the reign of Bharata Mahārāja it became known as Bhārata-varṣa. Bharata Mahārāja begot five sons in the womb of Pañcajanī, and he named the sons Sumati, Rāṣṭrabhṛta, Sudarśana, Āvaraṇa and Dhūmraketu. Bharata Mahārāja was very rigid in executing religious principles and following in the footsteps of his father. He therefore ruled the citizens very successfully. Because he performed various yajñas to satisfy the Supreme Lord, he was personally very satisfied. Being of undisturbed mind, he increased his devotional activities unto Lord Vāsudeva. Bharata Mahārāja was competent in understanding the principles of saintly persons like Nārada, and he followed in the footsteps of the sages. He also kept Lord Vāsudeva constantly within his heart. After finishing his kingly duties, he divided his kingdom among his five sons. He then left home and went to the place of Pulaha known as Pulahāśrama. There he ate forest vegetables and fruits, and worshiped Lord Vāsudeva with everything available. Thus he increased his devotion toward Vāsudeva, and he automatically began to realize further his transcendental, blissful life. Due to his highly advanced spiritual position, there were sometimes visible in his body the aṣṭa-sāttvika transformations, such as ecstatic crying and bodily trembling, which are symptoms of love of Godhead. It is understood that Mahārāja Bharata worshiped the Supreme Lord with the mantras mentioned in the Ṛg Veda, generally known as Gāyatrī mantra, which aim at the Supreme Nārāyaṇa situated within the sun.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

bharatas tu mahā-bhāgavato yadā bhagavatāvani-tala-paripālanāya sañcintitas tad-anuśāsana-paraḥ pañcajanīṁ viśvarūpa-duhitaram upayeme.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bharataḥ-Mahārāja Bharata; tu-but; mahā-bhāgavataḥ-a mahā-bhāgavata, most exalted devotee of the Lord; yadā-when; bhagavatā-by the order of his father, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; avani-tala-the surface of the globe; paripālanāya-for ruling over; sañcintitaḥ-made up his mind; tat-anuśāsana-paraḥ-engaged in governing the globe; pañcajanīm-Pañcajanī; viśvarūpa-duhitaram-the daughter of Viśvarūpa; upayeme-married.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued speaking to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, Bharata Mahārāja was a topmost devotee. Following the orders of his father, who had already decided to install him on the throne, he began to rule the earth accordingly. When Bharata Mahārāja ruled the entire globe, he followed the orders of his father and married Pañcajanī, the daughter of Viśvarūpa.





TEXT 2



tasyām u ha vā ātmajān kārtsnyenānurūpān ātmanaḥ pañca janayām āsa bhūtādir iva bhūta-sūkṣmāṇi sumatiṁ rāṣṭrabhṛtaṁ sudarśanam āvaraṇaṁ dhūmraketum iti.



SYNONYMS



tasyām-in her womb; u ha vā-indeed; ātma-jān-sons; kārtsnyena-entirely; anurūpān-exactly like; ātmanaḥ-himself; pañca-five; janayām āsa-begot; bhūta-ādiḥ iva-like the false ego; bhūta-sūkṣmāṇi-the five subtle objects of sense perception; su-matim-Sumatim; rāṣṭra-bhṛtam-Rāṣṭrabhṛta; su-darśanam-Sudarśana; āvaraṇam-Āvaraṇa; dhūmra-ketum-Dhūmraketu; iti-thus.





Just as the false ego creates the subtle sense objects, Mahārāja Bharata created five sons in the womb of Pañcajanī, his wife. These sons were named Sumati, Rāṣṭrabhṛta, Sudarśana, Āvaraṇa and Dhūmraketu.





TEXT 3



ajanābhaṁ nāmaitad varṣaṁ bhāratam iti yata ārabhya vyapadiśanti.



SYNONYMS



ajanābham-Ajanābha; nāma-by the name; etat-this; varṣam-island; bhāratam-Bhārata; iti-thus; yataḥ-from whom; ārabhya-beginning; vyapadiśanti-they celebrate.





Formerly this planet was known as Ajanābha-varṣa, but since Mahārāja Bharata's reign, it has become known as Bhārata-varṣa.





This planet was formerly known as Ajanābha because of the reign of King Nābhi. After Bharata Mahārāja ruled the planet, it became celebrated as Bhārata-varṣa.





TEXT 4



sa bahuvin mahī-patiḥ pitṛ-pitāmahavad uru-vatsalatayā sve sve karmaṇi vartamānāḥ prajāḥ sva-dharmam anuvartamānaḥ paryapālayat.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that King (Mahārāja Bharata); bahu-vit-being very advanced in knowledge; mahī-patiḥ-the ruler of the earth; pitṛ-father; pitāmaha-grandfather; vat-exactly like; uru-vatsalatayā-with the quality of being very affectionate to the citizens; sve sve-in their own respective; karmaṇi-duties; vartamānāḥ-remaining; prajāḥ-the citizens; sva-dharmam anuvartamānaḥ-being perfectly situated in his own occupational duty; paryapālayat-ruled.





Mahārāja Bharata was a very learned and experienced king on this earth. He perfectly ruled the citizens, being himself engaged in his own respective duties. Mahārāja Bharata was as affectionate to the citizens as his father and grandfather had been. Keeping them engaged in their occupational duties, he ruled the earth.





It is most important that the chief executive rule the citizens by keeping them fully engaged in their respective occupational duties. Some of the citizens were brāhmaṇas, some were kṣatriyas, and some were vaiśyas and śūdras. It is the duty of the government to see that the citizens act according to these material divisions for their spiritual advancement. No one should remain unemployed or unoccupied in any way. One must work as a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra on the material path. and on the spiritual path, everyone should act as a brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha or sannyāsī. Although formerly the government was a monarchy, all the kings were very affectionate toward the citizens, and they strictly kept them engaged in their respective duties. Therefore society was very smoothly conducted.





TEXT 5



īje ca bhagavantaṁ yajña-kratu-rūpaṁ kratubhir uccāvacaiḥ śraddhayāhṛtāgnihotra-darśa-pūrṇamāsa-cāturmāsya-paśu-somānāṁ prakṛti-vikṛtibhir anusavanaṁ cāturhotra-vidhinā.



SYNONYMS



īje-worshiped; ca-also; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-kratu-rūpam-having the form of sacrifices without animals and sacrifices with animals; kratubhiḥ-by such sacrifices; uccāvacaiḥ-very great and very small; śraddhayā-with faith; āhṛta-being performed; agni-hotra-of the agnihotra-yajña; darśa-of the darśa-yajña; pūrṇamāsa-of the pūrṇamāsa-yajña; cāturmāsya-of the cāturmāsya-yajña; paśu-somānām-of the yajña with animals and the yajña with soma-rasa; prakṛti-by full performances; vikṛtibhiḥ-and by partial performances; anusavanam-almost always; cātuḥ-hotra-vidhinā-by the regulative principles of sacrifice directed by four kinds of priests.





With great faith King Bharata performed various kinds of sacrifice. He performed the sacrifices known as agni-hotra, darśa, pūrṇamāsa, cāturmāsya, paśu-yajña [wherein a horse is sacrificed] and soma-yajña [wherein a kind of beverage is offered]. Sometimes these sacrifices were performed completely and sometimes partially. In any case, in all the sacrifices the regulations of cāturhotra were strictly followed. In this way Bharata Mahārāja worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Animals like hogs and cows were offered in sacrifice to test the proper execution of the sacrifice. Otherwise, there was no purpose in killing the animal. Actually the animal was offered in the sacrificial fire to get a rejuvenated life. Generally an old animal was sacrificed in the fire. and it would come out again in a youthful body. Some of the rituals however, did not require animal sacrifice. In the present age, animal sacrifices are forbidden. As stated by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ

sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ

kalau pañca vivarjayet





"In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyāsa, the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a man's begetting children in his brother's wife." (Cc. Ādi 17.164) Such sacrifices are impossible in this age due to the scarcity of expert brāhmaṇas or ṛtvijaḥ who are able to take the responsibility. In the absence of these, the saṅkīrtana-yajña is recommended. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ (Bhāg. 11.5.32). After all, sacrifices are executed to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yajñārtha-karma: such activities should be carried out for the Supreme Lord's pleasure. In this age of Kali, the Supreme Lord in His incarnation of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu should be worshiped with His associates by performance of saṅkīrtana-yajña, the congregational chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. This process is accepted by intelligent men. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ. The word sumedhasaḥ refers to intelligent men who possess very good brain substance.





TEXT 6



sampracaratsu nānā-yāgeṣu viracitāṅga-kriyeṣv apūrvaṁ yat tat kriyā-phalaṁ dharmākhyaṁ pare brahmaṇi yajña-puruṣe sarva-devatā-liṅgānāṁ mantrāṇām artha-niyāma-katayā sākṣāt-kartari para-devatāyāṁ bhagavati vāsudeva eva bhāvayamāna ātma-naipuṇya-mṛdita-kaṣāyo haviḥṣv adhvaryubhir gṛhyamāṇeṣu sa yajamāno yajña-bhājo devāṁs tān puruṣāvayaveṣv abhyadhyāyat.



SYNONYMS



sampracaratsu-when beginning to perform; nānā-yāgeṣu-various kinds of sacrifice; viracita-aṅga-kriyeṣu-in which the supplementary rites were performed; apūrvam-remote; yat-whatever; tat-that; kriyā-phalam-the result of such sacrifice; dharma-ākhyam-by the name of religion; pare-unto the transcendence; brahmaṇi-the Supreme Lord; yajña-puruṣe-the enjoyer of all sacrifices; sarva-devatā-liṅgānām-which manifest all the demigods; mantrāṇām-of the Vedic hymns; artha-niyāma-katayā-due to being the controller of the objects; sākṣāt-kartari-directly the performer; para-devatāyām-the origin of all demigods; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeve-unto Kṛṣṇa; eva-certainly; bhāvayamānaḥ-always thinking; ātma-naipuṇya-mṛdita-kaṣāyaḥ-freed from all lust and anger by his expertise in such thinking; haviḥṣu-the ingredients to be offered in the sacrifice; adhvaryubhiḥ-when the priests expert in the sacrifices mentioned in the Atharva Veda; gṛhyamāṇeṣu-taking; saḥ-Mahārāja Bharata; yajamānaḥ-the sacrificer; yajña-bhājaḥ-the recipients of the results of sacrifice; devān-all the demigods; tān-them; puruṣa-avayaveṣu-as different parts and limbs of the body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda; abhyadhyāyat-he thought.





After performing the preliminaries of various sacrifices, Mahārāja Bharata offered the results in the name of religion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. In other words, he performed all the yajñas for the satisfaction of Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. Mahārāja Bharata thought that since the demigods were different parts of Vāsudeva's body, He controls those who are explained in the Vedic mantras. By thinking in this way, Mahārāja Bharata was freed from all material contamination, such as attachment, lust and greed. When the priests were about to offer the sacrificial ingredients into the fire, Mahārāja Bharata expertly understood how the offering made to different demigods was simply an offering to the different limbs of the Lord. For instance, Indra is the arm of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Sūrya [the sun] is His eye. Thus Mahārāja Bharata considered that the oblations offered to different demigods were actually offered unto the different limbs of Lord Vāsudeva.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead says that as long as one does not develop the pure devotional service of śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam, hearing and chanting, one must carry out his prescribed duties. Since Bharata Mahārāja was a great devotee, one may ask why he performed so many sacrifices that are actually meant for karmīs. The fact is that he was simply following the orders of Vāsudeva. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā, sarva dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." (Bg. 18.66) Whatever we do, we should constantly remember Vāsudeva. People are generally addicted to offering obeisances to various demigods, but Bharata Mahārāja simply wanted to please Lord Vāsudeva. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā: bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram (Bg. 5.29). A yajña may be carried out to satisfy a particular demigod, but when the yajña is offered to the yajña-puruṣa, Nārāyaṇa, the demigods are satisfied. The purpose of performing different yajñas is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. One may perform them in the name of different demigods or directly. If we directly offer oblations to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods are automatically satisfied. If we water the root of a tree, the branches, twigs, fruits and flowers are automatically satisfied. When one offers sacrifices to different demigods, one should remember that the demigods are simply parts of the body of the Supreme. If we worship the hand of a person, we intend to satisfy the person himself. If we massage a person's legs, we do not really serve the legs but the person who possesses the legs. All the demigods are different parts of the Lord, and if we offer service to them, we actually serve the Lord Himself. Demigod worship is mentioned in Brahma-saṁhitā, but actually the ślokas advocate worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda. For instance, worship of the goddess Durgā is mentioned this way in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.44):



sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni vibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





Following the orders of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the goddess Durgā creates, maintains and annihilates. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also confirms this statement in Bhagavad-gītā. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: "This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings." (Bg. 9.10)



We should worship the demigods in that spirit. Because the goddess Durgā satisfies Kṛṣṇa, we should therefore offer respects to goddess Durgā. Because Lord Śiva is nothing but Kṛṣṇa's functional body, we should therefore offer respects to Lord Śiva. Similarly, we should offer respects to Brahmā, Agni and Sūrya. There are many offerings to different demigods, and one should always remember that these offerings are usually meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bharata Mahārāja did not aspire to receive some benediction from demigods. His aim was to please the Supreme Lord. In the Mahābhārata, among the thousand names of Viṣṇu, it is said yajña-bhug yajña-kṛd yajñaḥ. The enjoyer of yajña, the performer of yajña and yajña itself are the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the performer of everything, but out of ignorance the living entity thinks that he is the actor. As long as we think we are the actors, we bring about karma-bandha (bondage to activity). If we act for yajña, for Kṛṣṇa. there is no karma-bandha. Yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ: [Bg. 3.9]) "Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed. otherwise work binds one to this material world." (Bg. 3.9)



Following the instructions of Bharata Mahārāja, we should act not for our personal satisfaction but for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gītā (17.28) it is also stated:



aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ

tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat

asad ity ucyate pārtha

na ca tat pretya no iha





Sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead are nonpermanent. Regardless of whatever rituals are performed, they are called asat, nonpermanent. They are therefore useless both in this life and the next.



Kings like Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and many other rājarṣis who were pure devotees of the Lord simply passed their time in the service of the Supreme Lord. When a pure devotee executes some service through the agency of another person, he should not be criticized, for his activities are meant for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. A devotee may have a priest perform some karma-kāṇḍa, and the priest may not be a pure Vaiṣṇava, but because the devotee wants to please the Supreme Lord, he should not be criticized. The word apūrva is very significant. The resultant actions of karma are called apūrva. When we act piously or impiously, immediate results do not ensue. We therefore wait for the results, which are called apūrva. The results are manifest in the future. Even the smārtas accept this apūrva. Pure devotees simply act for the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the results of their activities are spiritual, or permanent. They are not like those of the karmīs, which are nonpermanent. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.23):



gata-saṅgasya muktasya

jñānāvasthita-cetasaḥ

yajñāyācarataḥ karma

samagraṁ pravilīyate





"The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into transcendence."



A devotee is always free from material contamination. He is fully situated in knowledge, and therefore his sacrifices are intended for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 7



evaṁ karma-viśuddhyā viśuddha-sattvasyāntar-hṛdayākāśa-śarīre brahmaṇi bhagavati vāsudeve mahā-puruṣa-rūpopalakṣaṇe śrīvatsa-kaustubha-vana-mālāri-dara-gadādibhir upalakṣite nija-puruṣa-hṛl-likhitenātmani puruṣa-rūpeṇa virocamāna uccaistarāṁ bhaktir anudinam edhamāna-rayājāyata.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; karma-viśuddhyā-by offering everything for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not desiring any results of his pious activities; viśuddha-sattvasya-of Bharata Mahārāja, whose existence was completely purified; antaḥ-hṛdaya-ākāśa-śarīre-the Supersoul within the heart, as meditated on by yogīs; brahmaṇi-into impersonal Brahman, which is worshiped by impersonalist jñānīs; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeve-the son of Vasudeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa; mahā-puruṣa-of the Supreme Person; rūpa-of the form; upalakṣaṇe-having the symptoms; śrīvatsa-the mark on the chest of the Lord; kaustubha-the Kaustubha gem used by the Lord; vana-mālā-flower garland; ari-dara-by the disc and conchshell; gadā-ādibhiḥ-by the club and other symbols; upalakṣite-being recognized; nija-puruṣa-hṛt-likhitena-which is situated in the heart of His own devotee like an engraved picture; ātmani-in his own mind; puruṣa-rūpeṇa-by His personal form; virocamāne-shining; uccaistarām-on a very high level; bhaktiḥ-devotional service; anudinam-day after day; edhamāna-increasing; rayā-possessing force; ajāyata-appeared.





In this way, being purified by ritualistic sacrifices, the heart of Mahārāja Bharata was completely uncontaminated. His devotional service unto Vāsudeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa, increased day after day. Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva, is the original Personality of Godhead manifest as the Supersoul [Paramātmā] as well as the impersonal Brahman. Yogīs meditate upon the localized Paramātmā situated in the heart, jñānīs worship the impersonal Brahman as the Supreme Absolute Truth, and devotees worship Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose transcendental body is described in the śāstras. His body is decorated with the Śrīvatsa, the Kaustubha jewel and a flower garland, and His hands hold a conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower. Devotees like Nārada always think of Him within their hearts.





Lord Vāsudeva, or Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is manifest within the hearts of yogīs in His Paramātmā feature, and He is worshiped as impersonal Brahman by jñānīs. The Paramātmā feature is described in the śāstras as having four hands, holding disc, conchshell, lotus flower and club. As confirmed in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.8):



kecit sva-dehāntar-hṛdayāvakāśe

prādeśa-mātraṁ puruṣaṁ vasantam

catur-bhujaṁ kañja-rathāṅga-śaṅkha-

gadā-dharaṁ dhāraṇayā smaranti





Paramātmā is situated in the hearts of all living beings. He has four hands, which hold four symbolic weapons. All devotees who think of the Paramātmā within the heart worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the temple Deity. They also understand the impersonal features of the Lord and His bodily rays, the Brahman effulgence.





TEXT 8



evaṁ varṣāyuta-sahasra-paryantāvasita-karma-nirvāṇāvasaro 'dhibhujyamānaṁ sva-tanayebhyo rikthaṁ pitṛ-paitāmahaṁ yathā-dāyaṁ vibhajya svayaṁ sakala-sampan-niketāt sva-niketāt pulahāśramaṁ pravavrāja.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus being always engaged; varṣa-ayuta-sahasra-one thousand times ten thousand years; paryanta-until then; avasita-karma-nirvāṇa-avasaraḥ-Mahārāja Bharata who ascertained the moment of the end of his royal opulence; adhibhujyamānam-being enjoyed in this way for that duration; sva-tanayebhyaḥ-unto his own sons; riktham-the wealth; pitṛ-paitāmaham-which he received from his father and forefathers; yathā-dāyam-according to the dāya-bhāk laws of Manu; vibhajya-dividing; svayam-personally; sakala-sampat-of all kinds of opulence; niketāt-the abode; sva-niketāt-from his paternal home; pulaha-āśramam pravavrāja-he went to the āśrama of Pulaha in Hardwar (where the śālagrāma-śilās are obtainable).





Destiny fixed the time for Mahārāja Bharata's enjoyment of material opulence at one thousand times ten thousand years. When that period was finished, he retired from family life and divided the wealth he had received from his forefathers among his sons. He left his paternal home, the reservoir of all opulence, and started for Pulahāśrama, which is situated in Hardwar. The śālagrāma-śilās are obtainable there.





According to the law of dāya-bhāk, when one inherits an estate, he must hand it over to the next generation. Bharata Mahārāja did this properly. First he enjoyed his paternal property for one thousand times ten thousand years. At the time of his retirement, he divided this property among his sons and left for Pulaha-āśrama.





TEXT 9



yatra ha vāva bhagavān harir adyāpi tatratyānāṁ nija-janānāṁ vātsalyena sannidhāpyata icchā-rūpeṇa.



SYNONYMS



yatra-where; ha vāva-certainly; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ-the Lord; adya-api-even today; tatratyānām-residing in that place; nija-janānām-for His own devotees; vātsalyena-by His transcendental affection; sannidhāpyate-becomes visible; icchā-rūpeṇa-according to the desire of the devotee.





At Pulaha-āśrama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, out of His transcendental affection for His devotee, becomes visible to His devotee, satisfying His devotee's desires.





The Lord always exists in different transcendental forms. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.39):



rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





The Lord is situated as Himself, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He is accompanied by His expansions like Lord Rāma, Baladeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Nārāyaṇa, Mahā-Viṣṇu and so forth. The devotees worship all these forms according to their liking, and the Lord, out of His affection, presents Himself as arcā-vigraha. He sometimes presents Himself personally before the devotee out of reciprocation or affection. A devotee is always fully surrendered to the loving service of the Lord, and the Lord is visible to the devotee according to the devotee's desires. He may be present in the form of Lord Rāma, Lord Kṛṣṇa, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva and so on. Such is the exchange of love between the Lord and His devotees.





TEXT 10



yatrāśrama-padāny ubhayato nābhibhir dṛṣac-cakraiś cakra-nadī nāma sarit-pravarā sarvataḥ pavitrī-karoti.



SYNONYMS



yatra-where; āśrama-padāni-all hermitages; ubhayataḥ-both on top and below; nābhibhiḥ-like the symbolic mark of a navel; dṛṣat-visible; cakraiḥ-with the circles; cakra-nadī-the Cakra-nadī River (generally known as the Gaṇḍakī); nāma-of the name; sarit-pravarā-the most important river of all; sarvataḥ-everywhere; pavitrī-karoti-sanctifies.





In Pulaha-āśrama is the Gaṇḍakī River, which is the best of all rivers. The śālagrāma-śilā, the marble pebbles, purify all those places. On each and every marble pebble, up and down, circles like navels are visible.





Śālagrāma-śilā refers to pebbles that appear like stones with circle; marked up and down. These are available in the river known as Gaṇḍakī-nadī. Wherever the waters of this river flow, the place becomes immediately sanctified.





TEXT 11



tasmin vāva kila sa ekalaḥ pulahāśramopavane vividha-kusuma-kisalaya-tulasikāmbubhiḥ kanda-mūla-phalopahāraiś ca samīhamāno bhagavata ārādhanaṁ vivikta uparata-viṣayābhilāṣa upabhṛtopaśamaḥ parāṁ nirvṛtim avāpa.



SYNONYMS



tasmin-in that āśrama; vāva kila-indeed; saḥ-Bharata Mahārāja; ekalaḥ-alone, only; pulaha-āśrama-upavane-in the gardens situated i n Pulaha-āśrama; vividha-kusuma-kisalaya-tulasikā-ambubhiḥ-with varieties of flowers, twigs and tulasī leaves, as well as with water; kanda-mūla-phala-upahāraiḥ-by offerings of roots, bulbs and fruits; ca-and; samīhamānaḥ-performing; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ārādhanam-worshiping; viviktaḥ-purified; uparata-being freed from; viṣaya-abhilāṣaḥ-desire for material sense enjoyment; upabhṛta-increased; upaśamaḥ-tranquillity; parām-transcendental; nirvṛtim-satisfaction; avāpa-he obtained.





In the gardens of Pulaha-āśrama, Mahārāja Bharata lived alone and collected a variety of flowers, twigs and tulasī leaves. He also collected the water of the Gaṇḍakī River, as well as various roots, fruits and bulbs. With these he offered food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, and, worshiping Him, he remained satisfied. In this way his heart was completely uncontaminated, and he did not have the least desire for material enjoyment. All material desires vanished. In this steady position, he felt full satisfaction and was situated in devotional service.





Everyone is searching after peace of mind. This is obtainable only when one is completely freed from the desire for material sense gratification and is engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā: patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati (9.26). Worship of the Lord is not at all expensive. One can offer the Lord a leaf, a flower, a little fruit and some water. The Supreme Lord accepts these offerings when they are offered with love and devotion. In this way, one can become freed from material desires. As long as one maintains material desires, he cannot be happy. As soon as one engages in the devotional service of the Lord, his mind is purified of all material desires. Then one becomes fully satisfied.



sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati





vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam





"The supreme occupation [dharma] for all humanity is that by which men can attain to loving devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted in order to completely satisfy the self. By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the world." (Bhāg. 1.2.6–7)



These are the instructions given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the supreme Vedic literature. One may not be able to go to Pulaha-āśrama, but wherever one is one can happily render devotional service to the Lord by adopting the processes mentioned above.





TEXT 12



tayettham avirata-puruṣa-paricaryayā bhagavati pravardhamānā-nurāga-bhara-druta-hṛdaya-śaithilyaḥ praharṣa-vegenātmany udbhidyamāna-roma-pulaka-kulaka autkaṇṭhya-pravṛtta-praṇaya-bāṣpa-niruddhāvaloka-nayana evaṁ nija-ramaṇāruṇa-caraṇāravindānudhyāna-paricita-bhakti-yogena paripluta-paramāhlāda-gambhīra-hṛdaya-hradāvagāḍha-dhiṣaṇas tām api kriyamāṇāṁ bhagavat-saparyāṁ na sasmāra.



SYNONYMS



tayā-by that; ittham-in this manner; avirata-constant; puruṣa-of the Supreme Lord; paricaryayā-by service; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pravardhamāna-constantly increasing; anurāga-of attachment; bhara-by the load; druta-melted; hṛdaya-heart; śaithilyaḥ-laxity; praharṣa-vegena-by the force of transcendental ecstasy; ātmani-in his body; udbhidyamāna-roma-pulaka-kulakaḥ-standing of the hair on end; autkaṇṭhya-because of intense longing; pravṛtta-produced; praṇaya-bāṣpa-niruddha-avaloka-nayanaḥ-awakening of tears of love in the eyes, obstructing the vision; evam-thus; nija-ramaṇa-aruṇa-caraṇa-aravinda-on the Lord's reddish lotus feet; anudhyāna-by meditating; paricita-i n creased; bhakti-yogena-by dint of devotional service; paripluta-spreading everywhere; parama-highest; āhlāda-of spiritual bliss; gambhīra-very deep; hṛdaya-hrada-in the heart, which is compared to a lake; avagāḍha-immersed; dhiṣaṇaḥ-whose intelligence; tām-that; api-although; kriyamāṇām-executing; bhagavat-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saparyām-the worship; na-not; sasmāra-remembered.





That most exalted devotee, Mahārāja Bharata, in this way engaged constantly in the devotional service of the Lord. Naturally his love for Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, increased more and more and melted his heart. Consequently he gradually lost all attachment for regulative duties. The hairs of his body stood on end, and all the ecstatic bodily symptoms were manifest. Tears flowed from his eyes, so much so that he could not see anything. Thus he constantly meditated on the reddish lotus feet of the Lord. At that time, his heart, which was like a lake, was filled with the water of ecstatic love. When his mind was immersed in that lake, he even forgot the regulative service to the Lord.





When one is actually advanced in ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa, eight transcendental, blissful symptoms are manifest in the body. Those are the symptoms of perfection arising from loving service to the Supreme Personality, of Godhead. Since Mahārāja Bharata was constantly, engaged in devotional service, all the symptoms of ecstatic love were manifest in his body.





TEXT 13



itthaṁ dhṛta-bhagavad-vrata aiṇeyājina-vāsasānusavanābhiṣekārdra-kapiśa-kuṭila-jaṭā-kalāpena ca virocamānaḥ sūryarcā bhagavantaṁ hiraṇmayaṁ puruṣam ujjihāne sūrya-maṇḍale 'bhyupatiṣṭhann etad u hovāca.



SYNONYMS



ittham-in this way; dhṛta-bhagavat-vrataḥ-having accepted the vow to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aiṇeya-ajina-vāsasa-with a dress of a deerskin; anusavana-three times in a day; abhiṣeka-by a bath; ardra-wet; kapiśa-tawny; kuṭila-jaṭā-of curling and matted hair; kalāpena-by masses; ca-and; virocamānaḥ-being very beautifully decorated; sūryarcā-by the Vedic hymns worshiping the expansion of Nārāyaṇa within the sun; bhagavantam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hiraṇmayam-the Lord, whose bodily hue is just like gold; puruṣam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ujjihāne-when rising; sūrya-maṇḍale-the sun globe; abhyupatiṣṭhan-worshiping; etat-this; u ha-certainly; uvāca-he recited.





Mahārāja Bharata appeared very beautiful. He had a wealth of curly hair on his head, which was wet from bathing three times daily. He dressed in a deerskin. He worshiped Lord Nārāyaṇa, whose body was composed of golden effulgence and who resided within the sun. Mahārāja Bharata worshiped Lord Nārāyaṇa by chanting the hymns given in the Ṛg Veda, and he recited the following verse as the sun rose.





The predominating Deity within the sun is Hiraṇmaya. Lord Nārāyaṇa. He is worshiped by the Gāyatrī mantra: oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur vareṇyaṁ bhargo devasya dhīmahi. He is also worshiped by other hymns mentioned in the Ṛg Veda, for instance: dhyeyaḥ sadā savitṛ-maṇḍala-madhya-vartī. Within the sun, Lord Nārāyaṇa is situated, and He has a golden hue.





TEXT 14



paro-rajaḥ savitur jāta-vedo

devasya bhargo manasedaṁ jajāna

suretasādaḥ punar āviśya caṣṭe

haṁsaṁ gṛdhrāṇaṁ nṛṣad-riṅgirām imaḥ

SYNONYMS



paraḥ-rajaḥ-beyond the mode of passion (situated in the pure mode of goodness); savituḥ-of the one who illuminates the whole universe; jāta-vedaḥ-from which all the devotee's desires are fulfilled; devasya-of the Lord; bhargaḥ-the self-effulgence; manasā-simply by contemplating; idam-this universe; jajāna-created; su-retasā-by spiritual potency; adaḥ-this created world; punaḥ-again; āviśya-entering; caṣṭe-sees or maintains; haṁsam-the living entity; gṛdhrāṇam-desiring for material enjoyment; nṛṣat-to the intelligence; riṅgirām-to one who gives motion; imaḥ-let me offer my obeisances.





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in pure goodness. He illuminates the entire universe and bestows all benedictions upon His devotees. The Lord has created this universe from His own spiritual potency. According to His desire, the Lord entered this universe as the Supersoul, and by virtue of His different potencies, He is maintaining all living entities desiring material enjoyment. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who is the giver of intelligence."





The predominating Deity of the sun is another expansion of Nārāyaṇa, who is illuminating the entire universe. The Lord enters the hearts of all living entities as the Supersoul, and He gives them intelligence and fulfills their material desires. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā. Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ. "I am sitting in everyone's heart." (Bg. 15.15)



As the Supersoul, the Lord enters the hearts of all living entities. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.35), aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham: "He enters the universe and the atom as well." In the Ṛg Veda, the predominating Deity of the sun is worshiped by, this mantra: dhyeyaḥ sadā savitṛ-maṇḍala-madhya-varti nārāyaṇaḥ sarasijāsana-sanniviṣṭaḥ. Nārāyaṇa sits on His lotus flower within the sun. By reciting this mantra, every living entity should take shelter of Nārāyaṇa just as the sun rises. According to modern scientists, the material world rests on the sun's effulgence. Due to the sunshine, all planets are rotating and vegetables are growing. We also have information that the moonshine helps vegetables and herbs grow. Actually Nārāyaṇa within the sun is maintaining the entire universe; therefore Nārāyaṇa should be worshiped by the Gāyatrī mantra or the Ṛg mantra.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The activities of King Bharata."



Chapter Eight



A Description of the Character of Bharata Mahārāja





Although Bharata Mahārāja was very elevated, he fell down due to his attachment to a young deer. One day after Bharata Mahārāja had taken his bath as usual in the River Gaṇḍakī and was chanting his mantra, he saw a pregnant deer come to the river to drink water. Suddenly there could be heard the thundering roar of a lion, and the deer was so frightened that it immediately gave birth to its calf. It then crossed the river, but died immediately thereafter. Mahārāja Bharata took compassion upon the motherless calf, rescued it from the water, took it to his āśrama and cared for it affectionately. He gradually became attached to this young deer and always thought of it affectionately. As it grew up, it became Mahārāja Bharata's constant companion, and he always took care of it. Gradually he became so absorbed in thinking of this deer that his mind became agitated. As he became more attached to the deer, his devotional service slackened. Although he was able to give up his opulent kingdom, he became attached to the deer. Thus he fell down from his mystic yoga practice. Once when the deer was absent, Mahārāja Bharata was so disturbed that he began to search for it. While searching and lamenting the deer's absence, Mahārāja Bharata fell down and died. Because his mind was fully absorbed thinking of the deer, he naturally took his next birth from the womb of a deer. However, because he was considerably advanced spiritually, he did not forget his past activities, even though he was in the body of a deer. He could understand how he had fallen down from his exalted position, and remembering this, he left his mother deer and again went to Pulaha-āśrama. He finally ended his fruitive activities in the form of a deer, and when he died he was released from the deer's body.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

ekadā tu mahā-nadyāṁ kṛtābhiṣeka-naiyamikāvaśyako brahmākṣaram abhigṛṇāno muhūrta-trayam udakānta upaviveśa.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ekadā-once upon a time; tu-but; mahā-nadyām-in the great river known as Gaṇḍakī; kṛta-abhiṣeka-naiyamika-avaśyakaḥ-having taken a bath after finishing the daily external duties such as passing stool and urine and brushing the teeth; brahma-akṣaram-the praṇava-mantra (oṁ); abhigṛṇānaḥ-chanting; muhūrta-trayam-for three minutes; udaka-ante-on the bank of the river; upaviveśa-he sat down.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, one day, after finishing his morning duties-evacuating, urinating and bathing-Mahārāja Bharata sat down on the bank of the River Gaṇḍakī for a few minutes and began chanting his mantra, beginning with oṁkāra.





TEXT 2



tatra tadā rājan hariṇī pipāsayā jalāśayābhyāśam ekaivopajagāma.



SYNONYMS



tatra-on the bank of the river; tadā-at the time; rājan-O King; hariṇī-a doe; pipāsayā-because of thirst; jalāśaya-abhyāśam-near the river; eka-one; eva-certainly; upajagāma-arrived.





O King, while Bharata Mahārāja was sitting on the bank of that river, a doe, being very thirsty, came there to drink.





TEXT 3



tayā pepīyamāna udake tāvad evāvidūreṇa nadato mṛga-pater unnādo loka-bhayaṅkara udapatat.



SYNONYMS



tayā-by the doe; pepīyamāne-being drunk with great satisfaction; udake-the water; tāvat eva-exactly at that time; avidūreṇa-very near; nadataḥ-roaring; mṛga-pateḥ-of one lion; unnādaḥ-the tumultuous sound; loka-bhayam-kara-very fearful to all living entities; udapatat-arose.





While the doe was drinking with great satisfaction, a lion, which was very close, roared very loudly. This was frightful to every living entity, and it was heard by the doe.





TEXT 4



tam upaśrutya sā mṛga-vadhūḥ prakṛti-viklavā cakita-nirīkṣaṇā sutarām api hari-bhayābhiniveśa-vyagra-hṛdayā pāriplava-dṛṣṭir agata-tṛṣā bhayāt sahasaivoccakrāma.



SYNONYMS



tam upaśrutya-hearing that tumultuous sound; sā-that; mṛga-vadhūḥ-wife of a deer; prakṛti-viklavā-by nature always afraid of being killed by others; cakita-nirīkṣaṇā-having wandering eyes; sutarām api-almost immediately; hari-of the lion; bhaya-of fear; abhiniveśa-by the entrance; vyagra-hṛdayā-whose mind was agitated; pāriplava-dṛṣṭiḥ-whose eyes were moving to and fro; agata-tṛṣā-without fully satisfying the thirst; bhayāt-out of fear; sahasā-suddenly; eva-certainly; uccakrāma-crossed the river.





By nature the doe was always afraid of being killed by others, and it was always looking about suspiciously. When it heard the lion's tumultuous roar, it became very agitated. Looking here and there with disturbed eyes, the doe, although it had not fully satisfied itself by drinking water, suddenly leaped across the river.





TEXT 5



tasyā utpatantyā antarvatnyā uru-bhayāvagalito yoni-nirgato garbhaḥ srotasi nipapāta.



SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-of it; utpatantyāḥ-forcefully jumping up; antarvatnyāḥ-having a full womb; uru-bhaya-due to great fear; avagalitaḥ-having slipped out; yoni-nirgataḥ-coming out of the womb; garbhaḥ-the offspring; srotasi-in the flowing water; nipapāta-fell down.





The doe was pregnant, and when it jumped out of fear, the baby deer fell from its womb into the flowing waters of the river.





There is every chance of a woman's having a miscarriage if she experiences some ecstatic emotion or is frightened. Pregnant women should therefore be spared all these external influences.





TEXT 6



tat-prasavotsarpaṇa-bhaya-khedāturā sva-gaṇena viyujyamānā kasyāñcid daryāṁ kṛṣṇa-sārasatī nipapātātha ca mamāra.



SYNONYMS



tat-prasava-from untimely discharge of that (baby deer); utsarpaṇa-from jumping across the river; bhaya-and from fear; kheda-by exhaustion; āturā-afflicted; sva-gaṇena-from the flock of deer; viyujyamānā-being separated; kasyāñcit-in some; daryām-cave of a mountain; kṛṣṇa-sārasatī-the black doe; nipapāta-fell down; atha-therefore; ca-and; mamāra-died.





Being separated from its flock and distressed by its miscarriage, the black doe, having crossed the river, was very much distressed. Indeed, it fell down in a cave and died immediately.





TEXT 7



taṁ tv eṇa-kuṇakaṁ kṛpaṇaṁ srotasānūhyamānam abhivīkṣyāpaviddhaṁ bandhur ivānukampayā rājarṣir bharata ādāya mṛta-mātaram ity āśrama-padam anayat.



SYNONYMS



tam-that; tu-but; eṇa-kuṇakam-the deer calf; kṛpaṇam-helpless; srotasā-by the waves; anūhyamānam-floating; abhivīkṣya-seeing; apaviddham-removed from its own kind; bandhuḥ iva-just like a friend; anukampayā-with compassion; rāja-ṛṣiḥ bharataḥ-the great, saintly King Bharata; ādāya-taking; mṛta-mātaram-who lost its mother; iti-thus thinking; āśrama-padam-to the āśrama; anayat-brought.





The great King Bharata, while sitting on the bank of the river, saw the small deer, bereft of its mother, floating down the river. Seeing this, he felt great compassion. Like a sincere friend, he lifted the infant deer from the waves, and, knowing it to be motherless, brought it to his āśrama.





The laws of nature work in subtle ways unknown to us. Mahārāja Bharata was a great king very advanced in devotional service. He had almost reached the point of loving service to the Supreme Lord, but even from that platform he could fall down onto the material platform. In Bhagavad-gītā we are therefore warned:



yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete

puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha

sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ

so 'mṛtatvāya kalpate





"O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation." (Bg. 2.15)



Spiritual salvation and liberation from material bondage must be worked out with great caution, otherwise a little discrepancy will cause one to fall down again into material existence. By studying the activities of Mahārāja Bharata, we can learn the art of becoming completely freed from all material attachment. As it will be revealed in later verses, Bharata Mahārāja had to accept the body of a deer due to being overly compassionate for this infant deer. We should be compassionate by raising one from the material platform to the spiritual platform; otherwise at any moment our spiritual advancement may be spoiled, and we may fall down onto the material platform. Mahārāja Bharata's compassion for the deer was the beginning of his falldown into the material world.





TEXT 8



tasya ha vā eṇa-kuṇaka uccair etasmin kṛta-nijābhimānasyāhar-ahas tat-poṣaṇa-pālana-lālana-prīṇanānudhyānenātma-niyamāḥ saha-yamāḥ puruṣa-paricaryādaya ekaikaśaḥ katipayenāhar-gaṇena viyujyamānāḥ kila sarva evodavasan.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of that King; ha vā-indeed; eṇa-kuṇake-in the deer calf; uccaiḥ-greatly; etasmin-in this; kṛta-nija-abhimānasya-who accepted the calf as his own son; ahaḥ-ahaḥ-every day; tat-poṣaṇa-maintaining that calf; pālana-protecting from dangers; lālana-raising it or showing love to it by kissing and so on; prīṇana-petting it in love; anudhyānena-by such attachment; ātma-niyamāḥ-his personal activities for taking care of his body; saha-yamāḥ-with his spiritual duties, such as nonviolence, tolerance and simplicity; puruṣa-paricaryā-ādayaḥ-worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead and performing other duties; eka-ekaśaḥ-every day; katipayena-with only a few; ahaḥ-gaṇena-days of time; viyujyamānāḥ-being given up; kila-indeed; sarve-all; eva-certainly; udavasan-became destroyed.





Gradually Mahārāja Bharata became very affectionate toward the deer. He began to raise it and maintain it by giving it grass. He was always careful to protect it from the attacks of tigers and other animals. When it itched, he petted it, and in this way he always tried to keep it in a comfortable condition. He sometimes kissed it out of love. Being attached to raising the deer, Mahārāja Bharata forgot the rules and regulations for the advancement of spiritual life, and he gradually forgot to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After a few days, he forgot everything about his spiritual advancement.





From this we can understand how we have to be very cautious in executing our spiritual duties by observing the rules and regulations and regularly chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. If we neglect doing this, we will eventually fall down. We must rise early in the morning. bathe, attend maṅgala-ārati, worship the Deities, chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, study the Vedic literatures and follow all the rules prescribed by the ācāryas and the spiritual master. If we deviate from this process, we may fall down, even though we may be very highly advanced. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (18.5):



yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma

na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat

yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva

pāvanāni manīṣiṇām





"Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but should be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great soul." Even if one is in the renounced order, he should never give up the regulative principles. He should worship the Deity and give his time and life to the service of Kṛṣṇa. He should also continue following the rules and regulations of austerity and penance. These things cannot be given up. One should not think oneself very advanced simply because one has accepted the sannyāsa order. The activities of Bharata Mahārāja should be carefully studied for one's spiritual advancement.





TEXT 9



aho batāyaṁ hariṇa-kuṇakaḥ kṛpaṇa īśvara-ratha-caraṇa-paribhramaṇa-rayeṇa sva-gaṇa-suhṛd-bandhubhyaḥ parivarjitaḥ śaraṇaṁ ca mopasādito mām eva mātā-pitarau bhrātṛ-jñātīn yauthikāṁś caivopeyāya nānyaṁ kañcana veda mayy ati-visrabdhaś cāta eva mayā mat-parāyaṇasya poṣaṇa-pālana-prīṇana-lālanam anasūyunānuṣṭheyaṁ śaraṇyopekṣā-doṣa-viduṣā.



SYNONYMS



aho bata-alas; ayam-this; hariṇa-kuṇakaḥ-the deer calf; kṛpaṇaḥ-helpless; īśvara-ratha-caraṇa-paribhramaṇa-rayeṇa-by the force of the rotation of the time agent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which is compared to the wheel of His chariot; sva-gaṇa-own kinsmen; suhṛt-and friends; bandhubhyaḥ-relatives; parivarjitaḥ-deprived of; śaraṇam-as shelter; ca-and; mā-me; upasāditaḥ-having obtained; mām-me; eva-alone; mātā-pitarau-father and mother; bhrātṛ-jñātīn-brothers and kinsmen; yauthikān-belonging to the herd; ca-also; eva-certainly; upeyāya-having gotten; na-not; anyam-anyone else; kañcana-some person; veda-it knows; mayi-in me; ati-very great; visrabdhaḥ-having faith; ca-and; ataḥ eva-therefore; mayā-by me; mat-parāyaṇasya-of one who is so dependent upon me; poṣaṇa-pālana-prīṇana-lālanam-raising, maintaining, petting and protecting; anasūyunā-who am without any grudge; anuṣṭheyam-to be executed; śaraṇya-the one who has taken shelter; upekṣā-of neglecting; doṣa-viduṣā-who knows the fault.





The great King Mahārāja Bharata began to think: Alas, this helpless young deer, by the force of time, an agent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has now lost its relatives and friends and has taken shelter of me. It does not know anyone but me, as I have become its father, mother, brother and relatives. This deer is thinking in this way, and it has full faith in me. It does not know anyone but me; therefore I should not be envious and think that for the deer my own welfare will be destroyed. I should certainly raise, protect, gratify and fondle it. When it has taken shelter with me, how can I neglect it? Even though the deer is disturbing my spiritual life, I realize that a helpless person who has taken shelter cannot be neglected. That would be a great fault.





When a person is advanced in spiritual consciousness or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he naturally becomes very sympathetic toward all living entities suffering in the material world. Naturally such an advanced person thinks of the suffering of the people in general. However, if one does not know of the material sufferings of fallen souls and becomes sympathetic because of bodily comforts, as in the case of Bharata Mahārāja, such sympathy or compassion is the cause of one's downfall. If one is actually sympathetic to fallen, suffering humanity, he should try to elevate people from material consciousness to spiritual consciousness. As far as the deer was concerned, Bharata Mahārāja became very sympathetic, but he forgot that it was impossible for him to elevate a deer to spiritual consciousness, because, after all, a deer is but an animal. It was very dangerous for Bharata Mahārāja to sacrifice all his regulative principles simply to take care of an animal. The principles enunciated in Bhagavad-gītā should be followed. Yaṁ hi na vyathayanty ete puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabha. As far as the material body is concerned, we cannot do anything for anyone. However, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa, we may raise a person to spiritual consciousness if we ourselves follow the rules and regulations. If we give up our own spiritual activities and simply become concerned with the bodily comforts of others, we will fall into a dangerous position.





TEXT 10



nūnaṁ hy āryāḥ sādhava upaśama-śīlāḥ kṛpaṇa-suhṛda evaṁ-vidhārthe svārthān api gurutarān upekṣante.



SYNONYMS



nūnam-indeed; hi-certainly; āryāḥ-those who are advanced in civilization; sādhavaḥ-saintly persons; upaśama-śīlāḥ-even though completely in the renounced order of life; kṛpaṇa-suhṛdaḥ-the friends of the helpless; evaṁ-vidha-arthe-to execute such principles; sva-arthān api-even their own personal interests; guru-tarān-very important; upekṣante-neglect.





Even though one is in the renounced order, one who is advanced certainly feels compassion for suffering living entities. One should certainly neglect his own personal interests, although they may be very important, to protect one who has surrendered.





Māyā is very strong. In the name of philanthropy, altruism and communism, people are feeling compassion for suffering humanity throughout the world. Philanthropists and altruists do not realize that it is impossible to improve people's material conditions. Material conditions are already established by the superior administration according to one's karma. They cannot be changed. The only benefit we can render to suffering beings is to try to raise them to spiritual consciousness. Material comforts cannot be increased or decreased. It is therefore said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.18), tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham: "As far as material happiness is concerned, that comes without effort, just as tribulations come without effort." Material happiness and pain can be attained without endeavor. One should not bother for material activities. If one is at all sympathetic or able to do good to others, he should endeavor to raise people to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In this way everyone advances spiritually by the grace of the Lord. For our instruction, Bharata Mahārāja acted in such a way. We should be very careful not to be misled by so-called welfare activities conducted in bodily, terms. One should not give up his interest in attaining the favor of Lord Viṣṇu at any cost. Generally people do not know this, or they forget it. Consequently they sacrifice their original interest, the attainment of Viṣṇu's favor, and engage in philanthropic activities for bodily comfort.





TEXT 11



iti kṛtānuṣaṅga āsana-śayanāṭana-snānāśanādiṣu saha mṛga-jahunā snehānubaddha-hṛdaya āsīt.



SYNONYMS



iti-thus; kṛta-anuṣaṅgaḥ-having developed attachment; āsana-sitting; śayana-lying down; aṭana-walking; snāna-bathing; āśana-ādiṣu-while eating and so on; saha mṛga-jahunā-with the deer calf; sneha-anubaddha-captivated by affection; hṛdayaḥ-his heart; āsīt-became.





Due to attachment for the deer, Mahārāja Bharata lay down with it, walked about with it, bathed with it and even ate with it. Thus his heart became bound to the deer in affection.





TEXT 12



kuśa-kusuma-samit-palāśa-phala-mūlodakāny āhariṣyamāṇo vṛkasālā-vṛkādibhyo bhayam āśaṁsamāno yadā saha hariṇa-kuṇakena vanaṁ samāviśati.



SYNONYMS



kuśa-a kind of grass required for ritualistic ceremonies; kusuma-flowers; samit-firewood; palāśa-leaves; phala-mūla-fruits and roots; udakāni-and water; āhariṣyamāṇaḥ-desiring to collect; vṛkasālā-vṛka-from wolves and dogs; ādibhyaḥ-and other animals, such as tigers; bhayam-fear; āśaṁsamānaḥ-doubting; yadā-when; saha-with; hariṇa-kuṇakena-the deer calf; vanam-the forest; samāviśati-enters.





When Mahārāja Bharata wanted to enter the forest to collect kuśa grass, flowers, wood, leaves, fruits, roots and water, he would fear that dogs, jackals, tigers and other ferocious animals might kill the deer. He would therefore always take the deer with him when entering the forest.





How Mahārāja Bharata increased his affection for the deer is described herein. Even such an exalted personality as Bharata Mahārāja, who had attained loving affection for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, fell down from his position due to his affection for some animal. Consequently, as will be seen. he had to accept the body of a deer in his next life. Since this was the case with Bharata Mahārāja, what can we say of those who are not advanced in spiritual life but who become attached to cats and dogs? Due to their affection for their cats and dogs, they have to take the same bodily forms in the next life unless they clearly increase their affection and love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unless we increase our faith in the Supreme Lord, we shall be attracted to many other things. That is the cause of our material bondage.





TEXT 13



pathiṣu ca mugdha-bhāvena tatra tatra viṣakta-mati-praṇaya-bhara-hṛdayaḥ kārpaṇyāt skandhenodvahati evam utsaṅga urasi cādhāyopalālayan mudaṁ paramām avāpa.



SYNONYMS



pathiṣu-on the forest paths; ca-also; mugdha-bhāvena-by the childish behavior of the deer; tatra tatra-here and there; viṣakta-mati-whose mind was too much attracted; praṇaya-with love; bhara-loaded; hṛdayaḥ-whose heart; kārpaṇyāt-because of affection and love; skandhena-by the shoulder; udvahati-carries; evam-in this way; utsaṅge-sometimes on the lap; urasi-on the chest while sleeping; ca-also; ādhāya-keeping; upalālayan-fondling; mudam-pleasure; paramām-very great; avāpa-he felt.





When entering the forest, the animal would appear very attractive to Mahārāja Bharata due to its childish behavior. Mahārāja Bharata would even take the deer on his shoulders and carry it due to affection. His heart was so filled with great love for the deer that he would sometimes keep it on his lap or, when sleeping, on his chest. In this way he felt great pleasure in fondling the animal.





Mahārāja Bharata left his home, wife, children, kingdom and everything else to advance his spiritual life in the forest, but again he fell victim to material affection due to his attachment to an insignificant pet deer. What, then. was the use of his renouncing his family? One who is serious in advancing his spiritual life should be very cautious not to become attached to anything but Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes, in order to preach. we have to accept many material activities, but we should remember that everything is for Kṛṣṇa. If we remember this, there is no chance of our being victimized by material activities.





TEXT 14



kriyāyāṁ nirvartyamānāyām antarāle 'py utthāyotthāya yadainam abhicakṣīta tarhi vāva sa varṣa-patiḥ prakṛti-sthena manasā tasmā āśiṣa āśāste svasti stād vatsa te sarvata iti.



SYNONYMS



kriyāyām-the activities of worshiping the Lord or performing ritualistic ceremonies; nirvartyamānāyām-even without finishing; antarāle-at intervals in the middle; api-although; utthāya utthāya-repeatedly getting up; yadā-when; enam-the deer calf; abhicakṣīta-would see; tarhi vāva-at that time; saḥ-he; varṣa-patiḥ-Mahārāja Bharata; prakṛti-sthena-happy; manasā-within his mind; tasmai-unto it; āśiṣaḥ āśāste-bestows benedictions; svasti-all auspiciousness; stāt-let there be; vatsa-O my dear calf; te-unto you; sarvataḥ-in all respects; iti-thus.





When Mahārāja Bharata was actually worshiping the Lord or was engaged in some ritualistic ceremony, although his activities were unfinished, he would still, at intervals, get up and see where the deer was. In this way he would look for it, and when he could see that the deer was comfortably situated, his mind and heart would be very satisfied, and he would bestow his blessings upon the deer, saying, "My dear calf, may you be happy in all respects."





Because his attraction for the deer was so intense, Bharata Mahārāja could not concentrate upon worshiping the Lord or performing his ritualistic ceremonies. Even though he was engaged in worshiping the Deity, his mind was restless due to his inordinate affection. While trying to meditate, he would simply think of the deer, wondering where it had gone. In other words, if one's mind is distracted from worship, a mere show of worship will not be of any benefit. The fact that Bharata Mahārāja had to get up at intervals to look for the deer was simply a sign that he had fallen down from the spiritual platform.





TEXT 15



anyadā bhṛśam udvigna-manā naṣṭa-draviṇa iva kṛpaṇaḥ sakaruṇam ati-tarṣeṇa hariṇa-kuṇaka-viraha-vihvala-hṛdaya-santāpas tam evānuśocan kila kaśmalaṁ mahad abhirambhita iti hovāca.



SYNONYMS



anyadā-sometimes (not seeing the calf); bhṛśam-very much; udvigna-manāḥ-his mind full of anxiety; naṣṭa-draviṇaḥ-who has lost his riches; iva-like; kṛpaṇaḥ-a miserly man; sa-karuṇam-piteously; ati-tarṣeṇa-with great anxiety; hariṇa-kuṇaka-from the calf of the deer; viraha-by separation; vihvala-agitated; hṛdaya-in mind or heart; santāpaḥ-whose affliction; tam-that calf; eva-only; anuśocan-continuously thinking of; kila-certainly; kaśmalam-illusion; mahat-very great; abhirambhitaḥ-obtained; iti-thus; ha-certainly; uvāca-said.





If Bharata Mahārāja sometimes could not see the deer, his mind would be very agitated. He would become like a miser, who, having obtained some riches, had lost them and had then become very unhappy. When the deer was gone, he would be filled with anxiety and would lament due to separation. Thus he would become illusioned and speak as follows.





If a poor man loses some money or gold, he at once becomes very agitated. Similarly, the mind of Mahārāja Bharata would become agitated when he did not see the deer. This is an example of how our attachment can be transferred. If our attachment is transferred to the Lord's service, we progress. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prayed to the Lord that he would be as naturally attracted to the Lord's service as young men and young women are naturally attracted to each other. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu exhibited such attachment to the Lord when He jumped into the ocean or cried at night in separation. However, if our attachment is diverted to material things instead of to the Lord, we will fall down from the spiritual platform.





TEXT 16



api bata sa vai kṛpaṇa eṇa-bālako mṛta-hariṇī-suto 'ho mamānāryasya śaṭha-kirāta-mater akṛta-sukṛtasya kṛta-visrambha ātma-pratyayena tad avigaṇayan sujana ivāgamiṣyati.



SYNONYMS



api-indeed; bata-alas; saḥ-that calf; vai-certainly; kṛpaṇaḥ-aggrieved; eṇa-bālakaḥ-the deer child; mṛta-hariṇī-sutaḥ-the calf of the dead doe; aho-oh; mama-of me; anāryasya-the most ill-behaved; śaṭha-of a cheater; kirāta-or of an uncivilized aborigine; mateḥ-whose mind is that; akṛta-sukṛtasya-who has no pious activities; kṛta-visrambhaḥ-putting all faith; ātma-pratyayena-by assuming me to be like himself; tat avigaṇayan-without thinking of all these things; su-janaḥ iva-like a perfect gentle person; agamiṣyati-will he again return.





Bharata Mahārāja would think: Alas, the deer is now helpless. I am now very unfortunate, and my mind is like a cunning hunter, for it is always filled with cheating propensities and cruelty. The deer has put its faith in me, just as a good man who has a natural interest in good behavior forgets the misbehavior of a cunning friend and puts his faith in him. Although I have proved faithless, will this deer return and place its faith in me?





Bharata Mahārāja was very noble and exalted, and therefore when the deer was absent from him he thought himself unworthy to give it protection. Due to his attachment for the animal, he thought that the animal was as noble and exalted as he himself was. According to the logic of ātmavan manyate jagat, everyone thinks of others according to his own position. Therefore Mahārāja Bharata felt that the deer had left him due to his negligence and that due to the animal's noble heart, it would again return.





TEXT 17



api kṣemeṇāsminn āśramopavane śaṣpāṇi carantaṁ deva-guptaṁ drak-ṣyāmi.



SYNONYMS



api-it may be; kṣemeṇa-with fearlessness because of the absence of tigers and other animals; asmin-in this; āśrama-upavane-garden of the hermitage; śaṣpāṇi carantam-walking and eating the soft grasses; deva-guptam-being protected by the demigods; drakṣyāmi-shall I see.





Alas, is it possible that I shall again see this animal protected by the Lord and fearless of tigers and other animals? Shall I again see him wandering in the garden eating soft grass?





Mahārāja Bharata thought that the animal was disappointed in his protection and had left him for the protection of a demigod. Regardless, he ardently desired to see the animal again within his āśrama eating the soft grass and not fearing tigers and other animals. Mahārāja Bharata could think only of the deer and how the animal could be protected from all kinds of inauspicious things. From the materialistic point of view such kind thoughts may be very laudable, but from the spiritual point of view the King was actually falling from his exalted spiritual position and unnecessarily becoming attached to an animal. Thus degrading himself, he would have to accept an animal body.





TEXT 18



api ca na vṛkaḥ sālā-vṛko 'nyatamo vā naika-cara eka-caro vā bhak-ṣayati.



SYNONYMS



api ca-or; na-not; vṛkaḥ-a wolf; sālā-vṛkaḥ-a dog; anyatamaḥ-any one of many; vā-or; na-eka-caraḥ-the hogs that flock together; eka-caraḥ-the tiger that wanders alone; vā-or; bhakṣayati-is eating (the poor creature).





I do not know, but the deer might have been eaten by a wolf or a dog or by the boars that flock together or the tiger who travels alone.





Tigers never wander in the forest in flocks. Each tiger wanders alone, but forest boars keep together. Similarly, hogs, wolves and dogs also do the same. Thus Mahārāja Bharata thought that the deer had been killed by some of the many ferocious animals within the forest.





TEXT 19



nimlocati ha bhagavān sakala-jagat-kṣemodayas trayy-ātmādyāpi mama na mṛga-vadhū-nyāsa āgacchati.



SYNONYMS



nimlocati-sets; ha-alas; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, represented as the sun; sakala-jagat-of all the universe; kṣema-udayaḥ-who increases the auspiciousness; trayī-ātmā-who consists of the three Vedas; adya api-until now; mama-my; na-not; mṛga-vadhū-nyāsaḥ-this baby deer entrusted to me by its mother; āgacchati-has come back.





Alas, when the sun rises, all auspicious things begin. Unfortunately, they have not begun for me. The sun-god is the Vedas personified, but I am bereft of all Vedic principles. That sun-god is now setting, yet the poor animal who trusted in me since its mother died has not returned.





In the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52), the sun is described as the eye of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





As the sun arises, one should chant the Vedic mantra beginning with the Gāyatrī. The sun is the symbolic representation of the eyes of the Supreme Lord. Mahārāja Bharata lamented that although the sun was going to set, due to the poor animal's absence, he could not find anything auspicious. Bharata Mahārāja considered himself most unfortunate, for due to the animal's absence, there was nothing auspicious for him in the presence of the sun.





TEXT 20



api svid akṛta-sukṛtam āgatya māṁ sukhayiṣyati hariṇa-rāja-kumāro vividha-rucira-darśanīya-nija-mṛga-dāraka-vinodair asantoṣaṁ svānām apanudan.



SYNONYMS



api svit-whether it will; akṛta-sukṛtam-who has never executed any pious activities; āgatya-coming back; mām-to me; sukhayiṣyati-give pleasure; hariṇa-rāja-kumāraḥ-the deer, who was just like a prince because of my taking care of it exactly like a son; vividha-various; rucira-very pleasing; darśanīya-to be seen; nija-own; mṛga-dāraka-befitting the calf of the deer; vinodaiḥ-by pleasing activities; asantoṣam-the unhappiness; svānām-of his own kind; apanudan-driving away.





That deer is exactly like a prince. When will it return? When will it again display its personal activities, which are so pleasing? When will it again pacify a wounded heart like mine? I certainly must have no pious assets, otherwise the deer would have returned by now.





Out of strong affection, the King accepted the small deer as if it were a prince. This is called moha. Due to his anxiety over the deer's absence, the King addressed the animal as though it were his son. Out of affection, anyone can be addressed as anything.





TEXT 21



kṣvelikāyāṁ māṁ mṛṣā-samādhināmīlita-dṛśaṁ prema-saṁrambheṇa cakita-cakita āgatya pṛṣad-aparuṣa-viṣāṇāgreṇa luṭhati.



SYNONYMS



kṣvelikāyām-while playing; mām-unto me; mṛṣā-feigning; samādhinā-by a meditational trance; āmīlita-dṛśam-with closed eyes; prema-saṁrambheṇa-because of anger due to love; cakita-cakitaḥ-with fear; āgatya-coming; pṛṣat-like drops of water; aparuṣa-very soft; viṣāṇa-of the horns; agreṇa-by the point; luṭhati-touches my body.





Alas, the small deer, while playing with me and seeing me feigning meditation with closed eyes, would circumambulate me due to anger arising from love, and it would fearfully touch me with the points of its soft horns, which felt like drops of water.





Now King Bharata considers his meditation false. While engaged in meditation, he was actually thinking of his deer, and he would feel great pleasure when the animal pricked him with the points of its horns. Feigning meditation, the King would actually think of the animal. and this was but a sign of his downfall.





TEXT 22



āsādita-haviṣi barhiṣi dūṣite mayopālabdho bhīta-bhītaḥ sapady uparata-rāsa ṛṣi-kumāravad avahita-karaṇa-kalāpa āste.



SYNONYMS



āsādita-placed; haviṣi-all the ingredients to be offered in the sacrifice; barhiṣi-on the kuśa grass; dūṣite-when polluted; mayā upālabdhaḥ-being scolded by me; bhīta-bhītaḥ-in great fear; sapadi-immediately; uparata-rāsaḥ-stopped its playing; ṛṣi-kumāravat-exactly like the son or disciple of a saintly person; avahita-completely restrained; karaṇa-kalāpaḥ-all the senses; āste-sits.





When I placed all the sacrificial ingredients on the kuśa grass, the deer, when playing, would touch the grass with its teeth and thus pollute it. When I chastised the deer by pushing it away, it would immediately become fearful and sit down motionless, exactly like the son of a saintly person. Thus it would stop its play.





Bharata Mahārāja was constantly thinking of the activities of the deer, forgetting that such meditation and diversion of attention was killing his progress in spiritual achievement.





TEXT 23



kiṁ vā are ācaritaṁ tapas tapasvinyānayā yad iyam avaniḥ savinaya-kṛṣṇa-sāra-tanaya-tanutara-subhaga-śivatamākhara-khura-pada-paṅktibhir draviṇa-vidhurāturasya kṛpaṇasya mama draviṇa-padavīṁ sūcayanty ātmānaṁ ca sarvataḥ kṛta-kautukaṁ dvijānāṁ svargāpavarga-kāmānāṁ deva-yajanaṁ karoti.



SYNONYMS



kim vā-what; are-oh; ācaritam-practiced; tapaḥ-penance; tapasvinyā-by the most fortunate; anayā-this planet earth; yat-since; iyam-this; avaniḥ-earth; sa-vinaya-very mild and well-behaved; kṛṣṇa-sāra-tanaya-of the calf of the black deer; tanutara-small; subhaga-beautiful; śiva-tama-most auspicious; akhara-soft; khura-of the hooves; pada-paṅktibhiḥ-by the series of the marks; draviṇa-vidhura-āturasya-who is very aggrieved because of loss of wealth; kṛpaṇasya-a most unhappy creature; mama-for me; draviṇa-padavīm-the way to achieve that wealth; sūcayanti-indicating; ātmānam-her own personal body; ca-and; sarvataḥ-on all sides; kṛta-kautukam-ornamented; dvijānām-of the brāhmaṇas; svarga-apavarga-kāmānām-who are desirous of achieving heavenly planets or liberation; deva-yajanam-a place of sacrifice to the demigods; karoti-it makes.





After speaking like a madman in this way, Mahārāja Bharata got up and went outside. Seeing the footprints of the deer on the ground, he praised the footprints out of love, saying: O unfortunate Bharata, your austerities and penances are very insignificant compared to the penance and austerity undergone by this earth planet. Due to the earth's severe penances, the footprints of this deer, which are small, beautiful, most auspicious and soft, are imprinted on the surface of this fortunate planet. This series of footprints show a person like me, who am bereaved due to loss of the deer, how the animal has passed through the forest and how I can regain my lost wealth. By these footprints, this land has become a proper place for brāhmaṇas who desire heavenly planets or liberation to execute sacrifices to the demigods.





It is said that when a person becomes overly involved in loving affairs, he forgets himself as well as others, and he forgets how to act and how to speak. It is said that once when a man's son was blind since birth, the father, out of staunch affection for the child, named him Padmalocana, or "lotus-eyed." This is the situation arising from blind love. Bharata Mahārāja gradually fell into this condition due to his material love for the deer. It is said in the smṛti-śāstra:



yasmin deśe mṛgaḥ kṛṣṇas

tasmin dharmānn ivodhata





"That tract of land wherein the footprints of a black deer can be seen is to be understood as a suitable place to execute religious rituals."





TEXT 24



api svid asau bhagavān uḍu-patir enaṁ mṛga-pati-bhayān mṛta-mātaraṁ mṛga-bālakaṁ svāśrama-paribhraṣṭam anukampayā kṛpaṇa-jana-vatsalaḥ paripāti.



SYNONYMS



api svit-can it be; asau-that; bhagavān-most powerful; uḍu-patiḥ-the moon; enam-this; mṛga-pati-bhayāt-because of fear of the lion; mṛta-mātaram-who lost its mother; mṛga-bālakam-the son of a deer; sva-āśrama-paribhraṣṭam-who strayed from its āśrama; anukampayā-out of compassion; kṛpaṇa-jana-vatsalaḥ-(the moon) who is very kind to the unhappy men; paripāti-now is protecting it.





Mahārāja Bharata continued to speak like a madman. Seeing above his head the dark marks on the rising moon, which resembled a deer, he said: Can it be that the moon, who is so kind to an unhappy man, might also be kind upon my deer, knowing that it has strayed from home and has become motherless? This moon has given the deer shelter near itself just to protect it from the fearful attacks of a lion.





TEXT 25



kiṁ vātmaja-viśleṣa-jvara-dava-dahana-śikhābhir upatapyamāna-hṛdaya-sthala-nalinīkaṁ mām upasṛta-mṛgī-tanayaṁ śiśira-śāntānurāga-guṇita-nija-vadana-salilāmṛtamaya-gabhastibhiḥ svadhayatīti ca.



SYNONYMS



kim vā-or it may be; ātma-ja-from the son; viśleṣa-because of separation; jvara-the heat; dava-dahana-of the forest fire; śikhābhiḥ-by the flames; upatapyamāna-being burned; hṛdaya-the heart; sthala-nalinīkam-compared to a red lotus flower; mām-unto me; upasṛta-mṛgī-tanayam-to whom the son of the deer was so submissive; śiśira-śānta-which is so peaceful and cool; anurāga-out of love; guṇita-flowing; nija-vadana-salila-the water from its mouth; amṛta-maya-as good as nectar; gabhastibhiḥ-by the rays of the moon; svadhayati-is giving me pleasure; iti-thus; ca-and.





After perceiving the moonshine, Mahārāja Bharata continued speaking like a crazy person. He said: The deer's son was so submissive and dear to me that due to its separation I am feeling separation from my own son. Due to the burning fever of this separation, I am suffering as if inflamed by a forest fire. My heart, which is like the lily of the land, is now burning. Seeing me so distressed, the moon is certainly splashing its shining nectar upon me-just as a friend throws water on another friend who has a high fever. In this way, the moon is bringing me happiness.





According to Āyur-vedic treatment, it is said that if one has a high fever, someone should splash him with water after gargling this water. In this way the fever subsides. Although Bharata Mahārāja was very aggrieved due to the separation of his so-called son, the deer, he thought that the moon was splashing gargled water on him from its mouth and that this water would subdue his high fever, which was raging due to separation from the deer.





TEXT 26



evam aghaṭamāna-manorathākula-hṛdayo mṛga-dārakābhāsena svārabdha-karmaṇā yogārambhaṇato vibhraṁśitaḥ sa yoga-tāpaso bhagavad-ārādhana-lakṣaṇāc ca katham itarathā jāty-antara eṇa-kuṇaka āsaṅgaḥ sākṣān niḥśreyasa-pratipakṣatayā prāk-parityakta-dustyaja-hṛdayābhijātasya tasyaivam antarāya-vihata-yogārambhaṇasya rājarṣer bharatasya tāvan mṛgārbhaka-poṣaṇa-pālana-prīṇana-lālanānuṣaṅgeṇāvigaṇayata ātmānam ahir ivākhu-bilaṁ duratikramaḥ kālaḥ karāla-rabhasa āpadyata.



SYNONYMS



evam-in that way; aghaṭamāna-impossible to be achieved; manaḥ-ratha-by desires, which are like mental chariots; ākula-aggrieved; hṛdayaḥ-whose heart; mṛga-dāraka-ābhāsena-resembling the son of a deer; sva-ārabdha-karmaṇā-by the bad results of his unseen fruitive actions; yoga-ārambhaṇataḥ-from the activities of yoga performances; vibhraṁśitaḥ-fallen down; saḥ-he (Mahārāja Bharata); yoga-tāpasaḥ-executing the activities of mystic yoga and austerities; bhagavat-ārādhana-lakṣaṇāt-from the activities of devotional service rendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca-and; katham-how; itarathā-else; jāti-antare-belonging to a different species of life; eṇa-kuṇake-to the body of a deer calf; āsaṅgaḥ-so much affectionate attachment; sākṣāt-directly; niḥśreyasa-to achieve the ultimate goal of life; pratipakṣatayā-with the quality of being an obstacle; prāk-who previously; parityakta-given up; dustyaja-although very difficult to give up; hṛdaya-abhijātasya-his sons, born of his own heart; tasya-of him; evam-thus; antarāya-by that obstacle; vihata-obstructed; yoga-ārambhaṇasya-whose path of executing the mystic yoga practices; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of the great saintly King; bharatasya-of Mahārāja Bharata; tāvat-in that way; mṛga-arbhaka-the son of a deer; poṣaṇa-i n maintaining; pālana-in protecting; prīṇana-in making happy; lālana-in fondling; anuṣaṅgeṇa-by constant absorption; avigaṇayataḥ-neglecting; ātmānam-his own soul; ahiḥ iva-like a serpent; ākhu-bilam-the hole of a mouse; duratikramaḥ-unsurpassable; kālaḥ-ultimate death; karāla-terrible; rabhasaḥ-having speed; āpadyata-arrived.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, in this way Bharata Mahārāja was overwhelmed by an uncontrollable desire which was manifest in the form of the deer. Due to the fruitive results of his past deeds, he fell down from mystic yoga, austerity and worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If it were not due to his past fruitive activity, how could he have been attracted to the deer after giving up the association of his own son and family, considering them stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual life? How could he show such uncontrollable affection for a deer? This was definitely due to his past karma. The King was so engrossed in petting and maintaining the deer that he fell down from his spiritual activities. In due course of time, insurmountable death, which is compared to a venomous snake that enters the hole created by a mouse, situated itself before him.





As will be seen in later verses, Bharata Mahārāja, at the time of death, would be forced to accept the body of a deer due to his attraction for the deer. In this regard, a question may be raised. How can a devotee be affected by his past misconduct and vicious activities? In Brahma-saṁhitā (5.54) it is said, karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām: "For those engaged in devotional service, bhakti-bhajana, the results of past deeds are indemnified." According to this, Bharata Mahārāja could not be punished for his past misdeeds. The conclusion must be that Mahārāja Bharata purposefully became over-addicted to the deer and neglected his spiritual advancement. To immediately rectify his mistake, for a short time he was awarded the body of a deer. This was just to increase his desire for mature devotional service. Although Bharata Mahārāja was awarded the body of an animal, he did not forget what had previously happened due to his purposeful mistake. He was very anxious to get out of his deer body, and this indicates that his affection for devotional service was intensified, so much so that he was quickly to attain perfection in a brāhmaṇa body in the next life. It is with this conviction that we declare in our Back to Godhead magazine that devotees like the gosvāmīs living in Vṛndāvana who purposely commit some sinful activity are born in the bodies of dogs, monkeys and tortoises in that holy land. Thus they take on these lower life forms for a short while. and after they give up those animal bodies, they are again promoted to the spiritual world. Such punishment is only for a short period, and it is not due to past karma. It may appear to be due to past karma, but it is offered to rectify the devotee and bring him to pure devotional service.





TEXT 27



tadānīm api pārśva-vartinam ātmajam ivānuśocantam abhivīkṣamāṇo mṛga evābhiniveśita-manā visṛjya lokam imaṁ saha mṛgeṇa kalevaraṁ mṛtam anu na mṛta-janmānusmṛtir itaravan mṛga-śarīram avāpa.



SYNONYMS



tadānīm-at that time; api-indeed; pārśva-vartinam-by the side of his deathbed; ātma-jam-his own son; iva-like; anuśocantam-lamenting; abhivīkṣamāṇaḥ-seeing; mṛge-in the deer; eva-certainly; abhiniveśita-manāḥ-his mind was absorbed; visṛjya-giving up; lokam-world; imam-this; saha-with; mṛgeṇa-the deer; kalevaram-his body; mṛtam-died; anu-thereafter; na-not; mṛta-destroyed; janma-anusmṛtiḥ-remembrance of the incident before his death; itara-vat-like others; mṛga-śarīram-the body of a deer; avāpa-got.





At the time of death, the King saw that the deer was sitting by his side, exactly like his own son, and was lamenting his death. Actually the mind of the King was absorbed in the body of the deer, and consequently-like those bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousness-he left the world, the deer, and his material body and acquired the body of a deer. However, there was one advantage. Although he lost his human body and received the body of a deer, he did not forget the incidents of his past life.





There was a difference between Bharata Mahārāja's acquiring a deer body and others' acquiring different bodies according to their mental condition at the time of death. After death, others forget everything that has happened in their past lives, but Bharata Mahārāja did not forget. According to Bhagavad-gītā:



yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ





"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6)



After quitting his body, a person gets another body according to his mental condition at the time of death. At death, a person always think; of that subject matter in which he has been engrossed during his life. According to this law, because Bharata Mahārāja was always thinking of the deer and forgetting his worship of the Supreme Lord, he acquired the body of a deer. However, due to his having been elevated to the topmost platform of devotional service, he did not forget the incidents of his past life. This special benediction saved him from further deterioration. Due to his past activities in devotional service, he became determined to finish his devotional service even in the body of a deer. It is therefore said in this verse, mṛtam, although he had died, anu, afterwards, na mṛta janmānusmṛtir itaravat, he did not forget the incidents of his past life as others forget them. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā: karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.54). It is proved herein that due to the grace of the Supreme Lord, a devotee is never vanquished. Due to his willful neglect of devotional service, a devotee may be punished for a short time, but he again revives his devotional service and returns home. back to Godhead.





TEXT 28



tatrāpi ha vā ātmano mṛgatva-kāraṇaṁ bhagavad-ārādhana-samīhānubhāvenānusmṛtya bhṛśam anutapyamāna āha.



SYNONYMS



tatra api-in that birth; ha vā-indeed; ātmanaḥ-of himself; mṛgatva-kāraṇam-the cause of accepting the body of a deer; bhagavat-ārādhana-samīhā-of past activities in devotional service; anubhāvena-by consequence; anusmṛtya-remembering; bhṛśam-always; anutapya-mānaḥ-repenting; āha-said.





Although in the body of a deer, Bharata Mahārāja, due to his rigid devotional service in his past life, could understand the cause of his birth in that body. Considering his past and present life, he constantly repented his activities, speaking in the following way.





This is a special concession for a devotee. Even if he attains a body that is nonhuman, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he advances further in devotional service, whether by remembering his past life or by natural causes. It is not easy for a common man to remember the activities of his past life, but Bharata Mahārāja could remember his past activities due to his great sacrifices and engagement in devotional service.





TEXT 29



aho kaṣṭaṁ bhraṣṭo 'ham ātmavatām anupathād yad-vimukta-samasta-saṅgasya vivikta-puṇyāraṇya-śaraṇasyātmavata ātmani sarveṣām ātmanāṁ bhagavati vāsudeve tad-anuśravaṇa-manana-saṅkīrtanārādhanānusmaraṇābhiyogenāśūnya-sakala-yāmena kālena samāveśitaṁ samāhitaṁ kārtsnyena manas tat tu punar mamābudhasyārān mṛga-sutam anu parisusrāva.



SYNONYMS



aho kaṣṭam-alas, what a miserable condition of life; bhraṣṭaḥ-fallen; aham-I (am); ātma-vatām-of great devotees who have achieved perfection; anupathāt-from the way of life; yat-from which; vimukta-samasta-saṅgasya-although having given up the association of my real sons and home; vivikta-solitary; puṇya-araṇya-of a sacred forest; śaraṇasya-who had taken shelter; ātma-vataḥ-of one who had become perfectly situated on the transcendental platform; ātmani-in the Supersoul; sarveṣām-of all; ātmanām-living entities; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeve-Lord Vāsudeva; tat-of Him; anuśravaṇa-constantly hearing; manana-thinking; saṅkīrtana-chanting; ārādhana-worshiping; anusmaraṇa-constantly remembering; abhiyogena-by absorption in; aśūnya-filled; sakala-yāmena-in which all the hours; kālena-by time; samāveśitam-fully established; samāhitam-fixed; kārtsnyena-totally; manaḥ-the mind in such a situation; tat-that mind; tu-but; punaḥ-again; mama-of me; abudhasya-a great fool; ārāt-from a great distance; mṛga-sutam-the son of a deer; anu-being affected by; parisusrāva-fell down.





In the body of a deer, Bharata Mahārāja began to lament: What misfortune! I have fallen from the path of the self-realized. I gave up my real sons, wife and home to advance in spiritual life, and I took shelter in a solitary holy place in the forest. I became self-controlled and self-realized, and I engaged constantly in devotional service, hearing, thinking, chanting, worshiping and remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. I was successful in my attempt, so much so that my mind was always absorbed in devotional service. However, due to my personal foolishness, my mind again became attached-this time to a deer. Now I have obtained the body of a deer and have fallen far from my devotional practices.





Due to his stringent execution of devotional service. Mahārāja Bharata could remember the activities of his past life and how he was raised to the spiritual platform. Due to his foolishness, he became attached to an insignificant deer and thus fell down and had to accept the body of a deer. This is significant for every devotee. If we misuse our position and think that we are fully engaged in devotional service and can do whatever we like, we have to suffer like Bharata Mahārāja and be condemned to accept the type of body that impairs our devotional service. Only the human form is able to execute devotional service, but if we voluntarily give this up for sense gratification, we certainly have to be punished. This punishment is not exactly like that endured by an ordinary materialistic person. By the grace of the Supreme Lord, a devotee is punished in such a way that his eagerness to attain the lotus feet of Lord Vāsudeva is increased. By his intense desire, he returns home in the next lifetime. Devotional service is very completely described here: tad-anuśravaṇa-manana-saṅkīrtanārādhanānusmaranābhiyogena. The constant hearing and chanting of the glories of the Lord is recommended in Bhagavad-gītā: satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]. Those who have taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be very careful that not a single moment is wasted and that not a single moment is spent without chanting and remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His activities. By His own actions and by the actions of His devotees, Kṛṣṇa teaches us how to become cautious in devotional service. Through the medium of Bharata Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa teaches us that we must be careful in the discharge of devotional service. If we want to keep our minds completely fixed without deviation, we must engage them in devotional service full time. As far as the members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness are concerned, they have sacrificed everything to push on this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Yet they must take a lesson from the life of Bharata Mahārāja to be very cautious and to see that not a single moment is wasted in frivolous talk, sleep or voracious eating. Eating is not prohibited, but if we eat voraciously we shall certainly sleep more than required. Sense gratification ensues, and we may be degraded to a lower life form. In that way our spiritual progress may be checked at least for the time being. The best course is to take the advice of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī: avyartha-kālatvam [Cc.Madhya 23.18-19]. We should see that every moment of our lives is utilized for the rendering of devotional service and nothing else. This is the secure position for one wanting to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 30



ity evaṁ nigūḍha-nirvedo visṛjya mṛgīṁ mātaraṁ punar bhagavat-kṣetram upaśama-śīla-muni-gaṇa-dayitaṁ śālagrāmaṁ pulastya-pulahāśramaṁ kālañjarāt pratyājagāma.



SYNONYMS



iti-thus; evam-in this way; nigūḍha-hidden; nirvedaḥ-completely unattached to material activities; visṛjya-giving up; mṛgīm-the deer; mātaram-its mother; punaḥ-again; bhagavat-kṣetram-the place where the Supreme Lord is worshiped; upaśama-śīla-completely detached from all material attachments; muni-gaṇa-dayitam-which is dear to the great saintly residents; śālagrāmam-the village known as Śālagrāma; pulastya-pulaha-āśramam-to the āśrama conducted by such great sages as Pulastya and Pulaha; kālañjarāt-from the Kālañjara Mountain, where he had taken his birth in the womb of a deer; pratyājagāma-he came back.





Although Bharata Mahārāja received the body of a deer, by constant repentance he became completely detached from all material things. He did not disclose these things to anyone, but he left his mother deer in a place known as Kālañjara Mountain, where he was born. He again went to the forest of Śālagrāma and to the āśrama of Pulastya and Pulaha.





It is significant that Mahārāja Bharata, by the grace of Vāsudeva, remembered his past life. He did not waste a moment; he returned to Pulaha-āśrama to the village known as Śālagrāma. Association is very meaningful; therefore ISKCON tries to perfect one who enters the society. The members of this society should always remember that the society is not like a free hotel. All the members should be very careful to execute their spiritual duties so that whoever comes will automatically become a devotee and will be able to return back to Godhead in this very life. Although Bharata Mahārāja acquired the body of a deer, he again left his hearth and home, in this case the Mountain Kālañjara. No one should be captivated by his birthplace and family; one should take shelter of the association of devotees and cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 31



tasminn api kālaṁ pratīkṣamāṇaḥ saṅgāc ca bhṛśam udvigna ātma-sahacaraḥ śuṣka-parṇa-tṛṇa-vīrudhā vartamāno mṛgatva-nimittāvasānam eva gaṇayan mṛga-śarīraṁ tīrthodaka-klinnam ut-sasarja.



SYNONYMS



tasmin api-in that āśrama (Pulaha-āśrama); kālam-the end of the duration of life in the deer body; pratīkṣamāṇaḥ-always waiting for; saṅgāt-from association; ca-and; bhṛśam-constantly; udvignaḥ-full of anxiety; ātma-sahacaraḥ-having the Supersoul as the only constant companion (no one should think of being alone); śuṣka-parṇa-tṛṇa-vīrudhā-by eating only the dry leaves and herbs; vartamānaḥ-existing; mṛgatva-nimitta-of the cause of a deer's body; avasānam-the end; eva-only; gaṇayan-considering; mṛga-śarīram-the body of a deer; tīrtha-udaka-klinnam-bathing in the water of that holy place; utsasarja-gave up.





Remaining in that āśrama, the great King Bharata Mahārāja was now very careful not to fall victim to bad association. Without disclosing his past to anyone, he remained in that āśrama and ate dry leaves only. He was not exactly alone, for he had the association of the Supersoul. In this way he waited for death in the body of a deer. Bathing in that holy place, he finally gave up that body.





Holy places like Vṛndāvana, Hardwar, Prayāga and Jagannātha Purī are especially meant for the execution of devotional service. Vṛndāvana specifically is the most exalted and preferred holy place for Vaiṣṇava devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa who are aspiring to return back to Godhead, the Vaikuṇṭha planets. There are many devotees in Vṛndāvana who regularly bathe in the Yamunā, and this cleanses all the contamination of the material world. By constantly chanting and hearing the holy names and pastimes of the Supreme Lord, one certainly becomes purified and becomes a fit candidate for liberation. However, if one purposefully falls victim to sense gratification, he has to be punished, at least for one lifetime, like Bharata Mahārāja.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "A Description of the Character of Bharata Mahārāja."



Chapter Nine



The Supreme Character of Jaḍa Bharata





In this chapter Bharata Mahārāja's attainment of the body of a brāhmaṇa is described. In this body he remained like one dull, deaf and dumb, so much so that when he was brought before the goddess Kālī to be killed as a sacrifice, he never protested but remained silent. After having given up the body of a deer, he took birth in the womb of the youngest wife of a brāhmaṇa. In this life he could also remember the activities of his past life, and in order to avoid the influence of society, he remained like a deaf and dumb person. He was very careful not to fall down again. He did not mix with anyone who was not a devotee. This process should be adopted by every devotee. As advised by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: asat-saṅga-tyāga-ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra. One should strictly avoid the company of nondevotees, even though they may be family members. When Bharata Mahārāja was in the body of a brāhmaṇa, the people in the neighborhood thought of him as a crazy, dull fellow, but within he was always chanting and remembering Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although his father wanted to give him an education and purify him as a brāhmaṇa by offering him the sacred thread, he remained in such a way that his father and mother could understand that he was crazy and not interested in the reformatory method. Nonetheless, he remained fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, even without undergoing such official ceremonies. Due to his silence, some people who were no better than animals began to tease him in many ways, but he tolerated this. After the death of his father and mother, his stepmother and stepbrothers began to treat him very poorly. They would give him the most condemned food, but still he did not mind; he remained completely absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. He was ordered by his stepbrothers and mother to guard a paddy field one night, and at that time the leader of a dacoit party took him away and tried to kill him by offering him as a sacrifice before Bhadra Kālī. When the dacoits brought Bharata Mahārāja before the goddess Kālī and raised a chopper to kill him, the goddess Kālī became immediately alarmed due to the mistreatment of a devotee. She came out of the deity and, taking the chopper in her own hands, killed all the dacoits there. Thus a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can remain silent despite the mistreatment of nondevotees. Rogues and dacoits who misbehave toward a devotee are punished at last by the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXTS 1–2



śrī-śuka uvāca

atha kasyacid dvija-varasyāṅgiraḥ-pravarasya śama-dama-tapaḥ-svādhyāyādhyayana-tyāga-santoṣa-titikṣā-praśraya-vidyānasūyātma-jñānānanda-yuktasyātma-sadṛśa-śruta-śīlācāra-rūpaudārya-guṇā nava sodaryā aṅgajā babhūvur mithunaṁ ca yavīyasyāṁ bhāryāyām yas tu tatra pumāṁs taṁ parama-bhāgavataṁ rājarṣi-pravaraṁ bharatam utsṛṣṭa-mṛga-śarīraṁ carama-śarīreṇa vipratvaṁ gatam āhuḥ.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; atha-thereafter; kasyacit-of some; dvija-varasya-brāhmaṇa; aṅgiraḥ-pravarasya-who came in the dynasty of the great saint Aṅgirā; śama-control of the mind; dama-control of the senses; tapaḥ-practice of austerities and penances; svādhyāya-recitation of the Vedic literatures; adhyayana-studying; tyāga-renunciation; santoṣa-satisfaction; titikṣā-tolerance; praśraya-very gentle; vidyā-knowledge; anasūya-without envy; ātma-jñāna-ānanda-satisfied in self-realization; yuktasya-who was qualified with; ātma-sadṛśa-and exactly like himself; śruta-in education; śīla-in character; ācāra-in behavior; rūpa-in beauty; audārya-in magnanimity; guṇāḥ-possessing all these qualities; nava sa-udaryāḥ-nine brothers born of the same womb; aṅga-jāḥ-sons; babhūvuḥ-were born; mithunam-a twin brother and sister; ca-and; yavīyasyām-in the youngest; bhāryāyām-wife; yaḥ-who; tu-but; tatra-there; pumān-the male child; tam-him; parama-bhāgavatam-the most exalted devotee; rāja-ṛṣi-of saintly kings; pravaram-most honored; bharatam-Bharata Mahārāja; utsṛṣṭa-having given up; mṛga-śarīram-the body of a deer; carama-śarīreṇa-with the last body; vipratvam-being a brāhmaṇa; gatam-obtained; āhuḥ-they said.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, after giving up the body of a deer, Bharata Mahārāja took birth in a very pure brāhmaṇa family. There was a brāhmaṇa who belonged to the dynasty of Aṅgirā. He was fully qualified with brahminical qualifications. He could control his mind and senses, and he had studied the Vedic literatures and other subsidiary literatures. He was expert in giving charity, and he was always satisfied, tolerant, very gentle, learned and nonenvious. He was self-realized and engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. He remained always in a trance. He had nine equally qualified sons by his first wife, and by his second wife he begot twins-a brother and a sister, of which the male child was said to be the topmost devotee and foremost of saintly kings-Bharata Mahārāja. This, then, is the story of the birth he took after giving up the body of a deer.





Bharata Mahārāja was a great devotee, but he did not attain success in one life. In Bhagavad-gītā it is said that a devotee who does not fulfill his devotional duties in one life is given the chance to be born in a fully qualified brāhmaṇa family or a rich kṣatriya or vaiśya family. Śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe (Bg. 6.41). Bharata Mahārāja was the firstborn son of Mahārāja Ṛṣabha in a rich kṣatriya family, but due to his willful negligence of his spiritual duties and his excessive attachment to an insignificant deer, he was obliged to take birth as the son of a deer. However, due to his strong position as a devotee, he was gifted with the remembrance of his past life. Being repentant, he remained in a solitary forest and always thought of Kṛṣṇa. Then he was given the chance to take birth in a very good brāhmaṇa family.





TEXT 3



tatrāpi svajana-saṅgāc ca bhṛśam udvijamāno bhagavataḥ karma-bandha-vidhvaṁsana-śravaṇa-smaraṇa-guṇa-vivaraṇa-caraṇāravinda-yugalaṁ manasā vidadhad ātmanaḥ pratighātam āśaṅkamāno bhagavad-anugraheṇānusmṛta-sva-pūrva-janmāvalir ātmānam unmatta-jaḍāndha-badhira-svarūpeṇa darśayām āsa lokasya.



SYNONYMS



tatra api-in that brāhmaṇa birth also; sva-jana-saṅgāt-from association with relatives and friends; ca-and; bhṛśam-greatly; udvijamānaḥ-being always afraid that he would fall down again; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karma-bandha-the bondage of the reactions of fruitive activities; vidhvaṁsana-which vanquishes; śravaṇa-hearing; smaraṇa-remembering; guṇa-vivaraṇa-hearing descriptions of the qualities of the Lord; caraṇa-aravinda-lotus feet; yugalam-the two; manasā-with the mind; vidadhat-always thinking of; ātmanaḥ-of his soul; pratighātam-obstruction on the path of devotional service; āśaṅkamānaḥ-always fearing; bhagavat-anugraheṇa-by the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anusmṛta-remembered; sva-pūrva-his own previous; janma-āvaliḥ-string of births; ātmānam-himself; unmatta-mad; jaḍa-dull; andha-blind; badhira-and deaf; svarūpeṇa-with these features; darśayām āsa-he exhibited; lokasya-to people in general.





Due to his being especially gifted with the Lord's mercy, Bharata Mahārāja could remember the incidents of his past life. Although he received the body of a brāhmaṇa, he was still very much afraid of his relatives and friends who were not devotees. He was always very cautious of such association because he feared that he would again fall down. Consequently he manifested himself before the public eye as a madman-dull, blind and deaf-so that others would not try to talk to him. In this way he saved himself from bad association. Within he was always thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord and chanting the Lord's glories, which save one from the bondage of fruitive action. In this way he saved himself from the onslaught of nondevotee associates.





Every living entity is bound by different activities due to association with the modes of nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu: "This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species." (Bg. 13.22)



We get different types of bodies among 8,400,000 species according to our karma. Karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa: we work under the influence of material nature contaminated by the three modes, and thus we get a certain type of body according to superior order. This is called karma-bandha. To get out of this karma-bandha, one must engage himself in devotional service. Then one will not be affected by the modes of material nature.



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) To remain immune from the material qualities, one must engage himself in devotional service-śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. That is the perfection of life. When Mahārāja Bharata took birth as a brāhmaṇa, he was not very interested in the duties of a brāhmaṇa, but within he remained a pure Vaiṣṇava, always thinking of the lotus feet of the Lord. As advised in Bhagavad-gītā: man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. This is the only process by which one can be saved from the danger of repeated birth and death.





TEXT 4



tasyāpi ha vā ātmajasya vipraḥ putra-snehānubaddha-manā āsamāvartanāt saṁskārān yathopadeśaṁ vidadhāna upanītasya ca punaḥ śaucācamanādīn karma-niyamān anabhipretān api samaśikṣayad anuśiṣṭena hi bhāvyaṁ pituḥ putreṇeti.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of him; api ha vā-certainly; ātma-jasya-of his son; vipraḥ-the brāhmaṇa father of Jaḍa Bharata (mad, crazy Bharata); putra-sneha-anubaddha-manāḥ-who was obliged by affection for his son; ā-sama-āvartanāt-until the end of the brahmacarya-āśrama; saṁskārān-the purificatory processes; yathā-upadeśam-as prescribed in the śāstras; vidadhānaḥ-performing; upanītasya-of one who has a sacred thread; ca-also; punaḥ-again; śauca-ācamana-ādīn-practice of cleanliness, washing of the mouth, legs and hands, etc.; karma-niyamān-the regulative principles of fruitive activities; anabhipretān api-although not wanted by Jaḍa Bharata; samaśikṣayat-taught; anuśiṣṭena-taught to follow the regulative principles; hi-indeed; bhāvyam-should be; pituḥ-from the father; putreṇa-the son; iti-thus.





The brāhmaṇa father's mind was always filled with affection for his son, Jaḍa Bharata [Bharata Mahārāja]. Therefore he was always attached to Jaḍa Bharata. Because Jaḍa Bharata was unfit to enter the gṛhastha-āśrama, he simply executed the purificatory process up to the end of the brahmacarya-āśrama. Although Jaḍa Bharata was unwilling to accept his father's instructions, the brāhmaṇa nonetheless instructed him in how to keep clean and how to wash, thinking that the son should be taught by the father.





Jaḍa Bharata was Bharata Mahārāja in the body of a brāhmaṇa, and he outwardly conducted himself as if he were dull, deaf, dumb and blind. Actually he was quite alert within. He knew perfectly well of the results of fruitive activity and the results of devotional service. In the body of a brāhmaṇa, Mahārāja Bharata was completely absorbed in devotional service within; therefore it was not at all necessary for him to execute the regulative principles of fruitive activity. As confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam (Bhāg. 1.2.13). One has to satisfy Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the perfection of the regulative principles of fruitive activity. Besides that, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam





"Duties [dharma] executed by men, regardless of occupation, are only so much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of the Supreme Lord." (Bhāg. 1.2.8) These karma-kāṇḍa activities are required as long as one has not developed Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one is developed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there is no need to execute the prior regulative principles of karma-kāṇḍa. Śrīla Mādhavendra Purī said, "O regulative principles of karma-kāṇḍa, please excuse me. I cannot follow all these regulative principles, for I am fully engaged in devotional service." He expressed the desire to sit somewhere beneath a tree and continue chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Consequently he did not execute all the regulative principles. Similarly, Haridāsa Ṭhākura was born in a Mohammedan family. From the very beginning of his life he was never trained in the karma-kāṇḍa system, but because he was always chanting the holy name of the Lord, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted him as nāmācārya, the authority in chanting the holy name. As Jaḍa Bharata, Bharata Mahārāja was always engaged in devotional service within his mind. Since he had executed the regulative principles continuously for three lives, he was not interested in continuing to execute them, although his brāhmaṇa father wanted him to do so.





TEXT 5



sa cāpi tad u ha pitṛ-sannidhāv evāsadhrīcīnam iva sma karoti chandāṁsy adhyāpayiṣyan saha vyāhṛtibhiḥ sapraṇava-śiras tripadīṁ sāvitrīṁ graiṣma-vāsantikān māsān adhīyānam apy asamaveta-rūpaṁ grāhayām āsa.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Jaḍa Bharata); ca-also; api-indeed; tat u ha-that which was instructed by his father; pitṛ-sannidhau-in the presence of his father; eva-even; asadhrīcīnam iva-not correct, as if he could not understand anything; sma karoti-used to perform; chandāṁsi adhyāpayiṣyan-desiring to teach him Vedic mantras during the months beginning with Śrāvaṇa or during the period of Cāturmāsya; saha-along with; vyāhṛtibhiḥ-the utterance of the names of the heavenly planets (bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ); sa-praṇava-śiraḥ-headed by oṁkāra; tri-padīm-three-footed; sāvitrīm-the Gāyatrī mantra; graiṣma-vāsantikān-for four months, beginning with Caitra, on the fifteenth of May; māsān-the months; adhīyānam api-although fully studying; asamaveta-rūpam-in an incomplete form; grāhayām āsa-he made him learn.





Jaḍa Bharata behaved before his father like a fool, despite his father's adequately instructing him in Vedic knowledge. He behaved in that way so that his father would know that he was unfit for instruction and would abandon the attempt to instruct him further. He would behave in a completely opposite way. Although instructed to wash his hands after evacuating, he would wash them before. Nonetheless, his father wanted to give him Vedic instructions during the spring and summer. He tried to teach him the Gāyatrī mantra along with oṁkāra and vyāhṛti, but after four months, his father still was not successful in instructing him.





TEXT 6



evaṁ sva-tanuja ātmany anurāgāveśita-cittaḥ śaucādhyayana-vrata-niyama-gurv-anala-śuśrūṣaṇādy-aupakurvāṇaka-karmāṇy anabhiyuktāny api samanuśiṣṭena bhāvyam ity asad-āgrahaḥ putram anuśāsya svayaṁ tāvad anadhigata-manorathaḥ kālenāpramattena svayaṁ gṛha eva pramatta upasaṁhṛtaḥ.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; sva-own; tanu-je-in his son, Jaḍa Bharata; ātmani-whom he considered to be himself; anurāga-āveśita-cittaḥ-the brāhmaṇa who was absorbed in love for his son; śauca-cleanliness; adhyayana-study of Vedic literature; vrata-accepting all the vows; niyama-regulative principles; guru-of the spiritual master; anala-of the fire; śuśrūṣaṇa-ādi-the service, etc.; aupakurvāṇaka-of the brahmacarya-āśrama; karmāṇi-all the activities; anabhiyuktāni api-although not liked by his son; samanuśiṣṭena-fully instructed; bhāvyam-should be; iti-thus; asat-āgrahaḥ-having unsuitable obstinacy; putram-his son; anuśāsya-instructing; svayam-himself; tāvat-in that way; anadhigata-manorathaḥ-not having fulfilled his desires; kālena-by the influence of time; apramattena-which is not forgetful; svayam-he himself; gṛhe-to his home; eva-certainly; pramattaḥ-being madly attached; upasaṁhṛtaḥ-died.





The brāhmaṇa father of Jaḍa Bharata considered his son his heart and soul, and therefore he was very much attached to him. He thought it wise to educate his son properly, and being absorbed in this unsuccessful endeavor, he tried to teach his son the rules and regulations of brahmacarya-including the execution of the Vedic vows, cleanliness, study of the Vedas, the regulative methods, service to the spiritual master and the method of offering a fire sacrifice. He tried his best to teach his son in this way, but all his endeavors failed. In his heart he hoped that his son would be a learned scholar, but all his attempts were unsuccessful. Like everyone, this brāhmaṇa was attached to his home, and he had forgotten that someday he would die. Death, however, was not forgetful. At the proper time, death appeared and took him away.





Those too attached to family life, who forget that death comes in the future to take them away, become attached and unable to finish their duty as human beings. The duty of human life is to solve all the problems of life, but instead people remain attached to family affairs and duties. Although they forget death, death will not forget them. Suddenly they will be kicked off the platform of a peaceful family life. One may forget that he has to die, but death never forgets. Death comes always at the right time. The brāhmaṇa father of Jaḍa Bharata wanted to teach his son the process of brahmacarya, but he was unsuccessful due to his son's unwillingness to undergo the process of Vedic advancement. Jaḍa Bharata was simply concerned with returning home, back to Godhead, by executing devotional service through śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. He did not care for the Vedic instructions of his father. When one is fully interested in the service of the Lord, he does not need to follow all the regulative principles enunciated in the Vedas. Of course, for an ordinary man, the Vedic principles are imperative. No one can avoid them. But when one has attained the perfection of devotional service, it is not very important to follow the Vedic principles. Lord Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna to ascend to the platform of nistraiguṇya, the transcendental position above the Vedic principles.



traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā

nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna

nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho

niryoga-kṣema ātmavān





"The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established in the Self." (Bg. 2.45)





TEXT 7



atha yavīyasī dvija-satī sva-garbha-jātaṁ mithunaṁ sapatnyā upanyasya svayam anusaṁsthayā patilokam agāt.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; yavīyasī-the youngest; dvija-satī-wife of the brāhmaṇa; sva-garbha-jātam-born of her womb; mithunam-the twins; sapatnyai-unto the co-wife; upanyasya-entrusting; svayam-personally; anusaṁsthayā-by following her husband; pati-lokam-the planet named Patiloka; agāt-went to.





Thereafter, the brāhmaṇa's younger wife, after entrusting her twin children-the boy and girl-to the elder wife, departed for Patiloka, voluntarily dying with her husband.





TEXT 8



pitary uparate bhrātara enam atat-prabhāva-vidas trayyāṁ vidyāyām eva paryavasita-matayo na para-vidyāyāṁ jaḍa-matir iti bhrātur anuśāsana-nirbandhān nyavṛtsanta.



SYNONYMS



pitari uparate-after the death of the father; bhrātaraḥ-the stepbrothers; enam-unto this Bharata (Jaḍa Bharata); a-tat-prabhāva-vidaḥ-without understanding his exalted position; trayyām-of the three Vedas; vidyāyām-in the matter of material ritualistic knowledge; eva-indeed; paryavasita-settled; matayaḥ-whose minds; na-not; para-vidyāyām-in the transcendental knowledge of spiritual life (devotional service); jaḍa-matiḥ-most dull intelligence; iti-thus; bhrātuḥ-their brother (Jaḍa Bharata); anuśāsana-nirbandhāt-from the endeavor to teach; nyavṛtsanta-stopped.





After the father died, the nine stepbrothers of Jaḍa Bharata, who considered Jaḍa Bharata dull and brainless, abandoned the father's attempt to give Jaḍa Bharata a complete education. The stepbrothers of Jaḍa Bharata were learned in the three Vedas-the Ṛg Veda, Sāma Veda and Yajur Veda-which very much encourage fruitive activity. The nine brothers were not at all spiritually enlightened in devotional service to the Lord. Consequently they could not understand the highly exalted position of Jaḍa Bharata.





TEXTS 9–10



sa ca prākṛtair dvipada-paśubhir unmatta-jaḍa-badhira-mūkety abhibhāṣyamāṇo yadā tad-anurūpāṇi prabhāṣate karmāṇi ca kāryamāṇaḥ parecchayā karoti viṣṭito vetanato vā yācñayā yadṛcchayā vopasāditam alpaṁ bahu mṛṣṭaṁ kadannaṁ vābhyavaharati paraṁ nendriya-prīti-nimittam. nitya-nivṛtta-nimitta-sva-siddha-viśuddhānubhavānanda-svātma-lābhādhigamaḥ sukha-duḥkhayor dvandva-nimittayor asambhāvita-dehābhimānaḥ. śītoṣṇa-vāta-varṣeṣu vṛṣa ivānāvṛtāṅgaḥ pīnaḥ saṁhananāṅgaḥ sthaṇḍila-saṁveśanānunmardanāmajjana-rajasā mahāmaṇir ivānabhivyakta-brahma-varcasaḥ kupaṭāvṛta-kaṭir upavītenoru-maṣiṇā dvijātir iti brahma-bandhur iti saṁjñayātaj-jñajanāvamato vicacāra.



SYNONYMS



saḥ ca-he also; prākṛtaiḥ-by common persons who have no access to spiritual knowledge; dvi-pada-paśubhiḥ-who are nothing but animals with two legs; unmatta-mad; jaḍa-dull; badhira-deaf; mūka-dumb; iti-thus; abhibhāṣyamāṇaḥ-being addressed; yadā-when; tat-anurūpāṇi-words suitable to reply to theirs; prabhāṣate-he used to speak; karmāṇi-activities; ca-also; kāryamāṇaḥ-being caused to execute; para-icchayā-by the order of others; karoti-he used to act; viṣṭitaḥ-by force; vetanataḥ-or by some wages; vā-either; yācñayā-by begging; yadṛcchayā-by its own accord; vā-or; upasāditam-gotten; alpam-a very small quantity; bahu-a large quantity; mṛṣṭam-very palatable; kat-annam-stale, tasteless foods; vā-or; abhyavaharati-he used to eat; param-only; na-not; indriya-prīti-nimittam-for the satisfaction of the senses; nitya-eternally; nivṛtta-stopped; nimitta-fruitive activity; sva-siddha-by self-accomplished; viśuddha-transcendental; anubhava-ānanda-blissful perception; sva-ātma-lābha-adhigamaḥ-who has achieved knowledge of the self; sukha-duḥkhayoḥ-in happiness and distress; dvandva-nimittayoḥ-in the causes of duality; asambhāvita-deha-abhimānaḥ-not identified with the body; śīta-in the winter; uṣṇa-in the summer; vāta-in the wind; varṣeṣu-in the rainfall; vṛṣaḥ-a bull; iva-like; anāvṛta-aṅgaḥ-uncovered body; pīnaḥ-very strong; saṁhanana-aṅgaḥ-whose limbs were firm; sthaṇḍila-saṁveśana-from lying down on the ground; anunmardana-without any massage; amajjana-without bathing; rajasā-by dirt; mahā-maṇiḥ-highly valuable gem; iva-like; anabhivyakta-unmanifested; brahma-varcasaḥ-spiritual splendor; ku-paṭa-āvṛta-covered by a dirty cloth; kaṭiḥ-whose loins; upavītena-with a sacred thread; uru-maṣiṇā-which was highly blackish due to dirt; dvi-jātiḥ-born in a brāhmaṇa family; iti-thus (saying out of contempt); brahma-bandhuḥ-a friend of a brāhmaṇa; iti-thus; saṁjñayā-by such names; a-tat-jña-jana-by persons not knowing his real position; avamataḥ-being disrespected; vicacāra-he wandered.





Degraded men are actually no better than animals. The only difference is that animals have four legs and such men have only two. These two-legged, animalistic men used to call Jaḍa Bharata mad, dull, deaf and dumb. They mistreated him, and Jaḍa Bharata behaved for them like a madman who was deaf, blind or dull. He did not protest or try to convince them that he was not so. If others wanted him to do something, he acted according to their desires. Whatever food he could acquire by begging or by wages, and whatever came of its own accord-be it a small quantity, palatable, stale or tasteless-he would accept and eat. He never ate anything for sense gratification because he was already liberated from the bodily conception, which induces one to accept palatable or unpalatable food. He was full in the transcendental consciousness of devotional service, and therefore he was unaffected by the dualities arising from the bodily conception. Actually his body was as strong as a bull's, and his limbs were very muscular. He didn't care for winter or summer, wind or rain, and he never covered his body at any time. He lay on the ground, and never smeared oil on his body or took a bath. Because his body was dirty, his spiritual effulgence and knowledge were covered, just as the splendor of a valuable gem is covered by dirt. He only wore a dirty loincloth and his sacred thread, which was blackish. Understanding that he was born in a brāhmaṇa family, people would call him a brahma-bandhu and other names. Being thus insulted and neglected by materialistic people, he wandered here and there.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung: deha-smṛti nāhi yāra, saṁsāra-bandhana kāhāṅ tāra. One who has no desire to maintain the body or who is not anxious to keep the body in order and who is satisfied in any condition must be either mad or liberated. Actually Bharata Mahārāja in his birth as Jaḍa Bharata was completely liberated from material dualities. He was a paramahaṁsa and therefore did not care for bodily comfort.





TEXT 11



yadā tu parata āhāraṁ karma-vetanata īhamānaḥ sva-bhrātṛbhir api kedāra-karmaṇi nirūpitas tad api karoti kintu na samaṁ viṣamaṁ nyūnam adhikam iti veda kaṇa-piṇyāka-phalī-karaṇa-kulmāṣa-sthālīpurīṣādīny apy amṛtavad abhyavaharati.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; tu-but; parataḥ-from others; āhāram-food; karma-vetanataḥ-in exchange for wages from working; īhamānaḥ-looking for; sva-bhrātṛbhiḥ api-even by his own stepbrothers; kedāra-karmaṇi-in working in the field and adjusting the agricultural work; nirūpitaḥ-engaged; tat api-at that time also; karoti-he used to do; kintu-but; na-not; samam-level; viṣamam-uneven; nyūnam-deficient; adhikam-more raised; iti-thus; veda-he knew; kaṇa-broken rice; piṇyāka-oil cakes; phalī-karaṇa-the chaff of rice; kulmāṣa-worm-eaten grains; sthālī-purīṣa-ādīni-burned rice stuck to the pot and so on; api-even; amṛta-vat-like nectar; abhyavaharati-used to eat.





Jaḍa Bharata used to work only for food. His stepbrothers took advantage of this and engaged him in agricultural field work in exchange for some food, but actually he did not know how to work very well in the field. He did not know where to spread dirt or where to make the ground level or uneven. His brothers used to give him broken rice, oil cakes, the chaff of rice, worm-eaten grains and burned grains that had stuck to the pot, but he gladly accepted all this as if it were nectar. He did not hold any grudges and ate all this very gladly.





The platform of paramahaṁsa is described in Bhagavad-gītā (2.15): sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ so 'mṛtatvāya kalpate. When one is callous to all duality, the happiness and distress of this material world, one is fit for amṛtatva, eternal life. Bharata Mahārāja was determined to finish his business in this material world, and he did not at all care for the world of duality. He was complete in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and was oblivious to good and evil, happiness and distress. As stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya 4.176):



'dvaite' bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba-'manodharma'

'ei bhāla, ei manda',--saba 'bhrama'





"In the material world, conceptions of good and bad are all mental speculations. Therefore, saying, 'This is good and this is bad,' is all a mistake." One has to understand that in the material world of duality, to think that this is good or that this is bad is simply a mental concoction. However, one should not imitate this consciousness; one should actually be situated on the spiritual platform of neutrality.





TEXT 12



atha kadācit kaścid vṛṣala-patir bhadra-kālyai puruṣa-paśum ālabhatāpatya-kāmaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; kadācit-at some time; kaścit-some; vṛṣala-patiḥ-the leader of śūdras engaged in plundering the property of others; bhadra-kālyai-unto the goddess known as Bhadra Kālī; puruṣa-paśum-an animal in the shape of a man; ālabhata-started to sacrifice; apatya-kāmaḥ-desiring a son.





At this time, being desirous of obtaining a son, a leader of dacoits who came from a śūdra family wanted to worship the goddess Bhadra Kālī by offering her in sacrifice a dull man, who is considered no better than an animal.





Low-class men such as śūdras worship demigods like goddess Kālī, or Bhadra Kālī, for the fulfillment of material desires. To this end, they sometimes kill a human being before the deity. They generally choose a person who is not very intelligent-in other words, an animal in the shape of a man.





TEXT 13



tasya ha daiva-muktasya paśoḥ padavīṁ tad-anucarāḥ paridhāvanto niśi niśītha-samaye tamasāvṛtāyām anadhigata-paśava ākasmikena vidhinā kedārān vīrāsanena mṛga-varāhādibhyaḥ saṁrakṣamāṇam aṅgiraḥ-pravara-sutam apaśyan.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of the leader of the dacoits; ha-certainly; daiva-muktasya-by chance having escaped; paśoḥ-of the human animal; padavīm-the path; tat-anucarāḥ-his followers or assistants; paridhāvantaḥ-searching here and there to find; niśi-at night; niśītha-samaye-at midnight; tamasā āvṛtāyām-being covered by darkness; anadhigata-paśavaḥ-not catching the man-animal; ākasmikena vidhinā-by the unexpected law of providence; kedārān-the fields; vīra-āsanena-by a seat on a raised place; mṛga-varāha-ādibhyaḥ-from the deer, wild pigs and so on; saṁrakṣamāṇam-protecting; aṅgiraḥ-pravara-sutam-the son of the brāhmaṇa descending from the Āṅgirā family; apaśyan-they found.





The leader of the dacoits captured a man-animal for sacrifice, but he escaped, and the leader ordered his followers to find him. They ran in different directions but could not find him. Wandering here and there in the middle of the night, covered by dense darkness, they came to a paddy field where they saw the exalted son of the Āṅgirā family [Jaḍa Bharata], who was sitting in an elevated place guarding the field against the attacks of deer and wild pigs.





TEXT 14



atha ta enam anavadya-lakṣaṇam avamṛśya bhartṛ-karma-niṣpattiṁ manyamānā baddhvā raśanayā caṇḍikā-gṛham upaninyur mudā vikasita-vadanāḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; te-they (the servants of the leader of the dacoits); enam-this (Jaḍa Bharata); anavadya-lakṣaṇam-as bearing the characteristics of a dull animal because of a fat body like a bull's and because of being deaf and dumb; avamṛśya-recognizing; bhartṛ-karma-niṣpattim-the accomplishment of their master's work; manyamānāḥ-understanding; baddhvā-binding tightly; raśanayā-with ropes; caṇḍikā-gṛham-to the temple of goddess Kālī; upaninyuḥ-brought; mudā-with great happiness; vikasita-vadanāḥ-with bright faces.





The followers and servants of the dacoit chief considered Jaḍa Bharata to possess qualities quite suitable for a man-animal, and they decided that he was a perfect choice for sacrifice. Their faces bright with happiness, they bound him with ropes and brought him to the temple of the goddess Kālī.





In some parts of India, animalistic men are still sacrificed before the goddess Kālī. However, such a sacrifice is only performed by śūdras and dacoits. Their business is to plunder the wealthy, and to become successful they offer an animalistic man before the goddess Kālī. It should be noted that they never sacrifice an intelligent man before the goddess. In the body of a brāhmaṇa, Bharata Mahārāja appeared deaf and dumb, yet he was the most intelligent man in the world. Nonetheless, being completely surrendered unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he remained in that condition and did not protest being brought before the deity for slaughter. As we have learned from the previous verses, he was very strong and could have very easily avoided being bound with ropes, but he did not do anything. He simply depended on the Supreme Personality of Godhead for his protection. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura describes surrender unto the Supreme Lord in this way:



mārabi rākhabi--yo icchā tohārā

nitya-dāsa-prati tuyā adhikārā





"My Lord, I am now surrendered unto You. I am Your eternal servant, and if You like You can kill me, or, if You like, You can protect me. In any case, I am fully surrendered unto You."





TEXT 15



atha paṇayas taṁ sva-vidhinābhiṣicyāhatena vāsasācchādya bhūṣaṇālepa-srak-tilakādibhir upaskṛtaṁ bhuktavantaṁ dhūpa-dīpa-mālya-lāja-kisalayāṅkura-phalopahāropetayā vaiśasa-saṁsthayā mahatā gīta-stuti-mṛdaṅga-paṇava-ghoṣeṇa ca puruṣa-paśuṁ bhadra-kālyāḥ purata upaveśayām āsuḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; paṇayaḥ-all the followers of the dacoit; tam-him (Jaḍa Bharata); sva-vidhinā-according to their own ritualistic principles; abhiṣicya-bathing; ahatena-with new; vāsasā-garments; ācchādya-covering; bhūṣaṇa-ornaments; ālepa-smearing the body with sandalwood pulp; srak-a flower garland; tilaka-ādibhiḥ-with markings on the body and so on; upaskṛtam-completely decorated; bhuktavantam-having eaten; dhūpa-with incense; dīpa-lamps; mālya-garlands; lāja-parched grain; kisalaya-aṅkura-twigs and sprouts; phala-fruits; upahāra-other paraphernalia; upetayā-fully equipped; vaiśasa-saṁsthayā-with complete arrangements for sacrifice; mahatā-great; gīta-stuti-of songs and prayers; mṛdaṅga-of the drums; paṇava-of the bugles; ghoṣeṇa-by vibration; ca-also; puruṣa-paśum-the man-animal; bhadra-kālyāḥ-of the goddess Kālī; purataḥ-just in front; upaveśayām āsuḥ-made him sit down.





After this, all the thieves, according to their imaginative ritual for killing animalistic men, bathed Jaḍa Bharata, dressed him in new clothes, decorated him with ornaments befitting an animal, smeared his body with scented oils and decorated him with tilaka, sandalwood pulp and garlands. They fed him sumptuously and then brought him before the goddess Kālī, offering her incense, lamps, garlands, parched grain, newly grown twigs, sprouts, fruits and flowers. In this way they worshiped the deity before killing the man-animal, and they vibrated songs and prayers and played drums and bugles. Jaḍa Bharata was then made to sit down before the deity.





In this verse the word sva-vidhinā (according to their own ritualistic principles) is very significant. According to the Vedic śāstras, everything must be done according to regulative principles, but here it is stated that the thieves and rogues devised their own process for killing an animalistic man. The tamasic śāstras give instructions for the sacrifice of an animal like a goat or buffalo before the goddess Kālī, but there is no mention of killing a man, however dull he may be. This process was manufactured by the dacoits themselves; therefore the word sva-vidhinā is used. Even at this time there are many sacrifices being conducted without reference to the Vedic scriptures. For instance, in Calcutta recently a slaughterhouse was being advertised as a temple of the goddess Kālī. Meat-eaters foolishly purchase meat from such shops, thinking it different from ordinary meat and taking it to be the prasāda of goddess Kālī. The sacrifice of a goat or a similar animal before the goddess Kālī is mentioned in śāstras just to keep people from eating slaughterhouse meat and becoming responsible for the killing of animals. The conditioned soul has a natural tendency toward sex and meat-eating; consequently the śāstras grant them some concessions. Actually the śāstras aim at putting an end to these abominable activities, but they impart some regulative principles so that gradually meat-eaters and sex hunters will be rectified.





TEXT 16



atha vṛṣala-rāja-paṇiḥ puruṣa-paśor asṛg-āsavena devīṁ bhadra-kālīṁ yakṣyamāṇas tad-abhimantritam asim ati-karāla-niśitam upādade.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; vṛṣala-rāja-paṇiḥ-the so-called priest of the leader of the dacoits (one of the thieves); puruṣa-paśoḥ-of the animalistic man for being sacrificed (Bharata Mahārāja); asṛk-āsavena-with the liquor of blood; devīm-to the deity; bhadra-kālīm-the goddess Kālī; yakṣyamāṇaḥ-desiring to offer; tat-abhimantritam-consecrated by the mantra of Bhadra Kālī; asim-the sword; ati-karāla-very fearful; niśitam-finely sharpened; upādade-he took up.





At this time, one of the thieves, acting as the chief priest, was ready to offer the blood of Jaḍa Bharata, whom they imagined to be an animal-man, to the goddess Kālī to drink as a liquor. He therefore took up a very fearsome sword, which was very sharp and, consecrating it by the mantra of Bhadra Kālī, raised it to kill Jaḍa Bharata.





TEXT 17



iti teṣāṁ vṛṣalānāṁ rajas-tamaḥ-prakṛtīnāṁ dhana-mada-raja-utsikta-manasāṁ bhagavat-kalā-vīra-kulaṁ kadarthī-kṛtyotpathena svairaṁ viharatāṁ hiṁsā-vihārāṇāṁ karmāti-dāruṇaṁ yad brahma-bhūtasya sākṣād brahmarṣi-sutasya nirvairasya sarva-bhūta-suhṛdaḥ sūnāyām apy ananumatam ālambhanaṁ tad upalabhya brahma-tejasāti-durviṣaheṇa dandahyamānena vapuṣā sahasoccacāṭa saiva devī bhadra-kālī.



SYNONYMS



iti-thus; teṣām-of them; vṛṣalānām-the śūdras, by whom all religious principles are destroyed; rajaḥ-in passion; tamaḥ-in ignorance; prakṛtīnām-having natures; dhana-mada-in the form of infatuation by material wealth; rajaḥ-by passion; utsikta-puffed up; manasām-whose minds; bhagavat-kalā-an expansion of the plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vīra-kulam-the group of elevated personalities (the brāhmaṇas); kat-arthī-kṛtya-disrespecting; utpathena-by a wrong path; svairam-independently; viharatām-who are proceeding; hiṁsā-vihārāṇām-whose business is to commit violence against others; karma-the activity; ati-dāruṇam-very fearful; yat-that which; brahma-bhūtasya-of a self-realized person born in a brāhmaṇa family; sākṣāt-directly; brahma-ṛṣi-sutasya-of the son born of a brāhmaṇa exalted in spiritual consciousness; nirvairasya-who had no enemies; sarva-bhūta-suhṛdaḥ-a well-wisher to all others; sūnāyām-at the last moment; api-even though; ananumatam-not being sanctioned by law; ālambhanam-against the desire of the Lord; tat-that; upalabhya-perceiving; brahma-tejasā-with the effulgence of spiritual bliss; ati-durviṣaheṇa-being too bright and unbearable; dandahyamānena-burning; vapuṣā-with a physical body; sahasā-suddenly; uccacāṭa-fractured (the deity); sā-she; eva-indeed; devī-the goddess; bhadra-kālī-Bhadra Kālī.





All the rogues and thieves who had made arrangements for the worship of goddess Kālī were low minded and bound to the modes of passion and ignorance. They were overpowered by the desire to become very rich; therefore they had the audacity to disobey the injunctions of the Vedas, so much so that they were prepared to kill Jaḍa Bharata, a self-realized soul born in a brāhmaṇa family. Due to their envy, these dacoits brought him before the goddess Kālī for sacrifice. Such people are always addicted to envious activities, and therefore they dared to try to kill Jaḍa Bharata. Jaḍa Bharata was the best friend of all living entities. He was no one's enemy, and he was always absorbed in meditation on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He was born of a good brāhmaṇa father, and killing him was forbidden, even though he might have been an enemy or aggressive person. In any case, there was no reason to kill Jaḍa Bharata, and the goddess Kālī could not bear this. She could immediately understand that these sinful dacoits were about to kill a great devotee of the Lord. Suddenly the deity's body burst asunder, and the goddess Kālī personally emerged from it in a body burning with an intense and intolerable effulgence.





According to the Vedic injunctions, only an aggressor can be killed. If a person comes with an intent to kill, one can immediately take action and kill in self-defense. It is also stated that one can be killed if he comes to set fire to the home or to pollute or kidnap one's wife. Lord Rāmacandra killed the entire family of Rāvaṇa because Rāvaṇa kidnapped His wife, Sītādevī. However, killing is not sanctioned in the śāstras for other purposes. The killing of animals in sacrifice to the demigods, who are expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is sanctioned for those who eat meat. This is a kind of restriction for meat-eating. In other words, the slaughter of animals is also restricted by certain rules and regulations in the Vedas. Considering these points, there was no reason to kill Jaḍa Bharata, who was born in a respectable, highly exalted brāhmaṇa family. He was a God-realized soul and a well-wisher to all living entities. The Vedas did not at all sanction the killing of Jaḍa Bharata by rogues and thieves. Consequently the goddess Bhadra Kālī emerged from the deity to give protection to the Lord's devotee. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that due to the Brahman effulgence of such a devotee as Jaḍa Bharata, the deity was fractured. Only thieves and rogues in the modes of passion and ignorance and maddened by material opulence offer a man in sacrifice before the goddess Kālī. This is not sanctioned by the Vedic instructions. Presently there are many hundreds and thousands of slaughterhouses throughout the world that are maintained by a puffed-up population mad for material opulence. Such activities are never supported by the Bhāgavata school.





TEXT 18



bhṛśam amarṣa-roṣāveśa-rabhasa-vilasita-bhru-kuṭi-viṭapa-kuṭila-daṁṣṭrāruṇekṣaṇāṭopāti-bhayānaka-vadanā hantu-kāmevedaṁ mahāṭṭa-hāsam ati-saṁrambheṇa vimuñcantī tata utpatya pāpīyasāṁ duṣṭānāṁ tenaivāsinā vivṛkṇa-śīrṣṇāṁ galāt sravantam asṛg-āsavam atyuṣṇaṁ saha gaṇena nipīyāti-pāna-mada-vihvaloccaistarāṁ sva-pārṣadaiḥ saha jagau nanarta ca vijahāra ca śiraḥ-kanduka-līlayā.



SYNONYMS



bhṛśam-very highly; amarṣa-in intolerance of the offenses; roṣa-in anger; āveśa-of her absorption; rabhasa-vilasita-expanded by the force; bhru-kuṭi-of her eyebrows; viṭapa-the branches; kuṭila-curved; daṁṣṭra-teeth; aruṇa-īkṣaṇa-of reddish eyes; āṭopa-by the agitation; ati-very much; bhayānaka-fearful; vadanā-having a face; hantu-kāmā-desirous to destroy; iva-as if; idam-this universe; mahā-aṭṭa-hāsam-a greatly fearful laugh; ati-great; saṁrambheṇa-because of anger; vimuñcantī-releasing; tataḥ-from that altar; utpatya-coming forth; pāpīyasām-of all the sinful; duṣṭānām-great offenders; tena eva asinā-by that same chopper; vivṛkṇa-separated; śīrṣṇām-whose heads; galāt-from the neck; sravantam-oozing out; asṛk-āsavam-the blood, compared to an intoxicating beverage; ati-uṣṇam-very hot; saha-with; gaṇena-her associates; nipīya-drinking; ati-pāna-from drinking so much; mada-by intoxication; vihvalā-overwhelmed; uccaiḥ-tarām-very loudly; sva-pārṣadaiḥ-her own associates; saha-with; jagau-sang; nanarta-danced; ca-also; vijahāra-played; ca-also; śiraḥ-kanduka-using the heads as balls; līlayā-by sports.





Intolerant of the offenses committed, the infuriated goddess Kālī flashed her eyes and displayed her fierce, curved teeth. Her reddish eyes glowed, and she displayed her fearsome features. She assumed a frightening body, as if she were prepared to destroy the entire creation. Leaping violently from the altar, she immediately decapitated all the rogues and thieves with the very sword with which they had intended to kill Jaḍa Bharata. She then began to drink the hot blood that flowed from the necks of the beheaded rogues and thieves, as if this blood were liquor. Indeed, she drank this intoxicant with her associates, who were witches and female demons. Becoming intoxicated with this blood, they all began to sing very loudly and dance as though prepared to annihilate the entire universe. At the same time, they began to play with the heads of the rogues and thieves, tossing them about as if they were balls.





It is evident from this verse that the devotees of goddess Kālī are not at all favored by her. It is goddess Kālī's work to kill and punish the demons. Goddess Kālī (Durgā) engages in decapitating many demons, dacoits and other unwanted elements in society. Neglecting Kṛṣṇa consciousness, foolish people try to satisfy the goddess by offering her many abominable things, but ultimately when there is a little discrepancy in this worship, the goddess punishes the worshiper by taking his life. Demoniac people worship goddess Kālī to obtain some material benefit, but they are not excused of the sins performed in the name of worship. To sacrifice a man or animal before the deity is specifically forbidden.





TEXT 19



evam eva khalu mahad-abhicārāti-kramaḥ kārtsnyenātmane phalati.



SYNONYMS



evam eva-in this way; khalu-indeed; mahat-to great personalities; abhicāra-in the form of envy; ati-kramaḥ-the limit of offense; kārtsnyena-always; ātmane-unto oneself; phalati-gives the result.





When an envious person commits an offense before a great personality, he is always punished in the way mentioned above.





TEXT 20



na vā etad viṣṇudatta mahad-adbhutaṁ yad asambhramaḥ sva-śiraś-chedana āpatite 'pi vimukta-dehādy-ātma-bhāva-sudṛḍha-hṛdaya-granthīnāṁ sarva-sattva-suhṛd-ātmanāṁ nirvairāṇāṁ sākṣād bhagavatānimiṣāri-varāyudhenāpramattena tais tair bhāvaiḥ parirakṣyamāṇānāṁ tat-pāda-mūlam akutaścid-bhayam upasṛtānāṁ bhāgavata-paramahaṁsānām.



SYNONYMS



na-not; vā-or; etat-this; viṣṇu-datta-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who was protected by Lord Viṣṇu; mahat-a great; adbhutam-wonder; yat-which; asambhramaḥ-lack of perplexity; sva-śiraḥ-chedane-when the chopping off of the head; āpatite-was about to happen; api-even though; vimukta-completely liberated from; deha-ādi-ātma-bhāva-the false bodily concept of life; su-dṛḍha-very strong and tight; hṛdaya-granthīnām-of those whose knots within the heart; sarva-sattva-suhṛt-ātmanām-of persons who in their hearts always wish well to all living entities; nirvairāṇām-who do not find anyone as their enemy; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; animiṣa-invincible time; ari-vara-and the best of weapons, the Sudarśana cakra; āyudhena-by Him who possesses the weapons; apramattena-not agitated at any time; taiḥ taiḥ-by those respective; bhāvaiḥ-moods of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parirakṣyamāṇānām-of persons who are protected; tat-pāda-mūlam-at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akutaścit-from nowhere; bhayam-fear; upasṛtānām-of those who have taken complete shelter; bhāgavata-of devotees of the Lord; parama-haṁsānām-of the most liberated persons.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī then said to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: O Viṣṇudatta, those who already know that the soul is separate from the body, who are liberated from the invincible knot in the heart, who are always engaged in welfare activities for all living entities and who never contemplate harming anyone are always protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries His disc [the Sudarśana cakra] and acts as supreme time to kill the demons and protect His devotees. The devotees always take shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord. Therefore at all times, even if threatened by decapitation, they remain unagitated. For them, this is not at all wonderful.





These are some of the great qualities of a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. First, a devotee is firmly convinced of his spiritual identity. He never identifies with the body; he is firmly convinced that the spirit soul is different from the body. Consequently he fears nothing. Even though his life may be threatened, he is not at all afraid. He does not even treat an enemy like an enemy. Such are the qualifications of devotees. Devotees are always fully dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Lord is always eager to give them all protection in all circumstances.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Supreme Character of Jaḍa Bharata."



Chapter Ten



The Discussion Between Jaḍa Bharata and Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa





In this chapter Bharata Mahārāja, now Jaḍa Bharata, was successfully accepted by King Rahūgaṇa, ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvīra. The King forced Jaḍa Bharata to carry his palanquin and chastised him because he did not carry it properly. A carrier of King Rahūgaṇa's palanquin was needed, and to fulfill this need the chief carriers found Jaḍa Bharata as the most likely person to do the work. He was therefore forced to carry the palanquin. Jaḍa Bharata, however, did not protest this proud order, but humbly accepted the job and carried the palanquin. While carrying it, however, he was very careful to see that he did not step on an ant, and whenever he saw one, he would stop until the ant had passed. Because of this, he could not keep pace with the other carriers. The King within the palanquin became very disturbed and chastised Jaḍa Bharata with filthy language, but Jaḍa Bharata, being completely freed from the bodily conception, did not protest; he proceeded carrying the palanquin. When he continued as before, the King threatened him with punishment, and being threatened by the King, Jaḍa Bharata began to talk. He protested against the filthy language used by the King when the King chastised him, and the King, hearing the instructions of Jaḍa Bharata, was awakened to his real knowledge. When he came to his consciousness, he understood that he had offended a great, learned and saintly person. At that time he very humbly and respectfully prayed to Jaḍa Bharata. He now wanted to understand the deep meaning of the philosophical words used by Jaḍa Bharata, and with great sincerity, he begged his pardon. He admitted that if one offends the lotus feet of a pure devotee, he is certainly punished by the trident of Lord Śiva.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

atha sindhu-sauvīra-pate rahūgaṇasya vrajata ikṣumatyās taṭe tat-kula-patinā śibikā-vāha-puruṣānveṣaṇa-samaye daivenopasāditaḥ sa dvija-vara upalabdha eṣa pīvā yuvā saṁhananāṅgo go-kharavad dhuraṁ voḍhum alam iti pūrva-viṣṭi-gṛhītaiḥ saha gṛhītaḥ prasabham atad-arha uvāha śibikāṁ sa mahānubhāvaḥ.





SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; atha-thus; sindhu-sauvīra-pateḥ-of the ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvīra; rahū-gaṇasya-the King known as Rahūgaṇa; vrajataḥ-while going (to the āśrama of Kapila); ikṣu-matyāḥ taṭe-on the bank of the river known as Ikṣumatī; tat-kula-patinā-by the leader of the palanquin carriers; śibikā-vāha-to become a carrier of the palanquin; puruṣa-anveṣaṇa-samaye-at the time of searching for a man; daivena-by chance; upasāditaḥ-led near; saḥ-that; dvija-varaḥ-Jaḍa Bharata, the son of a brāhmaṇa; upalabdhaḥ-obtained; eṣaḥ-this man; pīvā-very strong and stout; yuvā-young; saṁhanana-aṅgaḥ-having very firm limbs; go-khara-vat-like a cow or an ass; dhuram-a load; voḍhum-to carry; alam-able; iti-thus thinking; pūrva-viṣṭi-gṛhītaiḥ-others who were formerly forced to do the task; saha-with; gṛhītaḥ-being taken; prasabham-by force; a-tat-arhaḥ-although not fit for carrying the palanquin; uvāha-carried; śibikām-the palanquin; saḥ-he; mahā-anubhāvaḥ-a great soul.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, after this, King Rahūgaṇa, ruler of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvīra, was going to Kapilāśrama. When the King's chief palanquin carriers reached the banks of the River Ikṣumatī, they needed another carrier. Therefore they began searching for someone, and by chance they came upon Jaḍa Bharata. They considered the fact that Jaḍa Bharata was very young and strong and had firm limbs. Like cows and asses, he was quite fit to carry loads. Thinking in this way, although the great soul Jaḍa Bharata was unfit for such work, they nonetheless unhesitatingly forced him to carry the palanquin.





TEXT 2



yadā hi dvija-varasyeṣu-mātrāvalokānugater na samāhitā puruṣa-gatis tadā viṣama-gatāṁ sva-śibikāṁ rahūgaṇa upadhārya puruṣān adhivahata āha he voḍhāraḥ sādhv atikramata kim iti viṣamam uhyate yānam iti.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; hi-certainly; dvija-varasya-of Jaḍa Bharata; iṣu-mātra-the measurement of an arrow (three feet) ahead; avaloka-anugateḥ-from moving only after glancing; na samāhitā-not united; puruṣa-gatiḥ-the movement of the carriers; tadā-at that time; viṣama-gatām-becoming uneven; sva-śibikām-his own palanquin; rahūgaṇaḥ-King Rahūgaṇa; upadhārya-understanding; puruṣān-unto the men; adhivahataḥ-who were carrying the palanquin; āha-said; he-oh; voḍhāraḥ-carriers of the palanquin; sādhu atikramata-please walk evenly so that there will not be bouncing; kim iti-for what reason; viṣamam-uneven; uhyate-is being carried; yānam-the palanquin; iti-thus.





The palanquin, however, was very erratically carried by Jaḍa Bharata due to his sense of nonviolence. As he stepped forward, he checked before him every three feet to see whether he was about to step on ants. Consequently he could not keep pace with the other carriers. Due to this, the palanquin was shaking, and King Rahūgaṇa immediately asked the carriers, "Why are you carrying this palanquin unevenly? Better carry it properly."





Although Jaḍa Bharata was forced to carry the palanquin, he did not give up his sympathetic feelings toward the poor ants passing on the road. A devotee of the Lord does not forget his devotional service and other favorable activities, even when he is in a most distressful condition. Jaḍa Bharata was a qualified brāhmaṇa, highly elevated in spiritual knowledge, yet he was forced to carry the palanquin. He did not mind this, but while walking on the road, he could not forget his duty to avoid killing even an ant. A Vaiṣṇava is never envious or unnecessarily violent. There were many ants on the path, but Jaḍa Bharata took care by looking ahead three feet. When the ants were no longer in his way, he would place his foot on the ground. A Vaiṣṇava is always very kind at heart to all living entities. In His sāṅkhya-yoga, Lord Kapiladeva explains: suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. Living entities assume different bodily forms. Those who are not Vaiṣṇavas consider only human society worthy of their sympathy, but Kṛṣṇa claims to be the supreme father of all life forms. Consequently the Vaiṣṇava takes care not to annihilate untimely or unnecessarily any life form. All living entities have to fulfill a certain duration for being encaged in a particular type of material body. They have to finish the duration allotted a particular body before being promoted or evolved to another body. Killing an animal or any other living being simply places an impediment in the way of his completing his term of imprisonment in a certain body. One should therefore not kill bodies for one's sense gratification, for this will implicate one in sinful activity.





TEXT 3



atha ta īśvara-vacaḥ sopālambham upākarṇyopāya-turīyāc chaṅkita-manasas taṁ vijñāpayāṁ babhūvuḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thus; te-they (the carriers of the palanquin); īśvara-vacaḥ-the words of the master, King Rahūgaṇa; sa-upālambham-with reproach; upākarṇya-hearing; upāya-the means; turīyāt-from the fourth one; śaṅkita-manasaḥ-whose minds were afraid; tam-him (the King); vijñāpayām babhūvuḥ-informed.





When the palanquin carriers heard the threatening words of Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa, they became very afraid of his punishment and began to speak to him as follows.





According to political science, a king sometimes tries to pacify his subordinates, sometimes chastises them, sometimes derides them and sometimes rewards them. In this way the king rules his subordinates. The bearers of the palanquin could understand that the King was angry and that he would chastise them.





TEXT 4



na vayaṁ nara-deva pramattā bhavan-niyamānupathāḥ sādhv eva vahāmaḥ. ayam adhunaiva niyukto 'pi na drutaṁ vrajati nānena saha voḍhum u ha vayaṁ pārayāma iti.



SYNONYMS



na-not; vayam-we; nara-deva-O lord among human beings (the king is supposed to be the representative of deva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead); pramattāḥ-neglectful in our duties; bhavat-niyama-anupathāḥ-who are always obedient to your order; sādhu-properly; eva-certainly; vahāmaḥ-we are carrying; ayam-this man; adhunā-just recently; eva-indeed; niyuktaḥ-being engaged to work with us; api-although; na-not; drutam-very quickly; vrajati-works; na-not; anena-him; saha-with; voḍhum-to carry; u ha-oh; vayam-we; pārayāmaḥ-are able; iti-thus.





O lord, please note that we are not at all negligent in discharging our duties. We have been faithfully carrying this palanquin according to your desire, but this man who has been recently engaged to work with us cannot walk very swiftly. Therefore we are not able to carry the palanquin with him.





The other palanquin carriers were śūdras, whereas Jaḍa Bharata was not only a high-caste brāhmaṇa but also a great devotee. Śūdras do not sympathize with other living beings, but a Vaiṣṇava cannot act like a śūdra. Whenever a śūdra and a brāhmaṇa Vaiṣṇava are combined, there will certainly be imbalance in the execution of duties. The śūdras were walking with the palanquin without at all caring for the ants on the ground, but Jaḍa Bharata could not act like a śūdra, and therefore difficulty arose.





TEXT 5



sāṁsargiko doṣa eva nūnam ekasyāpi sarveṣāṁ sāṁsargikāṇāṁ bhavitum arhatīti niścitya niśamya kṛpaṇa-vaco rājā rahūgaṇa upāsita-vṛddho 'pi nisargeṇa balāt kṛta īṣad-utthita-manyur avispaṣṭa-brahma-tejasaṁ jāta-vedasam iva rajasāvṛta-matir āha.



SYNONYMS



sāṁsargikaḥ-resulting from intimate association; doṣaḥ-a fault; eva-indeed; nūnam-certainly; ekasya-of one; api-although; sarveṣām-of all other; sāṁsargikāṇām-persons associated with him; bhavitum-to become; arhati-is able; iti-thus; niścitya-ascertaining; niśamya-by hearing; kṛpaṇa-vacaḥ-the words of the poor servants, who were very afraid of being punished; rājā-the King; rahūgaṇaḥ-Rahūgaṇa; upāsita-vṛddhaḥ-having served and heard from many elderly sages; api-in spite of; nisargeṇa-by his personal nature, which was that of a kṣatriya; balāt-by force; kṛtaḥ-done; īṣat-slightly; utthita-awakened; manyuḥ-whose anger; avispaṣṭa-not being distinctly visible; brahma-tejasam-his (Jaḍa Bharata's) spiritual effulgence; jāta-vedasam-a fire covered by ashes in Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; iva-like; rajasā āvṛta-covered by the mode of passion; matiḥ-whose mind; āha-said.





King Rahūgaṇa could understand the speeches given by the carriers, who were afraid of being punished. He could also understand that simply due to the fault of one person, the palanquin was not being carried properly. Knowing this perfectly well and hearing their appeal, he became a little angry, although he was very advanced in political science and was very experienced. His anger arose due to his inborn nature as a king. Actually King Rahūgaṇa's mind was covered by the mode of passion, and he therefore spoke as follows to Jaḍa Bharata, whose Brahman effulgence was not clearly visible, being covered like a fire covered by ashes.





The distinction between rajo-guṇa and sattva-guṇa is explained in this verse. Although the King was very upright and advanced in political science and governmental management, he was nonetheless in the mode of passion, and therefore, due to a slight agitation, he became angry. Jaḍa Bharata, despite all kinds of injustice endured because of his deaf and dumb display, remained silent by the strength of his spiritual advancement. Nonetheless his brahma-tejaḥ, his Brahman effulgence, was indistinctly visible in his person.





TEXT 6



aho kaṣṭaṁ bhrātar vyaktam uru-pariśrānto dīrgham adhvānam eka eva ūhivān suciraṁ nāti-pīvā na saṁhananāṅgo jarasā copadruto bhavān sakhe no evāpara ete saṅghaṭṭina iti bahu-vipralabdho 'py avidyayā racita-dravya-guṇa-karmāśaya-sva-carama-kalevare 'vastuni saṁsthāna-viśeṣe 'haṁ mamety anadhyāropita-mithyā-pratyayo brahma-bhūtas tūṣṇīṁ śibikāṁ pūrvavad uvāha.



SYNONYMS



aho-alas; kaṣṭam-how troublesome it is; bhrātaḥ-my dear brother; vyaktam-clearly; uru-very much; pariśrāntaḥ-fatigued; dīrgham-a long; adhvānam-path; ekaḥ-alone; eva-certainly; ūhivān-you have carried; su-ciram-for a long time; na-not; ati-pīvā-very strong and stout; na-nor; saṁhanana-aṅgaḥ-having a firm, tolerant body; jarasā-by old age; ca-also; upadrutaḥ-disturbed; bhavān-yourself; sakhe-my friend; no eva-not certainly; apare-the other; ete-all these; saṅghaṭṭinaḥ-co-workers; iti-thus; bahu-very much; vipralabdhaḥ-sarcastically criticized; api-although; avidyayā-by nescience; racita-manufactured; dravya-guṇa-karma-āśaya-in a combination of material elements, material qualities, and the results of past activities and desires; sva-carama-kalevare-in the body, which is moved by the subtle elements (mind, intelligence and ego); avastuni-in such physical things; saṁsthāna-viśeṣe-having a particular disposition; aham mama-I and mine; iti-in this way; anadhyāropita-not interposed; mithyā-false; pratyayaḥ-belief; brahma-bhūtaḥ-who was self-realized, standing on the Brahman platform; tūṣṇīm-being silent; śibikām-the palanquin; pūrva-vat-as before; uvāha-carried.





King Rahūgaṇa told Jaḍa Bharata: How troublesome this is, my dear brother. You certainly appear very fatigued because you have carried this palanquin alone without assistance for a long time and for a long distance. Besides that, due to your old age you have become greatly troubled. My dear friend, I see that you are not very firm, nor very strong and stout. Aren't your fellow carriers cooperating with you?



In this way the King criticized Jaḍa Bharata with sarcastic words, yet despite being criticized in this way, Jaḍa Bharata had no bodily conception of the situation. He knew that he was not the body, for he had attained his spiritual identity. He was neither fat, lean nor thin, nor had he anything to do with a lump of matter, a combination of the five gross and three subtle elements. He had nothing to do with the material body and its two hands and legs. In other words, he had completely realized his spiritual identity []. He was therefore unaffected by this sarcastic criticism from the King. Without saying anything, he continued carrying the palanquin as before.





Jaḍa Bharata was completely liberated. He did not even care when the dacoits attempted to kill his body; he knew that he certainly was not the body. Even if the body were killed, he would not have cared, for he was thoroughly convinced of the proposition found in Bhagavad-gītā (2.20): na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre. He knew that he could not be killed even if his body were killed. Although he did not protest, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His agent could not tolerate the injustice of the dacoits; therefore he was saved by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, and the dacoits were killed. In this case, while carrying the palanquin, he also knew that he was not the body. This body was very strong and stout, in sound condition and quite competent to carry the palanquin. Due to his being freed from the bodily conception, the sarcastic words of the King did not at all affect him. The body is created according to one's karma, and material nature supplies the ingredients for the development of a certain type of body. The soul the body covers is different from the bodily construction; therefore anything favorable or mischievous done to the body does not affect the spirit soul. The Vedic injunction is asaṅgo hy ayaṁ puruṣaḥ: the spirit soul is always unaffected by material arrangements.





TEXT 7



atha punaḥ sva-śibikāyāṁ viṣama-gatāyāṁ prakupita uvāca rahūgaṇaḥ kim idam are tvaṁ jīvan-mṛto māṁ kadarthī-kṛtya bhartṛ-śāsanam aticarasi pramattasya ca te karomi cikitsāṁ daṇḍa-pāṇir iva janatāyā yathā prakṛtiṁ svāṁ bhajiṣyasa iti.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; punaḥ-again; sva-śibikāyām-in his own palanquin; viṣama-gatāyām-being unevenly carried because of Jaḍa Bharata's not walking properly; prakupitaḥ-becoming very angry; uvāca-said; rahūgaṇaḥ-King Rahūgaṇa; kim idam-what is this nonsense; are-O fool; tvam-you; jīvat-living; mṛtaḥ-dead; mām-me; kat-arthī-kṛtya-neglecting; bhartṛ-śāsanam-chastisement by the master; aticarasi-you are overstepping; pramattasya-who are almost crazy; ca-also; te-your; karomi-I shall do; cikitsām-proper treatment; daṇḍa-pāṇiḥ iva-like Yamarāja; janatāyāḥ-of the people in general; yathā-so that; prakṛtim-natural position; svām-your own; bhajiṣyase-you will take to; iti-thus.





Thereafter, when the King saw that his palanquin was still being shaken by the carriers, he became very angry and said: You rascal, what are you doing? Are you dead despite the life within your body? Do you not know that I am your master? You are disregarding me and are not carrying out my order. For this disobedience I shall now punish you just as Yamarāja, the superintendent of death, punishes sinful people. I shall give you proper treatment so that you will come to your senses and do the correct thing.





TEXT 8



evaṁ bahv abaddham api bhāṣamāṇaṁ nara-devābhimānaṁ rajasā tamasānuviddhena madena tiraskṛtāśeṣa-bhagavat-priya-niketaṁ paṇḍita-māninaṁ sa bhagavān brāhmaṇo brahma-bhūta-sarva-bhūta-suhṛd-ātmā yogeśvara-caryāyāṁ nāti-vyutpanna-matiṁ smayamāna iva vigata-smaya idam āha.



SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; bahu-much; abaddham-nonsensical; api-although; bhāṣamāṇam-talking; nara-deva-abhimānam-King Rahūgaṇa, who thought himself the ruler; rajasā-by the material mode of passion; tamasā-as well as by the mode of ignorance; anuviddhena-being increased; madena-by madness; tiraskṛta-who rebuked; aśeṣa-innumerable; bhagavat-priya-niketam-devotees of the Lord; paṇḍita-māninam-considering himself a very learned scholar; saḥ-that; bhagavān-spiritually most powerful (Jaḍa Bharata); brāhmaṇaḥ-a fully qualified brāhmaṇa; brahma-bhūta-fully self-realized; sarva-bhūta-suhṛt-ātmā-who was thus the friend of all living entities; yoga-īśvara-of the most advanced mystic yogīs; caryāyām-in the behavior; na ati-vyutpanna-matim-unto King Rahūgaṇa, who was not actually experienced; smayamānaḥ-slightly smiling; iva-like; vigata-smayaḥ-who was relieved from all material pride; idam-this; āha-spoke.





Thinking himself a king, King Rahūgaṇa was in the bodily conception and was influenced by material nature's modes of passion and ignorance. Due to madness, he chastised Jaḍa Bharata with uncalled-for and contradictory words. Jaḍa Bharata was a topmost devotee and the dear abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although considering himself very learned, the King did not know about the position of an advanced devotee situated in devotional service, nor did he know his characteristics. Jaḍa Bharata was the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; he always carried the form of the Lord within his heart. He was the dear friend of all living beings, and he did not entertain any bodily conception. He therefore smiled and spoke the following words.





The distinction between a person in the bodily conception and a person beyond the bodily conception is presented in this verse. In the bodily conception, King Rahūgaṇa considered himself a king and chastised Jaḍa Bharata in so many unwanted ways. Being self-realized, Jaḍa Bharata, who was fully situated on the transcendental platform, did not at all become angry; instead, he smiled and began to deliver his teachings to King Rahūgaṇa. A highly advanced Vaiṣṇava devotee is a friend to all living entities, and consequently he is a friend to his enemies also. In fact, he does not consider anyone to be his enemy. Suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. Sometimes a Vaiṣṇava becomes superficially angry at a nondevotee, but this is good for the nondevotee. We have several examples of this in Vedic literature. Once Nārada became angry with the two sons of Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, and he chastised them by turning them into trees. The result was that later they were liberated by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The devotee is situated on the absolute platform, and when he is angry or pleased, there is no difference, for in either case he bestows his benediction.





TEXT 9



brāhmaṇa uvāca

tvayoditaṁ vyaktam avipralabdhaṁ

bhartuḥ sa me syād yadi vīra bhāraḥ

gantur yadi syād adhigamyam adhvā

pīveti rāśau na vidāṁ pravādaḥ

SYNONYMS



brāhmaṇaḥ uvāca-the learned brāhmaṇa (Jaḍa Bharata) spoke; tvayā-by you; uditam-explained; vyaktam-very clearly; avipralabdham-without contradictions; bhartuḥ-of the bearer, the body; saḥ-that; me-mine; syāt-it would have been; yadi-if; vīra-O great hero (Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa); bhāraḥ-a load; gantuḥ-of the mover, also the body; yadi-if; syāt-it had been; adhigamyam-the object to be obtained; adhvā-the path; pīvā-very stout and strong; iti-thus; rāśau-in the body; na-not; vidām-of the self-realized persons; pravādaḥ-subject matter for discussion.





The great brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata said: My dear King and hero, whatever you have spoken sarcastically is certainly true. Actually these are not simply words of chastisement, for the body is the carrier. The load carried by the body does not belong to me, for I am the spirit soul. There is no contradiction in your statements because I am different from the body. I am not the carrier of the palanquin; the body is the carrier. Certainly, as you have hinted, I have not labored carrying the palanquin, for I am detached from the body. You have said that I am not stout and strong, and these words are befitting a person who does not know the distinction between the body and the soul. The body may be fat or thin, but no learned man would say such things of the spirit soul. As far as the spirit soul is concerned, I am neither fat nor skinny; therefore you are correct when you say that I am not very stout. Also, if the object of this journey and the path leading there were mine, there would be many troubles for me, but because they relate not to me but to my body, there is no trouble at all.





In Bhagavad-gītā it is stated that one who is advanced in spiritual knowledge is not disturbed by the pains and pleasures of the material body. The material body is completely separate from the spirit soul, and the pains and pleasures of the body are superfluous. The practice of austerity and penance is meant for understanding the distinction between the body and the soul and how the soul can be unaffected by the pleasures and pains of the body. Jaḍa Bharata was actually situated on the platform of self-realization. He was completely aloof from the bodily conception; therefore he immediately took this position and convinced the King that whatever contradictory things the King had said about his body did not actually apply to him as a spirit soul.





TEXT 10



sthaulyaṁ kārśyaṁ vyādhaya ādhayaś ca

kṣut tṛḍ bhayaṁ kalir icchā jarā ca

nidrā ratir manyur ahaṁ madaḥ śuco

dehena jātasya hi me na santi

SYNONYMS



sthaulyam-being very stout and strong; kārśyam-being skinny and weak; vyādhayaḥ-the pains of the body, such as disease; ādhayaḥ-the pains of the mind; ca-and; kṣut tṛṭ bhayam-hunger, thirst and fear; kaliḥ-quarrels between two persons; icchā-desires; jarā-old age; ca-and; nidrā-sleep; ratiḥ-attachment for sense gratification; manyuḥ-anger; aham-false identification (in the bodily concept of life); madaḥ-illusion; śucaḥ-lamentation; dehena-with this body; jātasya-of one who has taken birth; hi-certainly; me-of me; na-not; santi-exist.





Fatness, thinness, bodily and mental distress, thirst, hunger, fear, disagreement, desires for material happiness, old age, sleep, attachment for material possessions, anger, lamentation, illusion and identification of the body with the self are all transformations of the material covering of the spirit soul. A person absorbed in the material bodily conception is affected by these things, but I am free from all bodily conceptions. Consequently I am neither fat nor skinny nor anything else you have mentioned.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung: deha-smṛti nāhi yāra, saṁsāra-bandhana kāhāṅ tāra. One who is spiritually advanced has no connection with the body or with the bodily actions and reactions. When one comes to understand that he is not the body and therefore is neither fat nor skinny, one attains the topmost form of spiritual realization. When one is not spiritually realized, the bodily conception entangles one in the material world. At the present moment all human society is laboring under the bodily conception; therefore in the śāstras people in this age are referred to as dvipada-paśu, two-legged animals. No one can be happy in a civilization conducted by such animals. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to raise fallen human society to the status of spiritual understanding. It is not possible for everyone to become immediately self-realized like Jaḍa Bharata. However, as stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.18): naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā. By spreading the Bhāgavata principles, we can raise human society to the platform of perfection. When one is not affected by the bodily conceptions, one can advance to the Lord's devotional service.



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttamaśloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

[SB 1.2.18]





The more we advance our freedom from the bodily conception, the more we are fixed in devotional service, and the more we are happy and peaceful. In this regard, Śrīla Madhvācārya says that those who are too materially affected continue the bodily conception. Such persons are concerned with different bodily symptoms, whereas one freed from bodily conceptions lives without the body even in the material condition.





TEXT 11



jīvan-mṛtatvaṁ niyamena rājan

ādyantavad yad vikṛtasya dṛṣṭam

sva-svāmya-bhāvo dhruva īḍya yatra

tarhy ucyate 'sau vidhikṛtya-yogaḥ

SYNONYMS



jīvat-mṛtatvam-the quality of being dead while living; niyamena-by the laws of nature; rājan-O King; ādi-anta-vat-everything material has a beginning and an end; yat-because; vikṛtasya-of things that are transformed, such as the body; dṛṣṭam-is seen; sva-svāmya-bhāvaḥ-the condition of servanthood and mastership; dhruvaḥ-unchangeable; īḍya-O you who are worshiped; yatra-wherein; tarhi-then; ucyate-it is said; asau-that; vidhi-kṛtya-yogaḥ-fitness of order and duty.





My dear King, you have unnecessarily accused me of being dead though alive. In this regard, I can only say that this is the case everywhere because everything material has its beginning and end. As far as your thinking that you are the king and master and are thus trying to order me, this is also incorrect because these positions are temporary. Today you are a king and I am your servant, but tomorrow the position may be changed, and you may be my servant and I your master. These are temporary circumstances created by providence.





The bodily conception is the basic principle of suffering in material existence. In Kali-yuga especially, people are so uneducated that they cannot even understand that the body is changing at every moment and that the ultimate change is called death. In this life one may be a king, and in the next life one may be a dog, according to karma. The spirit soul is in a deep slumber caused by the force of material nature. He is put in one type of condition and again changed into another type. Without self-realization and knowledge, conditional life continues, and one falsely claims himself a king, a servant, a cat or a dog. These are simply different transformations brought about by the supreme arrangement. One should not be misled by such temporary bodily conceptions. Actually no one is master within the material world, for everyone is under the control of material nature, which is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the ultimate master. As explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya: the only master is Kṛṣṇa, and everyone else is His servant. Forgetfulness of our relationship with the Supreme Lord brings about our suffering in the material world.





TEXT 12



viśeṣa-buddher vivaraṁ manāk ca

paśyāma yan na vyavahārato 'nyat

ka īśvaras tatra kim īśitavyaṁ

tathāpi rājan karavāma kiṁ te

SYNONYMS



viśeṣa-buddheḥ-of the conception of the distinction between master and servant; vivaram-the scope; manāk-a little; ca-also; paśyāmaḥ-I see; yat-which; na-not; vyavahārataḥ-than the temporary usage or convention; anyat-other; kaḥ-who; īśvaraḥ-the master; tatra-in this; kim-who; īśitavyam-is to be controlled; tathāpi-nevertheless; rājan-O King (if you still think that you are master and I am servant); karavāma-I may do; kim-what; te-for you.





My dear King, if you still think that you are the King and that I am your servant, you should order me, and I should follow your order. I can then say that this differentiation is temporary, and it expands only from usage or convention. I do not see any other cause. In that case, who is the master, and who is the servant? Everyone is being forced by the laws of material nature; therefore no one is master, and no one is servant. Nonetheless, if you think that you are the master and that I am the servant, I shall accept this. Please order me. What can I do for you?





It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, ahaṁ mameti: [SB 5.5.8] One thinks, "I am this body, and in this bodily relationship he is my master, he is my servant, she is my wife, and he is my son." All these conceptions are temporary due to the inevitable change of body and the arrangement of material nature. We are gathered together like straws floating in the waves of an ocean, straws that are inevitably separated by the laws of the waves. In this material world, everyone is floating on the waves of the ocean of nescience. As described by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura:



(miche) māyāra vaśe, yāccha bhese',

khāccha hābuḍubu, bhāi

(jīva) kṛṣṇa-dāsa, ei viśvāsa,

karle ta' āra duḥkha nāi

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura states that all men and women are floating like straws on the waves of material nature. If they come to the understanding that they are the eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa, they will put an end to this floating condition. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.37): kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ. Due to the mode of passion, we desire many things, and according to our desire or anxiety and according to the order of the Supreme Lord, material nature gives us a certain type of body. For some time we play as master or servant, as actors play on the stage under someone else's direction. While we are in the human form, we should put an end to this nonsensical stage performance. We should come to our original constitutional position, known as Kṛṣṇa consciousness. At the present moment, the real master is material nature. Daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā (Bg. 7.14). Under the spell of material nature, we are becoming servants and masters, but if we agree to be controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His eternal servants, this temporary condition ceases to exist.





TEXT 13



unmatta-matta-jaḍavat sva-saṁsthāṁ

gatasya me vīra cikitsitena

arthaḥ kiyān bhavatā śikṣitena

stabdha-pramattasya ca piṣṭapeṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



unmatta-madness; matta-a drunkard; jaḍa-vat-like a dunce; sva-saṁsthām-situation in my original constitutional position; gatasya-of one who has obtained; me-of me; vīra-O King; cikitsitena-by your chastisement; arthaḥ-the meaning or purpose; kiyān-what; bhavatā-by you; śikṣitena-by being instructed; stabdha-dull; pramattasya-of a crazy man; ca-also; piṣṭa-peṣaḥ-like grinding flour.





My dear King, you have said, "You rascal, you dull, crazy fellow! I am going to chastise you, and then you will come to your senses." In this regard, let me say that although I live like a dull, deaf and dumb man, I am actually a self-realized person. What will you gain by punishing me? If your calculation is true and I am a madman, then your punishment will be like beating a dead horse. There will be no effect. When a madman is punished, he is not cured of his madness.





Everyone in this material world is working like a madman under certain impressions falsely acquired in the material condition. For example, a thief who knows that stealing is not good and who knows that it is followed with punishment by a king or by God, who has seen that thieves are arrested and punished by the police, nonetheless steals again and again. He is obsessed with the idea that by stealing he will be happy. This is a sign of madness. Despite repeated punishment, the thief cannot give up his stealing habit; therefore the punishment is useless.





TEXT 14



śrī-śuka uvāca

etāvad anuvāda-paribhāṣayā pratyudīrya muni-vara upaśama-śīla uparatānātmya-nimitta upabhogena karmārabdhaṁ vyapanayan rāja-yānam api tathovāha.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; etāvat-so much; anuvāda-paribhāṣayā-by explanatory repetition of words spoken previously by the King; pratyudīrya-giving replies one after another; muni-varaḥ-great sage Jaḍa Bharata; upaśama-śīlaḥ-who was calm and peaceful in character; uparata-ceased; anātmya-things not related to the soul; nimittaḥ-whose cause (ignorance) for identification with things not related to the soul; upabhogena-by accepting the consequences of his karma; karma-ārabdham-the resultant action now attained; vyapanayan-finishing; rāja-yānam-the palanquin of the King; api-again; tathā-as before; uvāha-continued to carry.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, when King Rahūgaṇa chastised the exalted devotee Jaḍa Bharata with harsh words, that peaceful, saintly person tolerated it all and replied properly. Nescience is due to the bodily conception, and Jaḍa Bharata was not affected by this false conception. Out of his natural humility, he never considered himself a great devotee, and he agreed to suffer the results of his past karma. Like an ordinary man, he thought that by carrying the palanquin, he was destroying the reactions of his past misdeeds. Thinking in this way, he began to carry the palanquin as before.





An exalted devotee of the Lord never thinks that he is a paramahaṁsa or a liberated person. He always remains a humble servant of the Lord. In all reverse conditions, he agrees to suffer the results of his past life. He never accuses the Lord of putting him into a distressed condition. These are the signs of an exalted devotee. Tat te 'nukampāṁ susamīkṣyamāṇaḥ. When suffering reversed conditions, the devotee always considers that the reverse conditions are the Lord's concessions. He is never angry with his master; he is always satisfied with the position his master offers. In any case, he continues performing his duty in devotional service. Such a person is guaranteed promotion back home, back to Godhead. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.8):



tat te 'nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk





"My dear Lord, one who constantly waits for Your causeless mercy to be bestowed upon him and who goes on suffering the reactions of his past misdeeds, offering You respectful obeisances from the core of his heart. is surely eligible for liberation, for it has become his rightful claim."





TEXT 15



sa cāpi pāṇḍaveya sindhu-sauvīra-patis tattva-jijñāsāyāṁ samyak-śraddhayādhikṛtādhikāras tad dhṛdaya-granthi-mocanaṁ dvija-vaca āśrutya bahu-yoga-grantha-sammataṁ tvarayāvaruhya śirasā pāda-mūlam upasṛtaḥ kṣamāpayan vigata-nṛpa-deva-smaya uvāca.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa); ca-also; api-indeed; pāṇḍaveya-O best of the Pāṇḍu dynasty (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); sindhu-sauvīra-patiḥ-the King of the states known as Sindhu and Sauvīra; tattva-jijñāsāyām-in the matter of inquiring about the Absolute Truth; samyak-śraddhayā-by faith consisting of complete control of the senses and the mind; adhikṛta-adhikāraḥ-who attained the proper qualification; tat-that; hṛdaya-granthi-the knot of false conceptions within the heart; mocanam-which eradicates; dvija-vacaḥ-the words of the brāhmaṇa (Jaḍa Bharata); āśrutya-hearing; bahu-yoga-grantha-sammatam-approved by all yogic processes and their scriptures; tvarayā-very hastily; avaruhya-getting down (from the palanquin); śirasā-by his head; pāda-mūlam-at the lotus feet; upasṛtaḥ-falling down flat to offer obeisances; kṣamāpayan-obtaining pardon for his offense; vigata-nṛpa-deva-smayaḥ-giving up the false pride of being the King and therefore being worshipable; uvāca-said.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O best of the Pāṇḍu dynasty [Mahārāja Parīkṣit], the King of the Sindhu and Sauvīra states [Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa] had great faith in discussions of the Absolute Truth. Being thus qualified, he heard from Jaḍa Bharata that philosophical presentation which is approved by all scriptures on the mystic yoga process and which slackens the knot in the heart. His material conception of himself as a king was thus destroyed. He immediately descended from his palanquin and fell flat on the ground with his head at the lotus feet of Jaḍa Bharata in such a way that he might be excused for his insulting words against the great brāhmaṇa. He then prayed as follows.





In Bhagavad-gītā (4.2) Lord Kṛṣṇa says:



evaṁ paramparā-prāptam

imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ

sa kāleneha mahatā

yogo naṣṭaḥ parantapa





"This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be lost."



Through the disciplic succession the royal order was on the same platform as great saintly persons (rāja-ṛṣis). Formerly they could understand the philosophy of life and knew how to train the citizens to come to the same standard. In other words, they knew how to deliver the citizens from the entanglement of birth and death. When Mahārāja Daśaratha ruled Ayodhyā, the great sage Viśvāmitra once came to him to take away Lord Rāmacandra and Lakṣmaṇa to the forest to kill a demon. When the saintly person Viśvāmitra came to the court of Mahārāja Daśaratha, the King, in order to receive the saintly person, asked him, aihiṣṭaṁ yat tat punar janma jayāya. He asked the sage whether everything was going on well in his endeavor to conquer the repetition of birth and death. The whole process of Vedic civilization is based on this point. We must know how to conquer the repetition of birth and death. Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa also knew the purpose of life; therefore when Jaḍa Bharata put the philosophy of life before him, he immediately appreciated it. This is the foundation of Vedic society. Learned scholars, brāhmaṇas, saintly persons and sages who were fully aware of the Vedic purpose advised the royal order how to benefit the general masses, and by their cooperation, the general masses were benefited. Therefore everything was successful. Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa attained this perfection of understanding the value of human life; therefore he regretted his insulting words to Jaḍa Bharata, and he immediately descended from his palanquin and fell down at the lotus feet of Jaḍa Bharata in order to be excused and to hear from him further about the values of life known as brahma jijñāsā (inquiry into the Absolute Truth). At the present moment, high government officials are ignorant of the values of life, and when saintly persons endeavor to broadcast the Vedic knowledge, the so-called executives do not offer their respectful obeisances but try to obstruct the spiritual propaganda. Thus one can say that the former kingly government was like heaven and that the present government is like hell.





TEXT 16



kas tvaṁ nigūḍhaś carasi dvijānāṁ

bibharṣi sūtraṁ katamo 'vadhūtaḥ

kasyāsi kutratya ihāpi kasmāt

kṣemāya naś ced asi nota śuklaḥ

SYNONYMS



kaḥ tvam-who are you; nigūḍhaḥ-very much covered; carasi-you move within this world; dvijānām-among the brāhmaṇas or saintly persons; bibharṣi-you also wear; sūtram-the sacred thread belonging to the first-class brāhmaṇas; katamaḥ-which; avadhūtaḥ-highly elevated person; kasya asi-whose are you (whose disciple or son are you); kutratyaḥ-from where; iha api-here in this place; kasmāt-for what purpose; kṣemāya-for the benefit; naḥ-of us; cet-if; asi-you are; na uta-or not; śuklaḥ-the personality of the pure mode of goodness (Kapiladeva).





King Rahūgaṇa said: O brāhmaṇa, you appear to be moving in this world very much covered and unknown to others. Who are you? Are you a learned brāhmaṇa and saintly person? I see that you are wearing a sacred thread. Are you one of those exalted, liberated saints such as Dattātreya and other highly advanced, learned scholars? May I ask whose disciple you are? Where do you live? Why have you come to this place? Is your mission in coming here to do good for us? Please let me know who you are.





Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa was very anxious to receive further enlightenment in Vedic knowledge because he could understand that Jaḍa Bharata belonged to a brāhmaṇa family either by disciplic succession or by birth in a brāhmaṇa dynasty. As stated in the Vedas: tad vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12]. Rahūgaṇa was accepting Jaḍa Bharata as a guru, but a guru must prove his position not only by wearing a sacred thread but by advancing knowledge in spiritual life. It is also significant that Rahūgaṇa asked Jaḍa Bharata which family he belonged to. There are two types of families-one according to dynasty and the other according to disciplic succession. In either way, one can be enlightened. The word śuklaḥ refers to a person in the mode of goodness. If one wants to receive spiritual knowledge, he must approach a bona fide brāhmaṇa-guru, either in the disciplic succession or in a family of learned brāhmaṇas.





TEXT 17



nāhaṁ viśaṅke sura-rāja-vajrān

na tryakṣa-śūlān na yamasya daṇḍāt

nāgny-arka-somānila-vittapāstrāc

chaṅke bhṛśaṁ brahma-kulāvamānāt

SYNONYMS



na-not; aham-I; viśaṅke-am afraid; sura-rāja-vajrāt-from the thunderbolt of the King of heaven, Indra; na-nor; tryakṣa-śūlāt-from the piercing trident of Lord Śiva; na-nor; yamasya-of the superintendent of death, Yamarāja; daṇḍāt-from the punishment; na-nor; agni-of fire; arka-of the scorching heat of the sun; soma-of the moon; anila-of the wind; vitta-pa-of the owner of riches, Kuvera, the treasurer of the heavenly planets; astrāt-from the weapons; śaṅke-I am afraid; bhṛśam-very much; brahma-kula-the group of the brāhmaṇas; avamānāt-from offending.





My dear sir, I am not at all afraid of the thunderbolt of King Indra, nor am I afraid of the serpentine, piercing trident of Lord Śiva. I do not care about the punishment of Yamarāja, the superintendent of death, nor am I afraid of fire, scorching sun, moon, wind, nor the weapons of Kuvera. Yet I am afraid of offending a brāhmaṇa. I am very much afraid of this.





When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was instructing Rūpa Gosvāmī at the Daśāśvamedha-ghāṭa in Prayāga, He pointed out very clearly the seriousness of offending a Vaiṣṇava. He compared the vaiṣṇava-aparādha to hātī mātā, a mad elephant. When a mad elephant enters a garden, it spoils all the fruits and flowers. Similarly, if one offends a Vaiṣṇava, he spoils all his spiritual assets. Offending a brāhmaṇa is very dangerous, and this was known to Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa. He therefore frankly admitted his fault. There are many dangerous things-thunderbolts, fire, Yamarāja's punishment, the punishment of Lord Śiva's trident, and so forth-but none is considered as serious as offending a brāhmaṇa like Jaḍa Bharata. Therefore Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa immediately descended from his palanquin and fell flat before the lotus feet of the brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata just to be excused.





TEXT 18



tad brūhy asaṅgo jaḍavan nigūḍha-

vijñāna-vīryo vicarasy apāraḥ

vacāṁsi yoga-grathitāni sādho

na naḥ kṣamante manasāpi bhettum

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; brūhi-please speak; asaṅgaḥ-who have no association with the material world; jaḍa-vat-appearing like a deaf and dumb man; nigūḍha-completely hidden; vijñāna-vīryaḥ-who have full knowledge of the spiritual science and are thus very powerful; vicarasi-you are moving; apāraḥ-who possess unlimited spiritual glories; vacāṁsi-the words uttered by you; yoga-grathitāni-bearing the complete meaning of mystic yoga; sādho-O great, saintly person; na-not; naḥ-of us; kṣamante-are able; manasā api-even by the mind; bhettum-to understand by analytical study.





My dear sir, it appears that the influence of your great spiritual knowledge is hidden. Factually you are bereft of all material association and fully absorbed in the thought of the Supreme. Consequently you are unlimitedly advanced in spiritual knowledge. Please tell me why you are wandering around like a dullard. O great, saintly person, you have spoken words approved by the yogic process, but it is not possible for us to understand what you have said. Therefore kindly explain it.





Saintly people like Jaḍa Bharata do not speak ordinary words. Whatever they say is approved by great yogīs and those advanced in spiritual life. That is the difference between ordinary people and saintly people. The listener must also be advanced to understand the words of such exalted, spiritually advanced people as Jaḍa Bharata. Bhagavad-gītā was spoken to Arjuna, not to others. Lord Kṛṣṇa especially selected Arjuna for instruction in spiritual knowledge because Arjuna happened to be a great devotee and confidential friend. Similarly, great personalities also speak to the advanced, not to śūdras, vaiśyas, women or unintelligent men. Sometimes it is very risky to give great philosophical instructions to ordinary people, but Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, for the benefit of the fallen souls of Kali-yuga, has given us a very nice instrument, the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. The general mass of people, although śūdras and less, can be purified by chanting this Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Then they can understand the exalted philosophical statements of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has therefore adopted the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra for the general masses. When people gradually become purified, they are instructed in the lessons of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Materialistic people like strī, śūdra and dvija-bandhu cannot understand words of spiritual advancement, yet one can take to the shelter of a Vaiṣṇava, for he knows the art of enlightening even śūdras in the highly elevated subject matter spoken in Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.





TEXT 19



ahaṁ ca yogeśvaram ātma-tattva-

vidāṁ munīnāṁ paramaṁ guruṁ vai

praṣṭuṁ pravṛttaḥ kim ihāraṇaṁ tat

sākṣād dhariṁ jñāna-kalāvatīrṇam

SYNONYMS



aham-I; ca-and; yoga-īśvaram-the master of all mystic power; ātma-tattva-vidām-of the learned scholars who are aware of the spiritual science; munīnām-of such saintly persons; paramam-the best; gurum-the preceptor; vai-indeed; praṣṭum-to inquire; pravṛttaḥ-engaged; kim-what; iha-in this world; araṇam-the most secure shelter; tat-that which; sākṣāt harim-directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jñāna-kalā-avatīrṇam-who has descended as the incarnation of complete knowledge in His plenary portion known as Kapiladeva.





I consider your good self the most exalted master of mystic power. You know the spiritual science perfectly well. You are the most exalted of all learned sages, and you have descended for the benefit of all human society. You have come to give spiritual knowledge, and you are a direct representative of Kapiladeva, the incarnation of God and the plenary portion of knowledge. I am therefore asking you, O spiritual master, what is the most secure shelter in this world?





As Kṛṣṇa confirms in Bhagavad-gītā:



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47)



Jaḍa Bharata was a perfect yogī. He was formerly the emperor Bharata Mahārāja, and he was now the most exalted personality among learned sages and the master of all mystic powers. Although Jaḍa Bharata was an ordinary living entity, he had inherited all the knowledge given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kapiladeva. He could therefore be taken directly as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his stanzas to the spiritual master: sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstraiḥ. An exalted personality like Jaḍa Bharata is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he fully represents the Lord by giving knowledge to others. Jaḍa Bharata is herein accepted as the direct representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he was imparting knowledge on behalf of the Supreme Lord. Therefore Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa concluded that it was appropriate to ask him about ātma-tattva, the spiritual science. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12]. This Vedic injunction is also confirmed herein. If anyone is at all interested in knowing the spiritual science (brahma jijñāsā), he must approach a guru like Jaḍa Bharata.





TEXT 20



sa vai bhavāḹ loka-nirīkṣaṇārtham

avyakta-liṅgo vicaraty api svit

yogeśvarāṇāṁ gatim andha-buddhiḥ

kathaṁ vicakṣīta gṛhānubandhaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead or His incarnation Kapiladeva; vai-indeed; bhavān-your good self; loka-nirīkṣaṇa-artham-just to study the characteristics of the people of this world; avyakta-liṅgaḥ-without manifesting your real identity; vicarati-are traveling in this world; api svit-whether; yoga-īśvarāṇām-of all the advanced yogīs; gatim-the characteristics or actual behavior; andha-buddhiḥ-who are illusioned and have become blind to spiritual knowledge; katham-how; vicakṣīta-may know; gṛha-anubandhaḥ-I who am bound by attachment to family life, or worldly life.





Is it not a fact that your good self is the direct representative of Kapiladeva, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? To examine people and see who is actually a human being and who is not, you have presented yourself to be a deaf and dumb person. Are you not moving this way upon the surface of the world? I am very attached to family life and worldly activities, and I am blind to spiritual knowledge. Nonetheless, I am now present before you and am seeking enlightenment from you. How can I advance in spiritual life?





Although Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa was playing the part of a king, he had been informed by Jaḍa Bharata that be was not a king nor was Jaḍa Bharata deaf and dumb. Such designations were simply coverings of the spirit soul. Everyone must come to this knowledge. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (2.13): dehino 'smin yathā dehe. Everyone is encased within the body. Since the body is never identical with the soul, the bodily activities are simply illusory. In the association of such a sādhu as Jaḍa Bharata, Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa came to the awareness that his activities as a royal authority were simply illusory phenomena. He therefore agreed to receive knowledge from Jaḍa Bharata, and that was the beginning of his perfection. Tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12]. A person like Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa, who was very inquisitive to know the value of life and the spiritual science, must approach a personality like Jaḍa Bharata. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam (Bhāg. 11.3.21). One must approach a guru like Jaḍa Bharata, a representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to inquire about the goal of human life.





TEXT 21



dṛṣṭaḥ śramaḥ karmata ātmano vai

bhartur gantur bhavataś cānumanye

yathāsatodānayanādy-abhāvāt

samūla iṣṭo vyavahāra-mārgaḥ

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭaḥ-it is experienced by everyone; śramaḥ-fatigue; karmataḥ-from acting in some way; ātmanaḥ-of the soul; vai-indeed; bhartuḥ-of one who is carrying the palanquin; gantuḥ-of one who is moving; bhavataḥ-of yourself; ca-and; anumanye-I guess like that; yathā-as much as; asatā-with something that is not an actual fact; uda-of water; ānayana-ādi-of the bringing and other such tasks; abhāvāt-from the absence; sa-mūlaḥ-based on evidence; iṣṭaḥ-respected; vyavahāra-mārgaḥ-phenomenon.





You have said, "I am not fatigued from labor." Although the soul is different from the body, there is fatigue because of bodily labor, and it appears to be the fatigue of the soul. When you are carrying the palanquin, there is certainly labor for the soul. This is my conjecture. You have also said that the external behavior exhibited between the master and the servant is not factual, but although in the phenomenal world it is not factual, the products of the phenomenal world can actually affect things. That is visible and experienced. As such, even though material activities are impermanent, they cannot be said to be untrue.





This is a discussion on impersonal Māyāvāda philosophy and the practical philosophy of Vaiṣṇavas. The Māyāvāda philosophy explains this phenomenal world to be false, but Vaiṣṇava philosophers do not agree. They know that the phenomenal world is a temporary manifestation, but it is not false. A dream that we see at night is certainly false, but a horrible dream certainly affects the person seeing it. The soul's fatigue is not factual, but as long as one is immersed in the illusory bodily conception, one is affected by such false dreams. When dreaming, it is not possible to avoid the actual facts, and the conditioned soul is forced to suffer due to his dream. A waterpot is made of earth and is temporary. Actually there is no waterpot; there is simply earth. However, as long as the waterpot can contain water, we can use it in that way. It cannot be said to be absolutely false.





TEXT 22



sthāly-agni-tāpāt payaso 'bhitāpas

tat-tāpatas taṇḍula-garbha-randhiḥ

dehendriyāsvāśaya-sannikarṣāt

tat-saṁsṛtiḥ puruṣasyānurodhāt

SYNONYMS



sthāli-on the cooking pot; agni-tāpāt-because of the heat of fire; payasaḥ-the milk put into the pot; abhitāpaḥ-becomes hot; tat-tāpataḥ-because of the milk's becoming hot; taṇḍula-garbha-randhiḥ-the center of the rice within the milk becomes cooked; deha-indriya-asvāśaya-the bodily senses; sannikarṣāt-from having connections with; tat-saṁsṛtiḥ-the experience of fatigue and other miseries; puruṣasya-of the soul; anurodhāt-from compliance due to being grossly attached to the body, senses and mind.





King Rahūgaṇa continued: My dear sir, you have said that designations like bodily fatness and thinness are not characteristics of the soul. That is incorrect because designations like pain and pleasure are certainly felt by the soul. You may put a pot of milk and rice within fire, and the milk and rice are automatically heated one after the other. Similarly, due to bodily pains and pleasures, the senses, mind and soul are affected. The soul cannot be completely detached from this conditioning.





This argument put forward by Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa is correct from the practical point of view, but it arises from an attachment to the bodily conception. It can be said that a person sitting in his car is certainly different from his car, but if there is damage to the car, the owner of the car, being overly attached to the car, feels pain. Actually, the damage done to the car has nothing to do with the car's proprietor, but because the proprietor has identified himself with the interest of the car, he feels pleasure and pain connected with it. This conditional state can be avoided if attachment is withdrawn from the car. Then the proprietor would not feel pleasure or pain if the car is damaged or whatever. Similarly, the soul has nothing to do with the body and the senses, but due to ignorance, he identifies himself with the body, and he feels pleasure and pain due to bodily pleasure and pain.





TEXT 23



śāstābhigoptā nṛpatiḥ prajānāṁ

yaḥ kiṅkaro vai na pinaṣṭi piṣṭam

sva-dharmam ārādhanam acyutasya

yad īhamāno vijahāty aghaugham

SYNONYMS



śāstā-the governor; abhigoptā-a well-wisher of the citizens as a father is the well-wisher of his children; nṛ-patiḥ-the king; prajānām-of the citizens; yaḥ-one who; kiṅkaraḥ-order carrier; vai-indeed; na-not; pinaṣṭi piṣṭam-grinds what is already ground; sva-dharmam-one's own occupational duty; ārādhanam-worshiping; acyutasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yat-which; īhamānaḥ-performing; vijahāti-they are released from; agha-ogham-all kinds of sinful activity and faulty action.





My dear sir, you have said that the relationship between the king and the subject or between the master and the servant are not eternal, but although such relationships are temporary, when a person takes the position of a king, his duty is to rule the citizens and punish those who are disobedient to the laws. By punishing them, he teaches the citizens to obey the laws of the state. Again, you have said that punishing a person who is deaf and dumb is like chewing the chewed or grinding the pulp; that is to say, there is no benefit in it. However, if one is engaged in his own occupational duty as ordered by the Supreme Lord, his sinful activities are certainly diminished. Therefore if one is engaged in his occupational duty by force, he benefits because he can vanquish all his sinful activities in that way.





This argument offered by Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa is certainly very effective. In his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.4), Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says, tasmāt kenāpy upāyena manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet: somehow or other, one should engage in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Actually every living being is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, but due to forgetfulness, a living entity engages himself as an eternal servant of māyā. As long as one is engaged in māyā's service, he cannot be happy. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement aims at engaging people in Lord Kṛṣṇa's service. That will help them become freed from all material contamination and sinful activity. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.10): vīta-rāga-bhaya-krodhāḥ. By becoming detached from material activities, we will be freed from fear and anger. By austerity, one becomes purified and eligible to return home, back to Godhead. The duty of the king is to rule his citizens in such a way that they can become Kṛṣṇa conscious. This would be very beneficial for everyone. Unfortunately the king or president engages people in sense gratification instead of the Lord's service, and such activities are certainly not beneficial for anyone. King Rahūgaṇa tried to engage Jaḍa Bharata in carrying the palanquin, which is a form of sense gratification for the King. However, if one is engaged as a palanquin carrier in the Lord's service, that is certainly beneficial. In this godless civilization, if a president engages people somehow or other in devotional service or the awakening of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he renders the very best service to the citizens.





TEXT 24



tan me bhavān nara-devābhimāna-

madena tucchīkṛta-sattamasya

kṛṣīṣṭa maitrī-dṛśam ārta-bandho

yathā tare sad-avadhyānam aṁhaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; me-unto me; bhavān-your good self; nara-deva-abhimāna-madena-by madness due to having the body of a king and thus being proud of it; tucchīkṛta-who has insulted; sat-tamasya-you who are the best among human beings; kṛṣīṣṭa-kindly show; maitrī-dṛśam-your causeless mercy upon me like a friend; ārta-bandho-O friend of all distressed persons; yathā-so; tare-I can get relief from; sat-avadhyānam-neglecting a great personality like you; aṁhaḥ-the sin.





Whatever you have spoken appears to me to be contradictory. O best friend of the distressed, I have committed a great offense by insulting you. I was puffed up with false prestige due to possessing the body of a king. For this I have certainly become an offender. Therefore I pray that you kindly glance at me with your causeless mercy. If you do so, I can be relieved from sinful activities brought about by insulting you.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said that by offending a Vaiṣṇava, one finishes all his spiritual activities. Offending a Vaiṣṇava is considered the mad elephant offense. A mad elephant can destroy an entire garden which has been developed with great labor. One may attain the topmost platform of devotional service, but somehow or other if he offends a Vaiṣṇava, the whole structure collapses. Unconsciously, King Rahūgaṇa offended Jaḍa Bharata, but due to his good sense, he asked to be excused. This is the process by which one can be relieved from a vaiṣṇava-aparādha. Kṛṣṇa is always very simple and by nature merciful. When one commits an offense at the feet of a Vaiṣṇava, one must immediately apologize to such a personality so that his spiritual advancement may not be hampered.





TEXT 25



na vikriyā viśva-suhṛt-sakhasya

sāmyena vītābhimates tavāpi

mahad-vimānāt sva-kṛtād dhi mādṛṅ

naṅkṣyaty adūrād api śūlapāṇiḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; vikriyā-material transformation; viśva-suhṛt-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is a friend to everyone; sakhasya-of you, the friend; sāmyena-because of your mental equilibrium; vīta-abhimateḥ-who has completely forsaken the bodily concept of life; tava-your; api-indeed; mahat-vimānāt-of insulting a great devotee; sva-kṛtāt-from my own activity; hi-certainly; mādṛk-a person like me; naṅkṣyati-will be destroyed; adūrāt-very soon; api-certainly; śūla-pāṇiḥ-even though as powerful as Lord Śiva (Śūlapāṇi).





O my dear lord, you are the friend of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the friend of all living entities. You are therefore equal to everyone, and you are free from the bodily conception. Although I have committed an offense by insulting you, I know that there is no loss or gain for you due to my insult. You are fixed in your determination, but I have committed an offense. Because of this, even though I may be as strong as Lord Śiva, I shall be vanquished without delay due to my offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava.





Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa was very intelligent and conscious of the inauspicious effects arising from insulting a Vaiṣṇava. He was therefore very anxious to be excused by Jaḍa Bharata. Following in the footsteps of Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa, everyone should be very cautious not to commit an offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava. Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura in the Caitanya-bhāgavata (Madhya 13) says:



śūlapāṇi-sama yadi bhakta-nindā kare

bhāgavata pramāṇa--tathāpi śīghra mare





hena vaiṣṇavere ninde sarvajña ha-i

se janera adhaḥ-pāta sarva-śāstre ka-i





"Even if one is as strong as Lord Śiva, who carries a trident in his hand, one will nonetheless fall down from his spiritual position if he tries to insult a Vaiṣṇava. That is the verdict of all Vedic scriptures." He also says this in Caitanya-bhāgavata (Madhya 22):



vaiṣṇavera nindā karibeka yāra gaṇa

tāra rakṣā sāmarthya nāhika kona jana





śūlapāṇi-sama yadi vaiṣṇavere ninde

tathāpiha nāśa yāya--kahe śāstra-vṛnde





ihā nā māniyā ye sujana nindā kare

janme janme se pāpiṣṭha daiva-doṣe mare





"One who blasphemes a Vaiṣṇava cannot be protected by anyone. Even if a person is as strong as Lord Śiva, if he blasphemes a Vaiṣṇava, he is sure to be destroyed. This is the verdict of all śāstras. If one does not care for the verdict of the śāstras and dares blaspheme a Vaiṣṇava, he suffers life after life because of this."



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "The Discussion Between Jaḍa Bharata and Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa."



Chapter Eleven



Jaḍa Bharata Instructs King Rahūgaṇa





In this chapter the brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata instructs Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa in detail. He tells the King: "You are not very experienced, yet you pose yourself as a learned person because you are very proud of your knowledge. Actually a person who is on the transcendental platform does not care for social behavior that sacrifices spiritual advancement. Social behavior comes within the jurisdiction of karma-kāṇḍa, material benefit. No one can spiritually advance by such activities. The conditioned soul is always overpowered by the modes of material nature. and consequently he is simply concerned with material benefits and auspicious and inauspicious material things. In other words, the mind, which is the leader of the senses, is absorbed in material activities life after life. Thus he continuously gets different types of bodies and suffers miserable material conditions. On the basis of mental concoction, social behavior has been formulated. If one's mind is absorbed in these activities, he certainly remains conditioned within the material world. According to different opinions, there are eleven or twelve mental activities, which can be transformed into hundreds and thousands. A person who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious is subjected to all these mental concoctions and is thus governed by the material energy. The living entity who is free from mental concoctions attains the platform of pure spirit soul, devoid of material contamination. There are two types of living entities-jīvātmā and Paramātmā, the individual soul and the Supreme Soul. That Supreme Soul in His ultimate realization is Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. He enters into everyone's heart and controls the living entity in his different activities. He is therefore the supreme shelter of all living entities. One can understand the Supreme Soul and one's position in relationship with Him when one is completely freed from the unwanted association of ordinary men. In this way one can become fit to cross the ocean of nescience. The cause of conditional Life is attachment to the external energy. One has to conquer these mental concoctions: unless one does so, he will never be freed from material anxieties. Although mental concoctions have no value, their influence is still very formidable. No one should neglect to control the mind. If one does, the mind becomes so powerful that one immediately forgets his real position. Forgetting that he is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa and that service to Kṛṣṇa is his only business, one is doomed by material nature to serve the objects of the senses. One should kill mental concoctions by the sword of service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotee [guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja]"





TEXT 1



brāhmaṇa uvāca

akovidaḥ kovida-vāda-vādān

vadasy atho nāti-vidāṁ variṣṭhaḥ

na sūrayo hi vyavahāram enaṁ

tattvāvamarśena sahāmananti

SYNONYMS



brāhmaṇaḥ uvāca-the brāhmaṇa said; akovidaḥ-without having experience; kovida-vāda-vādān-words used by experienced persons; vadasi-you are speaking; atho-therefore; na-not; ati-vidām-of those who are very experienced; variṣṭhaḥ-the most important; na-not; sūrayaḥ-such intelligent persons; hi-indeed; vyavahāram-mundane and social behavior; enam-this; tattva-of the truth; avamarśena-fine judgment by intelligence; saha-with; āmananti-discuss.





The brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata said: My dear King, although you are not at all experienced, you are trying to speak like a very experienced man. Consequently you cannot be considered an experienced person. An experienced person does not speak the way you are speaking about the relationship between a master and a servant or about material pains and pleasures. These are simply external activities. Any advanced, experienced man, considering the Absolute Truth, does not talk in this way.





Kṛṣṇa similarly chastised Arjuna. Aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase: "While speaking learned words, you are lamenting for what is not worthy of grief." (Bg. 2.11) Similarly, among people in general, 99.9 percent try to talk like experienced advisers, but they are actually devoid of spiritual knowledge and are therefore like inexperienced children speaking nonsensically. Consequently their words cannot be given any importance. One has to learn from Kṛṣṇa or His devotee. If one speaks on the basis of this experience-that is, on the basis of spiritual knowledge-one's words are valuable. At the present moment, the entire world is full of foolish people. Bhagavad-gītā describes these people as mūḍhas. They are trying to rule human society, but because they are devoid of spiritual knowledge, the entire world is in a chaotic condition. To be released from these miserable conditions, one has to become Kṛṣṇa conscious and take lessons from an exalted personality like Jaḍa Bharata, Lord Kṛṣṇa and Kapiladeva. That is the only way to solve the problems of material life.





TEXT 2



tathaiva rājann uru-gārhamedha-

vitāna-vidyoru-vijṛmbhiteṣu

na veda-vādeṣu hi tattva-vādaḥ

prāyeṇa śuddho nu cakāsti sādhuḥ

SYNONYMS



tathā-therefore; eva-indeed; rājan-O King; uru-gārha-medha-rituals related to material household life; vitāna-vidyā-in knowledge that expands; uru-very greatly; vijṛmbhiteṣu-among those interested; na-not; veda-vādeṣu-who speak the version of the Vedas; hi-indeed; tattva-vādaḥ-the spiritual science; prāyeṇa-almost always; śuddhaḥ-free from all contaminated activities; nu-indeed; cakāsti-appear; sādhuḥ-a person who is advanced in devotional service.





My dear King, talks of the relationship between the master and the servant, the king and the subject and so forth are simply talks about material activities. People interested in material activities, which are expounded in the Vedas, are intent on performing material sacrifices and placing faith in their material activities. For such people, spiritual advancement is definitely not manifest.





In this verse, two words are significant-veda-vāda and tattva-vāda. According to Bhagavad-gītā, those who are simply attached to the Vedas and who do not understand the purpose of the Vedas or the Vedānta-sūtra are called veda-vāda-ratāḥ.



yām imāṁ puṣpitāṁ vācaṁ

pravadanty avipaścitaḥ

veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha

nānyad astīti vādinaḥ





kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā

janma-karma-phala-pradām

kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ

bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati





"Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power and so forth. Being desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say there is nothing more than this." (Bg. 2.42–43)



The veda-vāda followers of the Vedas are generally inclined to karma-kāṇḍa, the performance of sacrifice according to the Vedic injunctions. They are thereby promoted to higher planetary systems. They generally practice the Cāturmāsya system. Akṣayyaṁ ha vai cāturmāsya-yājinaḥ sukṛtaṁ bhavati: one who performs the cāturmāsya-yajña becomes pious. By becoming pious, one may be promoted to the higher planetary systems (ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthāḥ). Some of the followers of the Vedas are attached to karma-kāṇḍa, the fruitive activities of the Vedas, in order to be promoted to a higher standard of life. Others argue that this is not the purpose of the Vedas. Tad yathaiveha karma jitaḥ lokaḥ kṣīyate evam evam utra puṇya jitaḥ lokaḥ kṣīyate. In this world someone may become very highly elevated by taking birth in an aristocratic family, by being well educated, beautiful or very rich. These are the gifts for pious activities enacted in the past life. However, these will be finished when the stock of pious activity is finished. If we become attached to pious activities, we may get these various worldly facilities in the next life and may take birth in the heavenly planets. But all this will eventually be finished. Kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti (Bg. 9.21): when the stock of pious activity is finished, one again has to come to this martya-loka. According to the Vedic injunctions, the performance of pious activity is not really the objective of the Vedas. The objective of the Vedas is explained in Bhagavad-gītā. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: [Bg. 15.15] the objective of the Vedas is to understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are veda-vādīs are not actually advanced in knowledge, and those who are followers of jñāna-kāṇḍa (Brahman understanding) are also not perfect. However, when one comes to the platform of upāsanā and accepts the worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes perfect (ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param). In the Vedas the worship of different demigods and the performance of sacrifice are certainly, mentioned, but such worship is inferior because the worshipers do not know that the ultimate goal is Viṣṇu (na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]). When one comes to the platform of viṣṇor ārādhanam, or bhakti-yoga, one has attained the perfection of life. Otherwise, as indicated in Bhagavad-gītā, one is not a tattva-vādī but a veda-vādī, a blind follower of the Vedic injunctions. A veda-vādī cannot be purified from material contamination unless he becomes a tattva-vādī, that is, one who knows tattva, the Absolute Truth. Tattva is also experienced in three features-brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate. Even after coming to the platform of understanding tattva, one must worship Bhagavān, Viṣṇu and His expansions, or one is not yet perfect. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate: [Bg. 7.19] after many births, one who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa. The conclusion is that unintelligent men with a poor fund of knowledge cannot understand Bhagavān, Brahman or Paramātmā, but after studying the Vedas and attaining the understanding of the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is supposed to be on the platform of perfect knowledge.





TEXT 3



na tasya tattva-grahaṇāya sākṣād

varīyasīr api vācaḥ samāsan

svapne niruktyā gṛhamedhi-saukhyaṁ

na yasya heyānumitaṁ svayaṁ syāt

SYNONYMS



na-not; tasya-of him (a student studying the Vedas); tattva-grahaṇāya-for accepting the real purpose of Vedic knowledge; sākṣāt-directly; varīyasīḥ-very exalted; api-although; vācaḥ-words of the Vedas; samāsan-sufficiently became; svapne-in a dream; niruktyā-by example; gṛha-medhi-saukhyam-happiness within this material world; na-not; yasya-of him who; heya-anumitam-concluded to be inferior; svayam-automatically; syāt-become.





A dream becomes automatically known to a person as false and immaterial, and similarly one eventually realizes that material happiness in this life or the next, on this planet or a higher planet, is insignificant. When one realizes this, the Vedas, although an excellent source, are insufficient to bring about direct knowledge of the truth.





In Bhagavad-gītā (2.45), Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna to become transcendental to the material activities impelled by the three material modes of nature (traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna). The purpose of Vedic study is to transcend the activities of the three modes of material nature. Of course in the material world the mode of goodness is accepted as the best, and one can be promoted to the higher planetary systems by being on the sattva-guṇa platform. However, that is not perfection. One must come to the conclusion that even the sattva-guṇa platform is also not good. One may dream that he has become a king with a good family, wife and children, but immediately at the end of that dream he comes to the conclusion that it is false. Similarly, all kinds of material happiness are undesirable for a person who wants spiritual salvation. If a person does not come to the conclusion that he has nothing to do with any kind of material happiness, he cannot come to the platform of understanding the Absolute Truth, or tattva jñāna. Karmīs, jñānīs and yogīs are after some material elevation. The karmīs work hard day and night for some bodily comfort, and the jñānīs simply speculate about how to get out of the entanglement of karma and merge into the Brahman effulgence. The yogīs are very much addicted to the acquisition of material perfection and magical powers. All of them are trying to be materially perfect, but a devotee very easily comes to the platform of nirguṇa in devotional service, and consequently for the devotee the results of karma, jñāna and yoga become very insignificant. Therefore only the devotee is on the platform of tattva jñāna, not the others. Of course the jñānī's position is better than that of the karmī but that position is also insufficient. The jñānī must actually become liberated, and after liberation he may be situated in devotional service (mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām [Bg. 18.54]).





TEXT 4



yāvan mano rajasā pūruṣasya

sattvena vā tamasā vānuruddham

cetobhir ākūtibhir ātanoti

niraṅkuśaṁ kuśalaṁ cetaraṁ vā

SYNONYMS



yāvat-as long as; manaḥ-the mind; rajasā-by the mode of passion; pūruṣasya-of the living entity; sattvena-by the mode of goodness; vā-or; tamasā-by the mode of darkness; vā-or; anuruddham-controlled; cetobhiḥ-by the knowledge-acquiring senses; ākūtibhiḥ-by the senses of action; ātanoti-expands; niraṅkuśam-independent like an elephant not controlled by a trident; kuśalam-auspiciousness; ca-also; itaram-other than auspiciousness, sinful activities; vā-or.





As long as the mind of the living entity is contaminated by the three modes of material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), his mind is exactly like an independent, uncontrolled elephant. It simply expands its jurisdiction of pious and impious activities by using the senses. The result is that the living entity remains in the material world to enjoy and suffer pleasures and pains due to material activity.





In Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that material pious and impious activities are both opposed to the principle of devotional service. Devotional service means mukti, freedom from material entanglement, but pious and impious activities result in entanglement within this material world. If the mind is captivated by the pious and impious activities mentioned in the Vedas, one remains eternally in darkness; one cannot attain the absolute platform. To change the consciousness from ignorance to passion or from passion to goodness does not really solve the problem. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (14.26), sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate. One must come to the transcendental platform; otherwise life's mission is never fulfilled.





TEXT 5



sa vāsanātmā viṣayoparakto

guṇa-pravāho vikṛtaḥ ṣoḍaśātmā

bibhrat pṛthaṅ-nāmabhi rūpa-bhedam

antar-bahiṣṭvaṁ ca purais tanoti

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that; vāsanā-endowed with many desires; ātmā-the mind; viṣaya-uparaktaḥ-attached to material happiness, sense gratification; guṇa-pravāhaḥ-driven by the force of either sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa; vikṛtaḥ-transformed by lust and so on; ṣoḍaśa-ātmā-the chief of the sixteen material elements (the five gross elements, the ten senses and the mind); bibhrat-wandering; pṛthak-nāmabhiḥ-with separate names; rūpa-bhedam-assuming different forms; antaḥ-bahiṣṭvam-the quality of being first-class or last-class; ca-and; puraiḥ-with different bodily forms; tanoti-manifests.





Because the mind is absorbed in desires for pious and impious activities, it is naturally subjected to the transformations of lust and anger. In this way, it becomes attracted to material sense enjoyment. In other words, the mind is conducted by the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. There are eleven senses and five material elements, and out of these sixteen items, the mind is the chief. Therefore the mind brings about birth in different types of bodies among demigods, human beings, animals and birds. When the mind is situated in a higher or lower position, it accepts a higher or lower material body.





Transmigration among the 8,400,000 species is due to the mind's being polluted by certain material qualities. Due to the mind, the soul is subjected to pious and impious activities. The continuation of material existence is like the waves of material nature. In this regard. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, māyāra vaśe, yāccha bhese', khāccha hābuḍubu, bhāi: "My dear brother, the spirit soul is completely under the control of māyā, and you are being carried away by its waves." This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā:



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself the doer of activities, which are in actuality carried out by nature." (Bg. 3.27)



Material existence means being fully controlled by material nature. The mind is the center for accepting the dictations of material nature. In this way the living entity is carried away in different types of bodies continuously, millennium after millennium.



kṛṣṇa bhuli' sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha





(Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 20.117)



Due to the living entity's forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa, one is bound by the laws of material nature.





TEXT 6



duḥkhaṁ sukhaṁ vyatiriktaṁ ca tīvraṁ

kālopapannaṁ phalam āvyanakti

āliṅgya māyā-racitāntarātmā

sva-dehinaṁ saṁsṛti-cakra-kūṭaḥ

SYNONYMS



duḥkham-unhappiness due to impious activities; sukham-happiness due to pious activities; vyatiriktam-illusion; ca-also; tīvram-very severe; kāla-upapannam-obtained in the course of time; phalam-the resultant action; āvyanakti-creates; āliṅgya-embracing; māyā-racita-created by material nature; antaḥ-ātmā-the mind; sva-dehinam-the living being himself; saṁsṛti-of the actions and reactions of material existence; cakra-kūṭaḥ-which deceives the living entity into the wheel.





The materialistic mind covering the living entity's soul carries it to different species of life. This is called continued material existence. Due to the mind, the living entity suffers or enjoys material distress and happiness. Being thus illusioned, the mind further creates pious and impious activities and their karma, and thus the soul becomes conditioned.





Mental activities under the influence of material nature cause happiness and distress within the material world. Being covered by illusion, the living entity eternally continues conditioned life under different designations. Such living entities are known as nitya-baddha, eternally' conditioned. On the whole, the mind is the cause of conditioned life; therefore the entire yogic process is meant to control the mind and the senses. If the mind is controlled, the senses are automatically controlled, and therefore the soul is saved from the reactions of pious and impious activity. If the mind is engaged at the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ), the senses are automatically engaged in the Lord's service. When the mind and senses are engaged in devotional service, the living entity naturally becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. As soon as one always thinks of Kṛṣṇa, he becomes a perfect yogī, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntarātmanā [Bg. 6.47]). This antarātmā, the mind, is conditioned by material nature. As stated here, māyā-racitāntarātmā sva-dehinaṁ saṁsṛti-cakra-kūṭaḥ: the mind, being most powerful, covers the living entity and puts him in the waves of material existence.





TEXT 7



tāvān ayaṁ vyavahāraḥ sadāviḥ

kṣetrajña-sākṣyo bhavati sthūla-sūkṣmaḥ

tasmān mano liṅgam ado vadanti

guṇāguṇatvasya parāvarasya

SYNONYMS



tāvān-until that time; ayam-this; vyavahāraḥ-the artificial designations (being fat or skinny, or belonging to the demigods or human beings); sadā-always; āviḥ-manifesting; kṣetra-jña-of the Living entity; sākṣyaḥ-testimony; bhavati-is; sthūla-sūkṣmaḥ-fat and skinny; tasmāt-therefore; manaḥ-the mind; liṅgam-the cause; adaḥ-this; vadanti-they say; guṇa-aguṇatvasya-of being absorbed in material qualities or devoid of material qualities; para-avarasya-and of lower and higher conditions of life.





The mind makes the living entity within this material world wander through different species of life, and thus the living entity experiences mundane affairs in different forms as a human being, demigod, fat person, skinny person and so forth. Learned scholars say that bodily appearance, bondage and liberation are caused by the mind.





Just as the mind is the cause of bondage, it can also be the cause of liberation. The mind is described here as para-avara, para means transcendental, and avara means material. When the mind is engaged in the Lord's service (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ), it is called para, transcendental. When the mind is engaged in material sense gratification, it is called avara, or material. At the present moment, in our conditioned state, our mind is fully absorbed in material sense gratification, but it can be purified and brought to its original Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the process of devotional service. We have often given the example of Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane. The mind must be controlled in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The tongue can be utilized to spread the message of Kṛṣṇa and glorify the Lord or take prasāda, the remnants of food offered to Kṛṣṇa. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau: when one utilizes the tongue in the service of the Lord, the other senses can become purified. As stated in the Nārada-pañcarātra, sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] when the mind and senses are purified, one's total existence is purified, and one's designations are also purified. One no longer considers himself a human being, a demigod, cat, dog, Hindu, Muslim and so forth. When the senses and mind are purified and one is fully engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, one can be liberated and return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 8



guṇānuraktaṁ vyasanāya jantoḥ

kṣemāya nairguṇyam atho manaḥ syāt

yathā pradīpo ghṛta-vartim aśnan

śikhāḥ sadhūmā bhajati hy anyadā svam

padaṁ tathā guṇa-karmānubaddhaṁ

vṛttīr manaḥ śrayate 'nyatra tattvam

SYNONYMS



guṇa-anuraktam-being attached to the material modes of nature; vyasanāya-for the conditioning in material existence; jantoḥ-of the living entity; kṣemāya-for the ultimate welfare; nairguṇyam-being unaffected by the material modes of nature; atho-thus; manaḥ-the mind; syāt-becomes; yathā-as much as; pradīpaḥ-a lamp; ghṛta-vartim-a wick within clarified butter; aśnan-burning; śikhāḥ-the flame; sadhūmāḥ-with smoke; bhajati-enjoys; hi-certainly; anyadā-otherwise; svam-its own original; padam-position; tathā-so; guṇa-karma-anubaddham-bound by the modes of nature and the reactions of material activities; vṛttīḥ-various engagements; manaḥ-the mind; śrayate-takes shelter of; anyatra-otherwise; tattvam-its original condition.





When the living entity's mind becomes absorbed in the sense gratification of the material world, it brings about his conditioned life and suffering within the material situation. However, when the mind becomes unattached to material enjoyment, it becomes the cause of liberation. When the flame in a lamp burns the wick improperly, the lamp is blackened, but when the lamp is filled with ghee and is burning properly, there is bright illumination. Similarly, when the mind is absorbed in material sense gratification, it causes suffering, and when detached from material sense gratification, it brings about the original brightness of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





It is therefore concluded that the mind is the cause of material existence and liberation also. Everyone is suffering in this material world because of the mind; it is therefore proper to train the mind or to cleanse the mind from material attachment and engage it fully in the Lord's service. This is called spiritual engagement. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā:



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26)



We should engage the mind fully in Kṛṣṇa conscious activities. Then it will be the cause of our liberation, for our returning home. back to Godhead. However, if we keep the mind engaged in material activities for sense gratification, it will cause continuous bondage and will make us remain in this material world in different bodies, suffering the consequences of our different actions.





TEXT 9



ekādaśāsan manaso hi vṛttaya

ākūtayaḥ pañca dhiyo 'bhimānaḥ

mātrāṇi karmāṇi puraṁ ca tāsāṁ

vadanti haikādaśa vīra bhūmīḥ

SYNONYMS



ekādaśa-eleven; āsan-there are; manasaḥ-of the mind; hi-certainly; vṛttayaḥ-activities; ākūtayaḥ-senses of action; pañca-five; dhiyaḥ-senses for gathering knowledge; abhimānaḥ-the false ego; mātrāṇi-different sense objects; karmāṇi-different material activities; puram ca-and the body, society, nation, family or place of nativity; tāsām-of those functions; vadanti-they say; ha-oh; ekādaśa-eleven; vīra-O hero; bhūmīḥ-fields of activity.





There are five working senses and five knowledge-acquiring senses. There is also the false ego. In this way, there are eleven items for the mind's functions. O hero, the objects of the senses [such as sound and touch], the organic activities [such as evacuation] and the different types of bodies, society, friendship and personality are considered by learned scholars the fields of activity for the functions of the mind.





The mind is the controller of the five knowledge-acquiring senses and the five working senses. Each sense has its particular field of activity. In all cases, the mind is the controller or owner. By the false ego one thinks oneself the body and thinks in terms of "my body, my house, my family, my society, my nation" and so on. These false identifications are due to the expansions of the false ego. Thus one thinks that be is this or that. Thus the living entity becomes entangled in material existence.





TEXT 10



gandhākṛti-sparśa-rasa-śravāṁsi

visarga-raty-arty-abhijalpa-śilpāḥ

ekādaśaṁ svīkaraṇaṁ mameti

śayyām ahaṁ dvādaśam eka āhuḥ

SYNONYMS



gandha-smell; ākṛti-form; sparśa-touch; rasa-taste; śravāṁsi-and sound; visarga-evacuating; rati-sexual intercourse; arti-movement; abhijalpa-speaking; śilpāḥ-grasping or releasing; ekādaśam-eleventh; svīkaraṇam-accepting as; mama-mine; iti-thus; śayyām-this body; aham-I; dvādaśam-twelfth; eke-some; āhuḥ-have said.





Sound, touch, form, taste and smell are the objects of the five knowledge-acquiring senses. Speech, touch, movement, evacuation and sexual intercourse are the objects of the working senses. Besides this, there is another conception by which one thinks, "This is my body, this is my society, this is my family, this is my nation," and so forth. This eleventh function, that of the mind, is called the false ego. According to some philosophers, this is the twelfth function, and its field of activity is the body.





There are different objects for the eleven items. Through the nose we can smell, by the eyes we can see, by the ears we can hear, and in this way we gather knowledge. Similarly, there are the karmendriyas, the working senses-the hands, legs, genitals, rectum, mouth and so forth. When the false ego expands, it makes one think. "This is my body, family, society, country," etc.





TEXT 11



dravya-svabhāvāśaya-karma-kālair

ekādaśāmī manaso vikārāḥ

sahasraśaḥ śataśaḥ koṭiśaś ca

kṣetrajñato na mitho na svataḥ syuḥ

SYNONYMS



dravya-by physical objects; sva-bhāva-by nature as the cause of development; āśaya-by culture; karma-by predestined resultant actions; kālaiḥ-by time; ekādaśa-eleven; amī-all these; manasaḥ-of the mind; vikārāḥ-transformations; sahasraśaḥ-in thousands; śataśaḥ-in hundreds; koṭiśaḥ ca-and in millions; kṣetra-jñataḥ-from the original Supreme Personality of Godhead; na-not; mithaḥ-one another; na-nor; svataḥ-from themselves; syuḥ-are.





The physical elements, nature, the original cause, culture, destiny and the time element are all material causes. Agitated by these material causes, the eleven functions transform into hundreds of functions and then into thousands and then into millions. But all these transformations do not take place automatically by mutual combination. Rather, they are under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





One should not think that all the interactions of the physical elements, gross and subtle, that cause the transformation of mind and consciousness are working independently. They are under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), Kṛṣṇa says that the Lord is situated in everyone's heart (sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca). As mentioned herein, Supersoul (kṣetrajña) is directing everything. The living entity is also kṣetrajña, but the supreme kṣetrajña is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the witness and order giver. Under His direction, everything takes place. The different inclinations of the living entity are created by his own nature or his expectations, and he is trained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the agency of material nature. The body, nature and the physical elements are under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They do not function automatically. Nature is neither independent nor automatic. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is behind nature.



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again." (Bg. 9.10)





TEXT 12



kṣetrajña etā manaso vibhūtīr

jīvasya māyā-racitasya nityāḥ

āvirhitāḥ kvāpi tirohitāś ca

śuddho vicaṣṭe hy aviśuddha-kartuḥ

SYNONYMS



kṣetra-jñaḥ-the individual soul; etāḥ-all these; manasaḥ-of the mind; vibhūtīḥ-different activities; jīvasya-of the living entity; māyā-racitasya-created by the external, material energy; nityāḥ-from time immemorial; āvirhitāḥ-sometimes manifested; kvāpi-somewhere; tirohitāḥ ca-and not manifested; śuddhaḥ-purified; vicaṣṭe-sees this; hi-certainly; aviśuddha-unpurified; kartuḥ-of the doer.





The individual soul bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousness has many ideas and activities created in the mind by the external energy. They have been existing from time immemorial. Sometimes they are manifest in the wakening state and in the dream state, but during deep sleep [unconsciousness] or trance, they disappear. A person who is liberated in this life [jīvan-mukta] can see all these things vividly.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (13.3), kṣetrajñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata. There are two kinds of kṣetrajña, or living beings. One is the individual living being, and the other is the supreme living being. The ordinary living being knows about his body to some extent, but the Supreme, Paramātmā, knows the condition of all bodies. The individual living being is localized, and the Supreme. Paramātmā. is all-pervading. In this śloka the word kṣetrajña refers to an ordinary living being, not the supreme living being. This ordinary living being is of two kinds-nitya-baddha or nitya-mukta. One is eternally conditioned and the other eternally liberated. The eternally liberated living being; are in the Vaikuṇṭha jagat, the spiritual world, and they never fall into the material world. Those in the material world are conditioned souls, nitya-baddha. The nitya-baddhas can become liberated by controlling the mind because the cause of conditioned life is the mind. When the mind is trained and the soul is not under the mind's control, the soul can be liberated even in this material world. When it is liberated, one is called jīvan-mukta. A jīvan-mukta knows how he has become conditioned; therefore he tries to purify himself and return home, back to Godhead. The eternally conditioned soul is eternally conditioned because he is controlled by the mind. The conditioned state and liberated state are compared to the sleeping, unconscious state and the awakened state. Those who are sleeping and unconscious are eternally conditioned, but those who are awake understand that they are eternally part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore even in this material world, they engage in Kṛṣṇa's service. As confirmed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī: īhā yasya harer dāsye. If one takes to Kṛṣṇa's service, he is liberated, even though he appears to be a conditioned soul within the material world. Jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate. In any condition, one is to be considered liberated if his only business is to serve Kṛṣṇa.





TEXTS 13–14



kṣetrajña ātmā puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ

sākṣāt svayaṁ jyotir ajaḥ pareśaḥ

nārāyaṇo bhagavān vāsudevaḥ

sva-māyayātmany avadhīyamānaḥ

yathānilaḥ sthāvara-jaṅgamānām



ātma-svarūpeṇa niviṣṭa īśet

evaṁ paro bhagavān vāsudevaḥ

kṣetrajña ātmedam anupraviṣṭaḥ

SYNONYMS



kṣetra-jñaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmā-all-pervading, present everywhere; puruṣaḥ-the unrestricted controller, who has unlimited power; purāṇaḥ-the original; sākṣāt-perceivable by hearing from the authorities and by direct perception; svayam-personal; jyotiḥ-manifesting His bodily rays (the Brahman effulgence); ajaḥ-never born; pareśaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nārāyaṇaḥ-the resting place of all living entities; bhagavān-the Personality of Godhead with six full opulences; vāsudevaḥ-the shelter of everything, manifested and nonmanifest; sva-māyayā-by His own potency; ātmani-in His own self, or in the ordinary living entities; avadhīyamānaḥ-existing as the controller; yathā-as much as; anilaḥ-the air; sthāvara-of nonmoving living entities; jaṅgamānām-and of the moving living entities; ātma-svarūpeṇa-by His expansion as the Supersoul; niviṣṭaḥ-entered; īśet-controls; evam-thus; paraḥ-transcendental; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevaḥ-the shelter of everything; kṣetra-jñaḥ-known as kṣetrajña; ātmā-the vital force; idam-this material world; anupraviṣṭaḥ-entered within.





There are two kinds of kṣetrajña-the living entity, as explained above, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is explained as follows. He is the all-pervading cause of creation. He is full in Himself and is not dependent on others. He is perceived by hearing and direct perception. He is self-effulgent and does not experience birth, death, old age or disease. He is the controller of all the demigods, beginning with Lord Brahmā. He is called Nārāyaṇa, and He is the shelter of living entities after the annihilation of this material world. He is full of all opulences, and He is the resting place of everything material. He is therefore known as Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By His own potency, He is present within the hearts of all living entities, just as the air or vital force is within the bodies of all beings, moving and nonmoving. In this way He controls the body. In His partial feature, the Supreme Personality of Godhead enters all bodies and controls them.





This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15). Sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca. Every living being is controlled by the supreme living being, Paramātmā, who resides within everyone's heart. He is the puruṣa, the puruṣa-avatāra, who creates this material world. The first puruṣa-avatāra is Mahā-Viṣṇu, and that Mahā-Viṣṇu is the plenary portion of the plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa's first expansion is Baladeva, and His next expansions are Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Aniruddha and Pradyumna. Vāsudeva is the original cause of the brahmajyoti, and the brahmajyoti is the expansion of the rays of the body of Vāsudeva.



yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which displays the varieties of countless planets, with their different opulences, in millions and millions of universes." (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.40) The Supreme Personality of Godhead is thus described in Bhagavad-gītā:



mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ

jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ





"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them." (Bg. 9.4)



This is the position of the plenary expansions of Kṛṣṇa as the all-pervading Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha.





TEXT 15



na yāvad etāṁ tanu-bhṛn narendra

vidhūya māyāṁ vayunodayena

vimukta-saṅgo jita-ṣaṭ-sapatno

vedātma-tattvaṁ bhramatīha tāvat

SYNONYMS



na-not; yāvat-as long as; etām-this; tanu-bhṛt-one who has accepted a material body; narendra-O King; vidhūya māyām-washing away the infection accumulated because of contamination by the material world; vayunā udayena-by awakening of transcendental knowledge due to good association and study of the Vedic literatures; vimukta-saṅgaḥ-free from all material association; jita-ṣaṭ-sapatnaḥ-conquering the six enemies (the five knowledge-acquiring senses and the mind); veda-knows; ātma-tattvam-spiritual truth; bhramati-he wanders; iha-in this material world; tāvat-until that time.





My dear King Rahūgaṇa, as long as the conditioned soul accepts the material body and is not freed from the contamination of material enjoyment, and as long as he does not conquer his six enemies and come to the platform of self-realization by awakening his spiritual knowledge, he has to wander among different places and different species of life in this material world.





When one's mind is absorbed in the material conception, he thinks that he belongs to a particular nation, family, country or creed. These are all called upādhis, designations, and one has to become freed from them (sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). As long as one is not freed, he has to continue conditioned life in material existence. The human form of life is meant for cleansing away these misconceptions. If this is not done, one has to repeat the cycle of birth and death and thus suffer all material conditions.





TEXT 16



na yāvad etan mana ātma-liṅgaṁ

saṁsāra-tāpāvapanaṁ janasya

yac choka-mohāmaya-rāga-lobha-

vairānubandhaṁ mamatāṁ vidhatte

SYNONYMS



na-not; yāvat-as long as; etat-this; manaḥ-mind; ātma-liṅgam-existing as the false designation of the soul; saṁsāra-tāpa-of the miseries of this material world; āvapanam-the growing ground; janasya-of the living being; yat-which; śoka-of lamentation; moha-of illusion; āmaya-of disease; rāga-of attachment; lobha-of greed; vaira-of enmity; anubandham-the consequence; mamatām-the sense of ownership; vidhatte-gives.





The soul's designation, the mind, is the cause of all tribulations in the material world. As long as this fact is unknown to the conditioned living entity, he has to accept the miserable condition of the material body and wander within this universe in different positions. Because the mind is affected by disease, lamentation, illusion, attachment, greed and enmity, it creates bondage and a false sense of intimacy within this material world.





The mind is the cause of both material bondage and liberation. The impure mind thinks, "I am this body." The pure mind knows that he is not the material body; therefore the mind is considered to be the root of all material designations. Until the living entity is aloof from the association and contaminations of this material world, the mind will be absorbed in such material things as birth, death, disease, illusion, attachment, greed and enmity. In this way the living entity is conditioned, and he suffers material miseries.





TEXT 17



bhrātṛvyam enaṁ tad adabhra-vīryam

upekṣayādhyedhitam apramattaḥ

guror hareś caraṇopāsanāstro

jahi vyalīkaṁ svayam ātma-moṣam

SYNONYMS



bhrātṛvyam-the formidable enemy; enam-this mind; tat-that; adabhra-vīryam-very, very powerful; upekṣayā-by neglecting; adhyedhitam-unnecessarily increased in power; apramattaḥ-one who is without illusion; guroḥ-of the spiritual master; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; caraṇa-of the lotus feet; upāsanā-astraḥ-applying the weapon of worshiping; jahi-conquer; vyalīkam-false; svayam-personally; ātma-moṣam-which covers the constitutional position of the living entity.





This uncontrolled mind is the greatest enemy of the living entity. If one neglects it or gives it a chance, it will grow more and more powerful and will become victorious. Although it is not factual, it is very strong. It covers the constitutional position of the soul. O King, please try to conquer this mind by the weapon of service to the lotus feet of the spiritual master and of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Do this with great care.





There is one easy weapon with which the mind can be conquered-neglect. The mind is always telling us to do this or that; therefore we should be very expert in disobeying the mind's orders. Gradually the mind should be trained to obey the orders of the soul. It is not that one should obey the orders of the mind. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura used to say that to control the mind one should beat it with shoes many times just after awakening and again before going to sleep. In this way one can control the mind. This is the instruction of all the śāstras. If one does not do so, one is doomed to follow the dictations of the mind. Another bona fide process is to abide strictly by the orders of the spiritual master and engage in the Lord's service. Then the mind will be automatically controlled. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja





When one receives the seed of devotional service by the mercy of the guru and Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one's real life begins. If one abides by the orders of the spiritual master, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa he is freed from service to the mind.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eleventh Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Jaḍa Bharata Instructs King Rahūgaṇa."



Chapter Twelve



Conversation Between Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa and Jaḍa Bharata





Because Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa was still doubtful about his enlightenment, he asked the brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata to repeat his instructions and clarify ideas he could not understand. In this chapter, Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa offers his respectful obeisances to Jaḍa Bharata, who was concealing his real position. The King could understand by his speech how exalted and advanced he was in spiritual knowledge. He very much regretted his offense against him. Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa was bitten by the serpent of ignorance, but was cured by the nectarean words of Jaḍa Bharata. Later, because he was doubtful about the subjects discussed, he made further inquiries, one question after another. First he wanted to be released from the offense he had committed at the lotus feet of Jaḍa Bharata.





Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa was somewhat unhappy at not being able to grasp Jaḍa Bharata's instructions, which were full of meaning that could not be understood by a materialistic person. Therefore Jaḍa Bharata repeated his instructions more clearly. He said that on the surface of the globe all living entities, moving and unmoving, were but transformations of the earth in different ways. The King was very proud of his king's body, but that body was simply another transformation of the earth. Out of his false prestige, the King was misbehaving toward the palanquin carrier. as a master toward a servant, and he was actually very unkind to other living entities. Consequently King Rahūgaṇa was unfit to give protection to the citizens, and because he was ignorant, he was unfit to be counted among advanced philosophers. Everything in the material world is but a transformation of the earth, although things have different names according to their transformations. Actually the varieties are one and the same, and ultimately all these varieties are vanquished into atoms. Nothing is permanent in this material world. The variety of things and their distinctions are simply mental concoctions. The Absolute Truth is beyond illusion and is manifest in three features-impersonal Brahman, localized Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, called Vāsudeva by His devotees. Unless one is blessed with the dust from the feet of a pure devotee on his head, one cannot possibly become a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Jaḍa Bharata also told about his own previous birth and informed the King that by the grace of the Lord he still remembered all the incidents of his past life. Due to the activities of his past life, Jaḍa Bharata was being very cautious and was therefore assuming the characteristics of a deaf and dumb man to avoid mingling with the material world. Association with the material modes of nature is very powerful. The bad association of materialistic men can be avoided only in the association of devotees. In the association of devotees, one is given an opportunity to render devotional service in nine different ways-śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]. In this way, in the association of devotees, one can pass over material association, cross over the ocean of nescience and return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 1



rahūgaṇa uvāca

namo namaḥ kāraṇa-vigrahāya

svarūpa-tucchīkṛta-vigrahāya

namo 'vadhūta dvija-bandhu-liṅga-

nigūḍha-nityānubhavāya tubhyam

SYNONYMS



rahūgaṇaḥ uvāca-King Rahūgaṇa said; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; namaḥ-obeisances; kāraṇa-vigrahāya-to one whose body emanates from the Supreme Person, the cause of all causes; svarūpa-tucchīkṛta-vigrahāya-who has completely removed all the contradictions of the scriptures by manifesting his true self; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; avadhūta-O master of all mystic power; dvija-bandhu-liṅga-by the characteristics of a person born in a brāhmaṇa family but not executing the duties of a brāhmaṇa; nigūḍha-covered; nitya-anubhavāya-to him whose eternal self-realization; tubhyam-to you.





King Rahūgaṇa said: O most exalted personality, you are not different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By the influence of your true self, all kinds of contradiction in the śāstras have been removed. In the dress of a friend of a brāhmaṇa, you are hiding your transcendental blissful position. I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.





From the Brahma-saṁhitā we understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes (sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]). Ṛṣabhadeva was the direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. His son, Bharata Mahārāja, who was now acting as the brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata, had received his body from the cause of all causes. Therefore he is addressed as kāraṇa-vigrahāya.





TEXT 2



jvarāmayārtasya yathāgadaṁ sat

nidāgha-dagdhasya yathā himāmbhaḥ

kudeha-mānāhi-vidaṣṭa-dṛṣṭeḥ

brahman vacas te 'mṛtam auṣadhaṁ me

SYNONYMS



jvara-of a fever; āmaya-by the disease; ārtasya-of a distressed person; yathā-just as; agadam-the medicine; sat-right; nidāgha-dagdhasya-of one scorched by the heat of the sun; yathā-just as; hima-ambhaḥ-very cold water; ku-deha-in this body made of matter and full of dirty things such as stool and urine; māna-of pride; ahi-by the serpent; vidaṣṭa-bitten; dṛṣṭeḥ-of one whose vision; brahman-O best of the brāhmaṇas; vacaḥ-words; te-your; amṛtam-nectar; auṣadham-medicine; me-for me.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, my body is filled with dirty things, and my vision has been bitten by the serpent of pride. Due to my material conceptions, I am diseased. Your nectarean instructions are the proper medicine for one suffering from such a fever, and they are cooling waters for one scorched by the heat.





The conditioned soul has a body full of dirty things-bones, blood, urine, stool and so forth. Nonetheless, the most intelligent men in this material world think they are these combinations of blood, bone, urine and stool. If this is so, why can't other intelligent men be made with these ingredients, which are so readily available? The entire world is going on under the bodily conception and creating a hellish condition unfit for any gentleman's living. The instructions given to King Rahūgaṇa by Jaḍa Bharata are very valuable. They are like the medicine that can save one from a snakebite. The Vedic instructions are like nectar and cool water for one suffering from scorching heat.





TEXT 3



tasmād bhavantaṁ mama saṁśayārthaṁ

prakṣyāmi paścād adhunā subodham

adhyātma-yoga-grathitaṁ tavoktam

ākhyāhi kautūhala-cetaso me

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; bhavantam-to you; mama-of me; saṁśaya-artham-the subject matter that is not clear to me; prakṣyāmi-I shall submit; paścāt-afterwards; adhunā-now; su-bodham-so that it can be clearly understood; adhyātma-yoga-of mystic instruction for self-realization; grathitam-as composed; tava-your; uktam-speech; ākhyāhi-please explain again; kautūhala-cetasaḥ-whose mind is very inquisitive to understand the mystery of such statements; me-to me.





Whatever doubts I have about a particular subject matter I shall ask you about later. For the time being, these mysterious yoga instructions you have given me for self-realization appear very difficult to understand. Please repeat them in a simple way so that I can understand them. My mind is very inquisitive, and I want to understand this clearly.





The Vedic literature instructs: tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam [SB 11.3.21]. An intelligent man must be very inquisitive to know the transcendental science deeply. Therefore one must approach a guru, a spiritual master. Although Jaḍa Bharata explained everything to Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa, it appears that his intelligence was not perfect enough to understand clearly. He therefore requested a further explanation. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34): tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā. The student must approach a spiritual master and surrender unto him fully (praṇipātena). He must also question him in order to understand his instructions (paripraśnena). One should not only surrender to the spiritual master but also render loving service unto him (sevayā) so that the spiritual master will be pleased with the student and explain the transcendental subject matter more clearly. A challenging spirit before the spiritual master should be avoided if one is at all interested in learning the Vedic instructions in depth.





TEXT 4



yad āha yogeśvara dṛśyamānaṁ

kriyā-phalaṁ sad-vyavahāra-mūlam

na hy añjasā tattva-vimarśanāya

bhavān amuṣmin bhramate mano me

SYNONYMS



yat-that which; āha-have said; yoga-īśvara-O master of mystic power; dṛśyamānam-being clearly seen; kriyā-phalam-the results of moving the body here and there, such as feeling fatigue; sat-existing; vyavahāra-mūlam-whose basis is etiquette alone; na-not; hi-certainly; añjasā-on the whole, or in fact; tattva-vimarśanāya-for understanding the truth by consultation; bhavān-your good self; amuṣmin-in that explanation; bhramate-is bewildered; manaḥ-mind; me-my.





O master of yogic power, you said that fatigue resulting from moving the body here and there is appreciated by direct perception, but actually there is no fatigue. It simply exists as a matter of formality. By such inquiries and answers, no one can come to the conclusion of the Absolute Truth. Because of your presentation of this statement, my mind is a little disturbed.





Formal inquiries and answers about the bodily conception do not constitute knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Knowledge of the Absolute Truth is quite different from the formal understanding of bodily pains and pleasures. In Bhagavad-gītā Lord Kṛṣṇa informs Arjuna that the pains and pleasures experienced in relation to the body are temporary; they come and go. One should not be disturbed by them but should tolerate them and continue with spiritual realization.





TEXTS 5–6



brāhmaṇa uvāca

ayaṁ jano nāma calan pṛthivyāṁ

yaḥ pārthivaḥ pārthiva kasya hetoḥ

tasyāpi cāṅghryor adhi gulpha-jaṅghā-

jānūru-madhyora-śirodharāṁsāḥ

aṁse 'dhi dārvī śibikā ca yasyāṁ



sauvīra-rājety apadeśa āste

yasmin bhavān rūḍha-nijābhimāno

rājāsmi sindhuṣv iti durmadāndhaḥ

SYNONYMS



brāhmaṇaḥ uvāca-the brāhmaṇa said; ayam-this; janaḥ-person; nāma-celebrated as such; calan-moving; pṛthivyām-on the earth; yaḥ-who; pārthivaḥ-a transformation of the earth; pārthiva-O King, who possesses a similar earthly body; kasya-for what; hetoḥ-reason; tasya api-of him also; ca-and; aṅghryoḥ-feet; adhi-above; gulpha-ankles; jaṅghā-calves; jānu-knees; uru-thighs; madhyora-waist; śiraḥ-dhara-neck; aṁsāḥ-shoulders; aṁse-shoulder; adhi-upon; dārvī-made of wood; śibikā-palanquin; ca-and; yasyām-on which; sauvīra-rājā-the King of Sauvīra; iti-thus; apadeśaḥ-known as; āste-there is; yasmin-in which; bhavān-Your Lordship; rūḍha-imposed upon; nija-abhimānaḥ-having a conception of false prestige; rājā asmi-I am the King; sindhuṣu-in the state of Sindhu; iti-thus; durmada-andhaḥ-captivated by false prestige.





The self-realized brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata said: Among the various material combinations and permutations, there are various forms and earthly transformations. For some reason, these move on the surface of the earth and are called palanquin carriers. Those material transformations which do not move are gross material objects like stones. In any case, the material body is made of earth and stone in the form of feet, ankles, calves, knees, thighs, torso, throat and head. Upon the shoulders is the wooden palanquin, and within the palanquin is the so-called King of Sauvīra. The body of the King is simply another transformation of earth, but within that body Your Lordship is situated and falsely thinking that you are the King of the state of Sauvīra.





After analyzing the material bodies of the palanquin carrier and the palanquin passenger, Jaḍa Bharata concludes that the real living force is the living entity. The living entity is the offshoot or offspring of Lord Viṣṇu; therefore within this material world, among moving and nonmoving things, the real principle is Lord Viṣṇu. Due to His presence, everything is working, and there are actions and reactions. One who understands Lord Viṣṇu as the original cause of everything is to be understood to be perfectly situated in knowledge. Although he was falsely proud of being a king, King Rahūgaṇa was not really situated in knowledge. Therefore he was rebuking the palanquin carriers, including the self-realized brāhmaṇa, Jaḍa Bharata. This is the first accusation Jaḍa Bharata made against the King, who was daring to talk to a learned brāhmaṇa from the flimsy ground of ignorance, identifying everything with matter. King Rahūgaṇa argued that the living entity is within the body and that when the body is fatigued the living entity within must therefore be suffering. It is clearly explained in the following verses that the living entity does not suffer due to the body's fatigue. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī gives an example of a child heavily decorated with ornaments; although the child's body is very delicate, he does not feel fatigue, nor do the parents think that his ornaments should be taken away. The living entity has nothing to do with bodily pains and pleasures. These are simply mental concoctions. An intelligent man will find the original cause of everything. Material combinations and permutations may be a matter of fact in worldly dealings, but actually the living force, the soul, has nothing to do with them. Those who are materially upset take care of the body and manufacture daridra-nārāyaṇa (poor Nārāyaṇa). However, it is not a fact that the soul or Supersoul becomes poor simply because the body is poor. These are the statements of ignorant people. The soul and Supersoul are always apart from bodily pleasure and pain.





TEXT 7



śocyān imāṁs tvam adhikaṣṭa-dīnān

viṣṭyā nigṛhṇan niranugraho 'si

janasya goptāsmi vikatthamāno

na śobhase vṛddha-sabhāsu dhṛṣṭaḥ

SYNONYMS



śocyān-lamentable; imān-all these; tvam-you; adhi-kaṣṭa-dīnān-poor persons suffering more pains because of their poverty-stricken position; viṣṭyā-by force; nigṛhṇan-seizing; niranugrahaḥ asi-you have no mercy in your heart; janasya-of the people in general; goptā asmi-I am the protector (king); vikatthamānaḥ-bragging; na śobhase-you do not look very good; vṛddha-sabhāsu-in the society of learned persons; dhṛṣṭaḥ-simply impudent.





It is a fact, however, that these innocent people carrying your palanquin without payment are certainly suffering due to this injustice. Their condition is very lamentable because you have forcibly engaged them in carrying your palanquin. This proves that you are cruel and unkind, yet due to false prestige you were thinking that you were protecting the citizens. This is ludicrous. You were such a fool that you could not have been adored as a great man in an assembly of persons advanced in knowledge.





King Rahūgaṇa was proud of being king, and he felt he had the right to control the citizens as he liked, but actually he was engaging men in carrying his palanquin without payment, and therefore he was causing them trouble without reason. Nonetheless, the King was thinking that he was the protector of the citizens. Actually the king should be the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For this reason he is called nara-devatā, the Lord among human beings. However, when a king thinks that because he is the head of the state, he can utilize the citizens for his sense gratification, he is in error. Such an attitude is not appreciated by learned scholars. According to the Vedic principles, the king should be advised by learned sages, brāhmaṇas and scholars, who advise him according to the injunctions given in the dharma-śāstra. The duty of the king is to follow these instructions. Learned circles do not appreciate the king's utilizing public endeavor for his own benefit. His duty is to give protection to the citizens instead. The king should not become such a rogue that he exploits the citizens for his own benefit.



It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that in Kali-yuga the heads of government will be plunderers and thieves. These thieves and plunderers take the money and property of the public by force or connivance. Therefore it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, rājanyair nirghṛṇair dasyu-dharmabhiḥ. As Kali-yuga advances, we can see that these characteristics are already visible. We can certainly imagine how deteriorated human civilization will be by the end of Kali-yuga. Indeed, there will no longer be a sane man capable of understanding God and our relationship with Him. In other words, human beings will be just like animals. At that time, in order to reform human society, Lord Kṛṣṇa will come in the form of the Kalki avatāra. His business will be to kill all the atheists because ultimately the real protector is Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa.



The Lord incarnates and sets things in order when things are mismanaged by so-called kings and heads of government. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā, yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. Of course this takes many years, but the principle is there. When the king or governmental head does not follow the proper principles, nature deals out the punishments in the forms of war, famine and so forth. Therefore if the governmental head is not aware of life's goal, he should not take charge of ruling the people. Actually the supreme proprietor of everything is Lord Viṣṇu. He is the maintainer of everyone. The king, the father, and the guardian are simply representatives of Lord Viṣṇu, empowered by Him to look after the management and maintain things. It is therefore the duty of the head of the state to maintain the general populace in such a way that people will ultimately know the goal of life. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. Unfortunately the foolish governmental head and the general populace do not know that the ultimate goal of life is to understand and approach Lord Viṣṇu. Without this knowledge, everyone is in ignorance, and all society is crowded with cheaters and cheated.





TEXT 8



yadā kṣitāv eva carācarasya

vidāma niṣṭhāṁ prabhavaṁ ca nityam

tan nāmato 'nyad vyavahāra-mūlaṁ

nirūpyatāṁ sat-kriyayānumeyam

SYNONYMS



yadā-therefore; kṣitau-in the earth; eva-certainly; cara-acarasya-of different bodies, some moving and some not moving; vidāma-we know; niṣṭhām-annihilation; prabhavam-appearance; ca-and; nityam-regularly by the principles of nature; tat-that; nāmataḥ-than simply by name; anyat-other; vyavahāra-mūlam-cause of material activities; nirūpyatām-let it be ascertained; sat-kriyayā-by actual employment; anumeyam-to be inferred.





All of us on the surface of the globe are living entities in different forms. Some of us are moving and some not moving. All of us come into existence, remain for some time and are annihilated when the body is again mingled with the earth. We are all simply different transformations of the earth. Different bodies and capacities are simply transformations of the earth that exist in name only, for everything grows out of the earth and when everything is annihilated it again mingles with the earth. In other words, we are but dust, and we shall but be dust. Everyone can consider this point.





In the Brahma-sūtra it is said: tad-ananyatvam ārabhambhaṇa-śabdādibhyaḥ (2.1.14). This cosmic manifestation is a mixture of matter and spirit, but the cause is the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.20) it is said: idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān ivetaraḥ. The entire cosmic manifestation is but a transformation of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because of illusion, no one can appreciate that God is nondifferent from the material world. Actually He is not different, but this material world is simply a transformation of His different energies; parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate. There are also other versions of this in the Vedas: sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma. Matter and spirit are all nondifferent from the Supreme Brahman, Bhagavān. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa confirms this statement in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.4): me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā. The material energy is Kṛṣṇa's energy, but it is separated from Him. The spiritual energy is also His energy, but it is not separated from Him. When the material energy is engaged in the service of the Supreme Spirit, so-called material energy is also transformed into spiritual energy, just as an iron rod becomes fire when placed in contact with fire. When we can understand by an analytical study that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes, our knowledge is perfect. Simply understanding the transformations of different energies is partial knowledge. We must come to the ultimate cause. Na te viduḥ svārtha gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. The knowledge of those who are not interested in knowing the original cause of all emanations is never perfect knowledge. There is nothing in the phenomenal world that is not produced by the supreme energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aromas from the earth are different scents manufactured and used for different purposes, but the original cause is the earth, nothing else. A waterpot made of earth can be used to carry water for some time, but ultimately the pot is nothing but earth. Therefore there is no difference between the pot and its original ingredient, earth. It is simply a different transformation of the energy. Originally the cause or primary ingredient is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the varieties are only by-products. In the Chāndogya Upaniṣad it is stated: yathā saumy ekena mṛt-piṇḍena sarvaṁ mṛnmayaṁ vijñātaṁ syād vācārambhaṇaṁ vikāro nāmadheyaṁ mṛttikety eva satyam. If one studies the earth, he naturally understands the by-products of the earth. The Vedas therefore enjoin, yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati: if one simply understands the original cause, Kṛṣṇa, the cause of all causes, then naturally everything else is understood, although it may be presented in different varieties. By understanding the original cause of different varieties, one can understand everything. If we understand Kṛṣṇa, the original cause of everything, we do not need to separately study the subsidiary varieties. Therefore from the very beginning it is said: satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi. One has to concentrate one's understanding on the Supreme Truth, Kṛṣṇa or Vāsudeva. The word Vāsudeva indicates the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the cause of all causes. Mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ. This is a summary of phenomenal and noumenal philosophy. The phenomenal world depends on the noumenal existence; similarly, everything exists by virtue of the potency of the Supreme Lord, although due to our ignorance the Supreme Lord is not perceived in everything.





TEXT 9



evaṁ niruktaṁ kṣiti-śabda-vṛttam

asan nidhānāt paramāṇavo ye

avidyayā manasā kalpitās te

yeṣāṁ samūhena kṛto viśeṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; niruktam-falsely described; kṣiti-śabda-of the word "earth"; vṛttam-the existence; asat-not real; nidhānāt-from the dissolution; parama-aṇavaḥ-atomic particles; ye-all of which; avidyayā-because of less intelligence; manasā-in the mind; kalpitāḥ-imagined; te-they; yeṣām-of which; samūhena-by the aggregate; kṛtaḥ-made; viśeṣaḥ-the particulars.





One may say that varieties arise from the planet earth itself. However, although the universe may temporarily appear to be the truth, it ultimately has no real existence. The earth was originally created by a combination of atomic particles, but these particles are impermanent. Actually the atom is not the cause of the universe, although some philosophers think so. It is not a fact that the varieties found in this material world simply result from atomic juxtaposition or combination.





Those who follow the atomic theory think that the protons and electrons of atoms combine in such a way as to bring all material existence into being. However, the scientists fail to discover the cause of atomic existence itself. Under these circumstances, we cannot accept that the atom is the cause of the universe. Such theories are advanced by unintelligent people. According to real intelligence, the real cause of the cosmic manifestation is the Supreme Lord. Janmādy asya yataḥ: [SB 1.1.1] He is the original cause of all creation. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (10.8): ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate. Kṛṣṇa is the original cause. Sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam: [Bs. 5.1] He is the cause of all causes. Kṛṣṇa is the cause of atoms, the material energy.



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā





(Bg. 7.4)



The ultimate cause is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and only those in ignorance try to find out other causes by posing different theories.





TEXT 10



evaṁ kṛśaṁ sthūlam aṇur bṛhad yad

asac ca saj jīvam ajīvam anyat

dravya-svabhāvāśaya-kāla-karma-

nāmnājayāvehi kṛtaṁ dvitīyam

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; kṛśam-skinny or short; sthūlam-fat; aṇuḥ-tiny; bṛhat-big; yat-which; asat-impermanent; ca-and; sat-existing; jīvam-the living entities; ajīvam-inanimate, lifeless matter; anyat-other causes; dravya-phenomena; sva-bhāva-nature; āśaya-disposition; kāla-time; karma-activities; nāmnā-only by such names; ajayā-by material nature; avehi-you should understand; kṛtam-done; dvitīyam-duality.





Since this universe has no real ultimate existence, the things within it-shortness, differences, grossness, skinniness, smallness, bigness, result, cause, living symptoms, and materials-are all imagined. They are all pots made of the same substance, earth, but they are named differently. The differences are characterized by the substance, nature, predisposition, time and activity. You should know that all these are simply mechanical manifestations created by material nature.





The temporary manifestations and varieties within this material world are simply creations of material nature under various circumstances: prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇa-ni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ. The actions and reactions carried out by the material nature are sometimes accepted as our scientific inventions; therefore we want to take credit for them and defy the existence of God. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (3.27), ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate: due to being covered by the illusory external energy, the living entity tries to take credit for the differentiated creations within the material world. Actually all these are being created automatically by the material force set in motion by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the ultimate cause is the Supreme Person. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā:



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]





He is the cause of all causes, the ultimate cause. In this regard Śrīla Madhvācārya says: evaṁ sarvaṁ tathā prakṛtvayai kalpitaṁ viṣṇor anyat. evaṁ prakṛtyādhāraḥ svayam ananyādhāro viṣṇur eva ataḥ sarva-śabdāś ca tasminn eva. Actually the original cause is Lord Viṣṇu, but out of ignorance people think that matter is the cause of everything.



rājā goptāśrayo bhūmiḥ

śaraṇaṁ ceti laukikaḥ

vyavahāro na tat satyaṁ

tayor brahmāśrayo vibhuḥ





Things are contemplated on the ephemeral or external platform, but actually this is not the truth. The actual protector and shelter of everyone is Brahman, the Supreme, not the king.



goptrī ca tasya prakṛtis

tasyā viṣṇuḥ svayaṁ prabhuḥ

tava goptrī tu pṛthivī

na tvaṁ goptā kṣiteḥ smṛtaḥ





ataḥ sarvāśrayaiś caiva

goptā ca harir īśvaraḥ

sarva-śabdābhidheyaś ca

śabda-vṛtter hi kāraṇam

sarvāntaraḥ sarva-bahir

eka eva janārdanaḥ





The actual protectress is the material nature, but Viṣṇu is her Lord. He is the Lord of everything. Lord Janārdana is the director both externally and internally. He is the cause of the function of words and what is expressed in all sound.



śirasodhāratā yadvad

grīvāyās tadvad eva tu

āśrayatvaṁ ca goptṛtvam

anyeṣām upacārataḥ





Lord Viṣṇu is the resting place of the entire creation: brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham (Bg. 14.27). On Brahman, everything is resting. All the universes are resting on the brahmajyoti, and all the planets are resting on the universal atmosphere. In each and every planet there are oceans, hills, states and kingdoms, and each planet is giving shelter to so many living entities. They are all standing on the earth of feet and legs, torso and shoulders, but actually everything is resting ultimately on the potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore He is known ultimately as sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1], the cause of all causes.





TEXT 11



jñānaṁ viśuddhaṁ paramārtham ekam

anantaraṁ tv abahir brahma satyam

pratyak praśāntaṁ bhagavac-chabda-saṁjñaṁ

yad vāsudevaṁ kavayo vadanti

SYNONYMS



jñānam-the supreme knowledge; viśuddham-without contamination; parama-artham-giving the ultimate goal of life; ekam-unified; anantaram-without interior, unbroken; tu-also; abahiḥ-without exterior; brahma-the Supreme; satyam-Absolute Truth; pratyak-inner; praśāntam-the calm and peaceful Supreme Lord, worshiped by the yogīs; bhagavat-śabda-saṁjñam-known in the higher sense as Bhagavān, or full of all opulences; yat-that; vāsudevam-Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva; kavayaḥ-the learned scholars; vadanti-say.





What, then, is the ultimate truth? The answer is that nondual knowledge is the ultimate truth. It is devoid of the contamination of material qualities. It gives us liberation. It is the one without a second, all-pervading and beyond imagination. The first realization of that knowledge is Brahman. Then Paramātmā, the Supersoul, is realized by the yogīs who try to see Him without grievance. This is the second stage of realization. Finally, full realization of the same supreme knowledge is realized in the Supreme Person. All learned scholars describe the Supreme Person as Vāsudeva, the cause of Brahman, Paramātmā and others.





In Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said: yad advaitaṁ brahmopaniṣadi tad apy asya tanu-bhā. The impersonal Brahman effulgence of the Absolute Truth consists of the bodily rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ya ātmāntaryāmī puruṣa iti so 'syāṁśa-vibhavaḥ. What is known as ātmā and antaryāmī, the Supersoul, is but an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sad-aiśvaryaiḥ pūrṇo ya iha bhagavān sa svayam ayam [Cc. Ādi 1.3]. What is described as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, complete with all six opulences, is Vāsudeva, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is nondifferent from Him. Great learned scholars and philosophers accept this after many, many births. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ (Bg. 7.19). The wise man can understand that ultimately Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the cause of Brahman, and Paramātmā, the Supersoul. Thus Vāsudeva is sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1], the cause of all causes. This is confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The real tattva, Absolute Truth, is Bhagavān, but due to incomplete realization of the Absolute Truth, people sometimes describe the same Viṣṇu as impersonal Brahman or localized Paramātmā.



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate





(Bhāg. 1.2.11)



From the very beginning, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says, satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi: we meditate on the supreme truth. The supreme truth is explained here as jñānaṁ viśuddhaṁ satyam. The Absolute Truth is devoid of material contamination and is transcendental to the material qualities. It gives all spiritual success and liberation from this material world. That Supreme Absolute Truth is Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. There is no difference between Kṛṣṇa's inner self and outward body. Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa, the complete whole. There is no distinction between His body and soul as there is between ours. Sometimes so-called scholars, not knowing the constitutional position of Kṛṣṇa, mislead people by saying that the Kṛṣṇa within is different from the Kṛṣṇa without. When Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru, so-called scholars advise the reader that it is not the person Kṛṣṇa to whom we must surrender but the Kṛṣṇa within. So-called scholars, Māyāvādīs, cannot understand Kṛṣṇa with their poor fund of knowledge. One should therefore approach an authorized person to understand Kṛṣṇa. The spiritual master has actually seen Kṛṣṇa; therefore he can explain Him properly.



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ





(Bg. 4.34)



Without approaching an authorized person, one cannot understand Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 12



rahūgaṇaitat tapasā na yāti

na cejyayā nirvapaṇād gṛhād vā

na cchandasā naiva jalāgni-sūryair

vinā mahat-pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam

SYNONYMS



rahūgaṇa-O King Rahūgaṇa; etat-this knowledge; tapasā-by severe austerities and penances; na yāti-does not become revealed; na-not; ca-also; ijyayā-by a great arrangement for worshiping the Deity; nirvapaṇāt-or from finishing all material duties and accepting sannyāsa; gṛhāt-from ideal householder life; vā-or; na-nor; chandasā-by observing celibacy or studying Vedic literature; na eva-nor; jala-agni-sūryaiḥ-by severe austerities such as keeping oneself in water, in a burning fire or in the scorching sun; vinā-without; mahat-of the great devotees; pāda-rajaḥ-the dust of the lotus feet; abhiṣekam-smearing all over the body.





My dear King Rahūgaṇa, unless one has the opportunity to smear his entire body with the dust of the lotus feet of great devotees, one cannot realize the Absolute Truth. One cannot realize the Absolute Truth simply by observing celibacy [brahmacarya], strictly following the rules and regulations of householder life, leaving home as a vānaprastha, accepting sannyāsa, or undergoing severe penances in winter by keeping oneself submerged in water or surrounding oneself in summer by fire and the scorching heat of the sun. There are many other processes to understand the Absolute Truth, but the Absolute Truth is only revealed to one who has attained the mercy of a great devotee.





Actual knowledge of transcendental bliss can be bestowed upon anyone by a pure devotee. Vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau [Bs. 5.33]. One cannot attain the perfection of spiritual life simply by following the directions of the Vedas. One has to approach a pure devotee: anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Madhya 19.167]. By the grace of such a devotee, one can understand the Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa, and one's relationship with Him. A materialistic person sometimes thinks that simply by executing pious activities and remaining at home one can understand the Absolute Truth. That is denied in this verse. Nor can one understand the Absolute Truth simply by observing the rules and regulations of brahmacarya (celibacy). One only has to serve the pure devotee. That will help one understand the Absolute Truth without fail.





TEXT 13



yatrottamaśloka-guṇānuvādaḥ

prastūyate grāmya-kathā-vighātaḥ

niṣevyamāṇo 'nudinaṁ mumukṣor

matiṁ satīṁ yacchati vāsudeve

SYNONYMS



yatra-in which place (in the presence of exalted devotees); uttama-śloka-guṇa-anuvādaḥ-discussion of the pastimes and glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prastūyate-is presented; grāmya-kathā-vighātaḥ-due to which there is no chance of talking of worldly matters; niṣevyamāṇaḥ-being heard very seriously; anudinam-day after day; mumukṣoḥ-of persons who are very serious about getting out of material entanglement; matim-meditation; satīm-pure and simple; yacchati-is turned; vāsudeve-unto the lotus feet of Lord Vāsudeva.





Who are the pure devotees mentioned here? In an assembly of pure devotees, there is no question of discussing material subjects like politics and sociology. In an assembly of pure devotees, there is discussion only of the qualities, forms and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is praised and worshiped with full attention. In the association of pure devotees, by constantly hearing such topics respectfully, even a person who wants to merge into the existence of the Absolute Truth abandons this idea and gradually becomes attached to the service of Vāsudeva.





The symptoms of pure devotees are described in this verse. The pure devotee is never interested in material topics. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has strictly prohibited His devotees to talk about worldly matters. Grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe: one should not indulge in talking unnecessarily about news of the material world. One should not waste time in this way. This is a very important feature in the life of a devotee. A devotee has no other ambition than to serve Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement was started to engage people twenty-four hours daily in the service of the Lord and in His glorification. The students in this institution engage in the cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness from five in the morning to ten at night. They actually have no opportunity to waste their time unnecessarily by discussing politics, sociology and current events. These will go their own way. A devotee is concerned only with serving Kṛṣṇa positively and seriously.





TEXT 14



ahaṁ purā bharato nāma rājā

vimukta-dṛṣṭa-śruta-saṅga-bandhaḥ

ārādhanaṁ bhagavata īhamāno

mṛgo 'bhavaṁ mṛga-saṅgād dhatārthaḥ

SYNONYMS



aham-I; purā-formerly (in my previous birth); bharataḥ nāma rājā-a King named Mahārāja Bharata; vimukta-liberated from; dṛṣṭa-śruta-by experiencing personally through direct association, or by getting knowledge from the Vedas; saṅga-bandhaḥ-bondage by association; ārādhanam-the worship; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva; īhamānaḥ-always performing; mṛgaḥ abhavam-I became a deer; mṛga-saṅgāt-because of my intimate association with a deer; hata-arthaḥ-having neglected the regulative principles in the discharge of devotional service.





In a previous birth I was known as Mahārāja Bharata. I attained perfection by becoming completely detached from material activities through direct experience, and through indirect experience I received understanding from the Vedas. I was fully engaged in the service of the Lord, but due to my misfortune, I became very affectionate to a small deer, so much so that I neglected my spiritual duties. Due to my deep affection for the deer, in my next life I had to accept the body of a deer.





The incident herein described is very significant. In a previous verse it is stated, vinā mahat-pāda-rajo-'bhiṣekam: one cannot attain perfection without smearing the dust from the lotus feet of an exalted devotee on his head. If one always follows the orders of the spiritual master, there is no question of falling down. As soon as a foolish disciple tries to overtake his spiritual master and becomes ambitious to occupy his post, he immediately falls down. Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi . If the spiritual master is considered an ordinary man, the disciple surely loses his chance to advance further. Despite a very rigid life in devotional service, Bharata Mahārāja did not consult a spiritual master when he became overly attached to a deer. Consequently he became strongly attached to the deer, and, forgetting his spiritual routine, he fell down.





TEXT 15



sā māṁ smṛtir mṛga-dehe 'pi vīra

kṛṣṇārcana-prabhavā no jahāti

atho ahaṁ jana-saṅgād asaṅgo

viśaṅkamāno 'vivṛtaś carāmi

SYNONYMS



sā-that; mām-me; smṛtiḥ-remembrance of the activities of my previous life; mṛga-dehe-in the body of a deer; api-although; vīra-O great hero; kṛṣṇa-arcana-prabhavā-which appeared because of the influence of sincere service to Kṛṣṇa; no jahāti-did not leave; atho-therefore; aham-I; jana-saṅgāt-from the association of ordinary men; asaṅgaḥ-completely detached; viśaṅkamānaḥ-being afraid; avivṛtaḥ-unobserved by others; carāmi-I go here and there.





My dear heroic King, due to my past sincere service to the Lord, I could remember everything of my past life even while in the body of a deer. Because I am aware of the falldown in my past life, I always keep myself separate from the association of ordinary men. Being afraid of their bad, materialistic association, I wander alone unnoticed by others.





In Bhagavad-gītā it is said: svalpam apy asya dharmasya (Bg. 2.40). It is certainly a great fall to go from human life to animal life, but in the case of Bharata Mahārāja or any devotee, devotional service to the Lord never goes in vain. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (8.6): yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram. At the time of death, by nature's law the mind is absorbed in a certain type of thinking. This may lead one to animal life, yet for a devotee there is no loss. Even though Bharata Mahārāja received the body of a deer, he didn't forget his position. Consequently, in the body of a deer he was very careful to remember the cause of his downfall. As a result, he was given a chance to be born in a family of very pure brāhmaṇas. Thus his service to the Lord never went in vain.





TEXT 16



tasmān naro 'saṅga-susaṅga-jāta-

jñānāsinehaiva vivṛkṇa-mohaḥ

hariṁ tad-īhā-kathana-śrutābhyāṁ

labdha-smṛtir yāty atipāram adhvanaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-for this reason; naraḥ-every person; asaṅga-by detachment from the association of worldly people; su-saṅga-by the association of devotees; jāta-produced; jñāna-asinā-by the sword of knowledge; iha-in this material world; eva-even; vivṛkṇa-mohaḥ-whose illusion is completely cut to pieces; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tad-īhā-of His activities; kathana-śrutābhyām-by the two processes of hearing and chanting; labdha-smṛtiḥ-the lost consciousness is regained; yāti-achieves; atipāram-the ultimate end; adhvanaḥ-of the path back home, back to Godhead.





Simply by associating with exalted devotees, anyone can attain perfection of knowledge and with the sword of knowledge can cut to pieces the illusory associations within this material world. Through the association of devotees, one can engage in the service of the Lord by hearing and chanting [śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam]. Thus one can revive his dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness and, sticking to the cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, return home, back to Godhead, even in this life.





To become liberated from material bondage, one must give up the association of worldly people and accept the association of devotees, positive and negative processes are mentioned in this regard. Through the association of devotees, one develops Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is dormant within. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving this chance to everyone. We are giving shelter to everyone who is serious about progressing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We arrange for their lodging and board so that they can peacefully cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness and return home, back to Godhead, even in this life.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twelfth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "The Conversation Between Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa and Jaḍa Bharata."



Chapter Thirteen



Further Talks Between King Rahūgaṇa and Jaḍa Bharata





The brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata became very kind to King Rahūgaṇa, and to disassociate him from the material world, he spoke figuratively of the forest of the material world. He explained that this material world is like a great forest in which one becomes entangled due to association with material life. In this forest there are plunderers (the six senses) as well as carnivorous animals like jackals, wolves and lions (wife, children and other relatives) who are always anxious to suck the blood from the head of the family. The forest plunderers and the carnivorous blood-sucking animals combine to exploit the energy of a man within this material world. In this forest there is also a black hole, covered by grass, into which one may fall. Coming into the forest and being captivated by so many material attractions, one identifies himself with this material world, society, friendship, love and family. Having lost the path and not knowing where to go, being harassed by animals and birds, one is also victimized by many desires. Thus one works very hard within the forest and wanders here and there. He becomes captivated by temporary happiness and becomes aggrieved by so-called distress. Actually one simply suffers in the forest from so-called happiness and distress. Sometimes he is attacked by a snake (deep sleep), and due to the snakebite he loses consciousness and becomes puzzled and bewildered about discharging his duties. Sometimes he is attracted by women other than his wife, and thus be thinks he enjoys extramarital love with another woman. He is attacked by various diseases, by lamentation and by summer and winter. Thus one within the forest of the material world suffers the pains of material existence. Expecting to become happy, the living entity changes his position from one place to another, but actually a materialistic person within the material world is never happy. Being constantly engaged in materialistic activities, he is always disturbed. He forgets that one day he has to die. Although he suffers severely, being illusioned by the material energy, he still hankers after material happiness. In this way he completely forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





By hearing this from Jaḍa Bharata, Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa revived his Kṛṣṇa consciousness and thus benefited from Jaḍa Bharata's association. He could understand that his illusion was over, and he begged pardon from Jaḍa Bharata for his misbehavior. All this was told to Mahārāja Parīkṣit by Śukadeva Gosvāmī.





TEXT 1



brāhmaṇa uvāca

duratyaye 'dhvany ajayā niveśito

rajas-tamaḥ-sattva-vibhakta-karmadṛk

sa eṣa sārtho 'rtha-paraḥ paribhraman

bhavāṭavīṁ yāti na śarma vindati

SYNONYMS



brāhmaṇaḥ uvāca-the brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata continued to speak; duratyaye-which is very difficult to traverse; adhvani-on the path of fruitive activities (performing actions in this life, creating a body in the next life by those actions, and in this way continuously accepting birth and death); ajayā-by māyā, the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; niveśitaḥ-caused to enter; rajaḥ-tamaḥ-sattva-vibhakta-karma-dṛk-a conditioned soul who sees only immediately beneficial fruitive activities and their results, which are divided into three groups by the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; saḥ-he; eṣaḥ-this; sa-arthaḥ-the living entity falsely seeking sense gratification; artha-paraḥ-intent upon gaining wealth; paribhraman-wandering all over; bhava-aṭavīm-the forest known as bhava, which means the repetition of birth and death; yāti-enters; na-not; śarma-happiness; vindati-obtains.





Jaḍa Bharata, who had fully realized Brahman, continued: My dear King Rahūgaṇa, the living entity wanders on the path of the material world, which is very difficult for him to traverse, and he accepts repeated birth and death. Being captivated by the material world under the influence of the three modes of material nature (sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa), the living entity can see only the three fruits of activities under the spell of material nature. These fruits are auspicious, inauspicious and mixed. He thus becomes attached to religion, economic development, sense gratification and the monistic theory of liberation (merging with the Supreme). He works very hard day and night exactly like a merchant who enters a forest to acquire some articles to sell later for profit. However, he cannot really achieve happiness within this material world.





One can very easily understand how difficult and insurmountable the path of sense gratification is. Not knowing what the path of sense gratification is, one becomes implicated in the repetition of birth and accepts different types of bodies again and again. Thus one suffers in material existence. In this life one may think that he is very happy being an American, Indian, Englishman or German, but in the next life one has to accept another body among 8,400,000 species. The next body has to be immediately accepted according to karma. One will be forced to accept a certain type of body, and protesting will not help. That is the stringent law of nature. Due to the living entity's ignorance of his eternal blissful life, he becomes attracted to material activities under the spell of māyā. In this world, he can never experience happiness, yet he works very hard to do so. This is called māyā.





TEXT 2



yasyām ime ṣaṇ nara-deva dasyavaḥ

sārthaṁ vilumpanti kunāyakaṁ balāt

gomāyavo yatra haranti sārthikaṁ

pramattam āviśya yathoraṇaṁ vṛkāḥ

SYNONYMS



yasyām-in which (in the forest of material existence); ime-these; ṣaṭ-six; nara-deva-O King; dasyavaḥ-the plunderers; sa-artham-the conditioned souls, who are interested in false ideas; vilumpanti-plunder, regularly taking away all the possessions; ku-nāyakam-who are always misguided by so-called gurus, or spiritual masters; balāt-by force; gomāyavaḥ-exactly like foxes; yatra-in which forest; haranti-they take away; sa-arthikam-the conditioned soul who is seeking material profits to maintain the body and soul; pramattam-who is a crazy man not knowing his self-interest; āviśya-entering the heart; yathā-just as; uraṇam-nicely protected lambs; vṛkāḥ-the tigers.





O King Rahūgaṇa, in this forest of material existence there are six very powerful plunderers. When the conditioned soul enters the forest to acquire some material gain, the six plunderers misguide him. Thus the conditioned merchant does not know how to spend his money, and it is taken away by these plunderers. Like tigers, jackals and other ferocious animals in a forest that are ready to take away a lamb from the custody of its protector, the wife and children enter the heart of the merchant and plunder him in so many ways.





In the forest there are many plunderers, dacoits, jackals and tigers. The jackals are compared to one's wife and children. In the dead of night, jackals cry very loudly, and similarly one's wife and children in this material world also cry like jackals. The children say, "Father, this is wanted; give me this. I am your dear son." Or the wife says, "I am your dear wife. Please give me this. This is now needed." In this way one is plundered by the thieves in the forest. Not knowing the aim of human life, one is constantly being misguided. The aim of life is Viṣṇu (na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]). Everyone works very hard to earn money, but no one knows that his real self-interest is in serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Instead of spending money for advancing the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, one spends his hard-earned money on clubs, brothels, liquor, slaughterhouses and so forth. Due to sinful activities, one becomes implicated in the process of transmigration and thus has to accept one body after another. Being thus absorbed in a distressed condition, one never attains happiness.





TEXT 3



prabhūta-vīrut-tṛṇa-gulma-gahvare

kaṭhora-daṁśair maśakair upadrutaḥ

kvacit tu gandharva-puraṁ prapaśyati

kvacit kvacic cāśu-rayolmuka-graham

SYNONYMS



prabhūta-a very large number; vīrut-of creepers; tṛṇa-of varieties of grass; gulma-of thickets; gahvare-in bowers; kaṭhora-cruel; daṁśaiḥ-by bites; maśakaiḥ-by mosquitoes; upadrutaḥ-disturbed; kvacit-sometimes; tu-but; gandharva-puram-a false palace created by the Gandharvas; prapaśyati-be sees; kvacit-and sometimes; kvacit-sometimes; ca-and; āśu-raya-very quickly; ulmuka-like a meteor; graham-a fiend.





In this forest there are dense bowers composed of thickets of bushes, grass and creepers. In these bowers the conditioned soul is always disturbed by cruelly biting mosquitoes [envious people]. Sometimes he sees an imaginary palace in the forest, and sometimes he is bewildered by seeing a fleeting fiend or ghost, which appears like a meteor in the sky.





The material household is actually a hole of fruitive activity. To earn a livelihood one engages in different industries and trades, and sometimes one performs great sacrifices to go to higher planetary systems. Apart from this, at least everyone is engaged in earning a livelihood in some profession or occupation. In these dealings, one has to meet many undesirable people, and their behavior is compared to the biting of mosquitoes. This creates very undesirable conditions. Even in the midst of these disturbances, one imagines that he is going to construct a grand house and live there permanently, although he knows that he cannot. Gold is compared to a quickly fleeting fiend, which appears like a meteor in the sky. It displays itself for a moment and is then gone. Generally karmīs are attracted to gold or money, but these are compared herein to ghosts and witches.





TEXT 4



nivāsa-toya-draviṇātma-buddhis

tatas tato dhāvati bho aṭavyām

kvacic ca vātyotthita-pāṁsu-dhūmrā

diśo na jānāti rajas-valākṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



nivāsa-residential place; toya-water; draviṇa-wealth; ātma-buddhiḥ-who considers these material things the ātma, or self; tataḥ tataḥ-here and there; dhāvati-he runs; bhoḥ-O King; aṭavyām-on that forest path of material existence; kvacit ca-and sometimes; vātyā-by the whirlwind; utthita-raised; pāṁsu-by dust; dhūmrāḥ-appear smoke-colored; diśaḥ-the directions; na-not; jānāti-knows; rajaḥ-vala-akṣaḥ-whose eyes are covered by the dust of the wind or who is captivated by his wife during her menstrual period.





My dear King, the merchant on the forest path of the material world, his intelligence victimized by home, wealth, relatives and so forth, runs from one place to another in search of success. Sometimes his eyes are covered by the dust of a whirlwind-that is to say, in his lust he is captivated by the beauty of his wife, especially during her menstrual period. Thus his eyes are blinded, and he cannot see where to go or what he is doing.





It is said that household attraction resides in the wife because sex is the center of household life: yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. A materialistic person, making his wife the center of attraction, works very hard day and night. His only enjoyment in material life is sexual intercourse. Therefore karmīs are attracted to women as friends or wives. Indeed, they cannot work without sex. Under the circumstances the wife is compared to a whirlwind, especially during her menstrual period. Those who strictly follow the rules and regulations of householder life engage in sex only once a month, at the end of the menstrual period. As one looks forward to this opportunity, his eyes are overwhelmed by the beauty of his wife. Thus it is said that the whirlwind covers the eyes with dust. Such a lusty person does not know that all his material activities are being observed by different demigods, especially the sun-god, and are being recorded for the karma of one's next body. Astrological calculations are called jyoti-śāstra. Because the jyoti, or effulgence, in the material world comes from the different stars and planets, the science is called jyoti-śāstra, the science of the luminaries. By the calculations of jyoti, our future is indicated. In other words, all the luminaries-the stars, sun and moon-witness the activities of the conditioned soul. Thus he is awarded a particular type of body. A lusty, person whose eyes are covered by the dust of the whirlwind or material existence does not at all consider that his activities are being observed by different stars and planets and are being recorded. Not knowing this, the conditioned soul commits all kinds of sinful activities for the satisfaction of his lusty desires.





TEXT 5



adṛśya-jhillī-svana-karṇa-śūla

ulūka-vāgbhir vyathitāntarātmā

apuṇya-vṛkṣān śrayate kṣudhārdito

marīci-toyāny abhidhāvati kvacit

SYNONYMS



adṛśya-invisible; jhillī-of crickets or a kind of bee; svana-by the sounds; karṇa-śūla-whose ears are disturbed; ulūka-of the owls; vāgbhiḥ-by sound vibrations; vyathita-very disturbed; antaḥ-ātmā-whose mind and heart; apuṇya-vṛkṣān-impious trees that have no fruits or flowers; śrayate-he takes shelter of; kṣudha-from hunger; arditaḥ-suffering; marīci-toyāni-the waters of a mirage in the desert; abhidhāvati-he runs after; kvacit-sometimes.





Wandering in the forest of the material world, the conditioned soul sometimes hears an invisible cricket making harsh sounds, and his ears become very much aggrieved. Sometimes his heart is pained by the sounds of owls, which are just like the harsh words of his enemies. Sometimes he takes shelter of a tree that has no fruits or flowers. He approaches such a tree due to his strong appetite, and thus he suffers. He would like to acquire water, but he is simply illusioned by a mirage, and he runs after it.





In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said that the Bhāgavata philosophy is meant for people who are completely free from envy (paramo nirmatsarāṇām). The material world is full of envious people. Even within one's inner circle there is much backbiting, and this is compared to the sound vibration of a cricket in the forest. One cannot see the cricket, but one bears its sounds and thus becomes aggrieved. When one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one always hears unpalatable words from relatives. This is the nature of the world; one cannot avoid mental distress due to the backbiting of envious people. Being very much aggrieved, sometimes one goes to a sinful person for help, but he has no means to help because he has no intelligence. Thus the living entity is disappointed. This is like running after a mirage in the desert in an effort to find water. Such activities do not produce any tangible results. Due to being directed by the illusory energy, a conditioned soul suffers in so many ways.





TEXT 6



kvacid vitoyāḥ sarito 'bhiyāti

parasparaṁ cālaṣate nirandhaḥ

āsādya dāvaṁ kvacid agni-tapto

nirvidyate kva ca yakṣair hṛtāsuḥ

SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; vitoyāḥ-without depth to the water; saritaḥ-rivers; abhiyāti-he goes to bathe or jumps into; parasparam-one another; ca-and; ālaṣate-desires; nirandhaḥ-being with no stock of food; āsādya-experiencing; dāvam-a forest fire in family life; kvacit-sometimes; agni-taptaḥ-burned by fire; nirvidyate-is despondent; kva-somewhere; ca-and; yakṣaiḥ-by kings resembling rogues and thieves; hṛta-taken away; asuḥ-wealth. which is as dear as one's life.





Sometimes the conditioned soul jumps into a shallow river, or being short of food grains, he goes to beg food from people who are not at all charitable. Sometimes he suffers from the burning heat of household life, which is like a forest fire, and sometimes he becomes sad to have his wealth, which is as dear as life, plundered by kings in the name of heavy income taxes.





When one is hot due to the scorching sun, one sometimes jumps into a river to gain relief. However, if the river is almost dried up and the water is too shallow, one may break his bones by jumping in. The conditioned soul is always experiencing miserable conditions. Sometimes his efforts to get help from friends are exactly like jumping into a dry river. By such actions, he does not derive any benefit. He only breaks his bones. Sometimes, suffering from a shortage of food, one may go to a person who is neither able to give charity nor willing to do so. Sometimes one is stationed in household life, which is compared to a forest fire (saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka ). When a man is heavily taxed by the government, he becomes very sad. Heavy taxation obliges one to hide his income, but despite this endeavor the government agents are often so vigilant and strong that they take all the money anyway, and the conditioned soul becomes very aggrieved.

Thus people are trying to become happy within the material world, but this is like trying to be happy in a forest fire. No one need go to a forest to set it ablaze: fire takes place automatically. Similarly, no one wants to be unhappy in family life or worldly life, but by the laws of nature unhappiness and distress are forced upon everyone. To become dependent on another's maintenance is very degrading; therefore, according to the Vedic system, everyone should live independently. Only the śūdras are unable to live independently. They are obliged to serve someone for maintenance. It is said in the śāstras: kalau śūdra-sambhavāḥ. In this age of Kali, everyone is dependent on another's mercy for the maintenance of the body; therefore everyone is classified as a śūdra. In the Twelfth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said that in Kali-yuga the government will levy taxes without reciprocally benefiting the citizens. Anāvṛṣṭyā vinaṅkṣyanti durbhikṣa-kara-pīḍitāḥ. In this age there will also be a shortage of rain; therefore a scarcity of food will arise, and the citizens will be very much harassed by government taxation. In this way the citizens will abandon their attempts to lead a peaceful life and will leave their homes and hearths and go to the forest in sheer disappointment.





TEXT 7



śūrair hṛta-svaḥ kva ca nirviṇṇa-cetāḥ

śocan vimuhyann upayāti kaśmalam

kvacic ca gandharva-puraṁ praviṣṭaḥ

pramodate nirvṛtavan muhūrtam

SYNONYMS



śūraiḥ-by very powerful enemies; hṛta-svaḥ-all of whose possessions have been stolen; kva ca-sometimes; nirviṇṇa-cetāḥ-very morose and aggrieved at heart; śocan-deeply lamenting; vimuhyan-becoming bewildered; upayāti-achieves; kaśmalam-unconsciousness; kvacit-sometimes; ca-also; gandharva-puram-an imaginary city in the forest; praviṣṭaḥ-having entered; pramodate-he enjoys; nirvṛta-vat-exactly like a person who has achieved success; muhūrtam-for a moment only.





Sometimes, being defeated or plundered by a superior, powerful agent, a living entity loses all his possessions. He then becomes very morose, and lamenting their loss, he sometimes becomes unconscious. Sometimes he imagines a great palatial city in which he desires to live happily with his family members and riches. He thinks himself fully satisfied if this is possible, but such so-called happiness continues only for a moment.





The word gandharva-puram is very significant in this verse. Sometimes in the forest a very big castle appears, and this is called a castle in the air. Actually this castle does not exist anywhere but in one's imagination. This is called gandharva-pura. In the material forest, the conditioned soul sometimes contemplates great castles and skyscrapers, and he wastes his energy for such things, hoping to live in them very peacefully with his family forever. However, the laws of nature do not allow this. When he enters such castles, he temporarily thinks that he is very happy, even though his happiness is impermanent. His happiness may last for a few years, but because the owner of the castle has to leave the castle at the time of death, everything is eventually lost. This is the way of worldly transactions. Such happiness is described by Vidyāpati as the happiness one derives upon seeing a drop of water in the desert. The desert is heated by scorching sunshine, and if we want to reduce the desert temperature, we need huge amounts of water-millions and millions of gallons. What effect will one drop have? Water certainly has value, but one drop of water cannot reduce the heat of the desert. In this material world everyone is ambitious, but the heat is very scorching. What will an imaginary castle in the air do to help? Śrīla Vidyāpati has therefore sung: tāṭala saikate, vāri-bindu-sama, suta-mita-ramaṇi-samāje. The happiness of family life, friends and society is compared to a drop of water in the scorching desert. The entire material world is busy trying to attain happiness because happiness is the prerogative of the living being. Unfortunately, due to falling in contact with the material world, the living entity simply struggles for existence. Even if one becomes happy for a while, a very powerful enemy may plunder everything. There are many instances in which big businessmen suddenly become paupers in the street. Yet the nature of material existence is such that foolish people are attracted to these transactions and they forget the real business of self-realization.





TEXT 8



calan kvacit kaṇṭaka-śarkarāṅghrir

nagārurukṣur vimanā ivāste

pade pade 'bhyantara-vahninārditaḥ

kauṭumbikaḥ krudhyati vai janāya

SYNONYMS



calan-wandering; kvacit-sometimes; kaṇṭaka-śarkara-pierced by thorns and small stones; aṅghriḥ-whose feet; naga-the hills; ārurukṣuḥ-one desiring to climb; vimanāḥ-disappointed; iva-like; āste-becomes; pade pade-step by step; abhyantara-within the abdomen; vahninā-by the strong fire of appetite; arditaḥ-being fatigued and aggrieved; kauṭumbikaḥ-a person living with his family members; krudhyati-becomes angry; vai-certainly; janāya-at the family members.





Sometimes the merchant in the forest wants to climb the hills and mountains, but due to insufficient footwear, his feet are pricked by small stone fragments and by thorns on the mountain. Being pricked by them, he becomes very aggrieved. Sometimes a person who is very attached to his family becomes overwhelmed with hunger, and due to his miserable condition he becomes furious with his family members.





The ambitious conditioned soul wants to be very happy in this material world with his family, but he is compared to a traveler in the forest who desires to climb a hill full of thorns and small stones. As stated in the previous verse, the happiness derived from society, friendship and love is like a drop of water in the scorching heat of the desert. One may want to become very great and powerful in society, but this is like attempting to climb a hill full of thorns. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura compares one's family to high mountains. Becoming happy in their association is like a hungry man's endeavoring to climb a mountain full of thorns. Almost 99.9 percent of the population is unhappy in family life, despite all the attempts being made to satisfy the family members. In the Western countries, due to the dissatisfaction of the family members. there is actually no family life. There are many cases of divorce, and out of dissatisfaction, the children leave the protection of their parents. Especially in this age of Kali, family life is being reduced. Everyone is becoming self-centered because that is the law of nature. Even if one has sufficient money to maintain a family, the situation is such that no one is happy in family life. Consequently according to the varṇāśrama institution, one has to retire from family life in middle age: pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. One should voluntarily retire from family life at the age of fifty and go to Vṛndāvana or a forest. This is recommended by Śrīla Prahlāda Mahārāja (Bhāg. 7.5.5):



tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta





There is no benefit in transferring from one forest to another. One must go to the Vṛndāvana forest and take shelter of Govinda. That will make one happy. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness is therefore constructing a Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple to invite its members as well as outsiders to come and live peacefully in a spiritual atmosphere. That will help one become elevated to the transcendental world and return home, back to Godhead. Another sentence in this verse is very significant: kauṭumbikaḥ krudhyati vai janāya. When one's mind is disturbed in so many ways, he satisfies himself by becoming angry with his poor wife and children. The wife and children are naturally dependent on the father, but the father, being unable to maintain the family properly, becomes mentally distressed and therefore chastises the family members unnecessarily. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.2.9): ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā yāsyanti giri-kānanam. Being disgusted with family life, one separates from the family by divorce or some other means. If one has to separate, why not separate willingly? Systematic separation is better than forced separation. Forced separation cannot make anyone happy, but by mutual consent or by the Vedic arrangement one must separate from his family affairs at a certain age and fully depend on Kṛṣṇa. This makes one's life successful.





TEXT 9



kvacin nigīrṇo 'jagarāhinā jano

nāvaiti kiñcid vipine 'paviddhaḥ

daṣṭaḥ sma śete kva ca danda-śūkair

andho 'ndha-kūpe patitas tamisre

SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; nigīrṇaḥ-being swallowed; ajagara-ahinā-by the great snake known as the python; janaḥ-the conditioned soul; na-not; avaiti-understands; kiñcit-anything; vipine-in the forest; apaviddhaḥ-pierced by arrows of suffering; daṣṭaḥ-being bitten; sma-indeed; śete-lies down; kva ca-sometimes; danda-śūkaiḥ-by other kinds of snakes; andhaḥ-blind; andha-kūpe-in a blind well; patitaḥ-fallen; tamisre-in a hellish condition of life.





The conditioned soul in the material forest is sometimes swallowed by a python or crushed. At such a time he is left lying in the forest like a dead person, devoid of consciousness and knowledge. Sometimes other poisonous snakes bite him. Being blind to his consciousness, he falls down into a dark well of hellish life with no hope of being rescued.





When one becomes unconscious due to being bitten by a snake, one cannot understand what is taking place outside the body. This unconscious condition is the condition of deep sleep. Similarly, the conditioned soul is actually sleeping on the lap of the illusory energy. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung, kota nidrā yāo māyā-piśācīra kole: "O living entity, how long will you sleep in this condition on the lap of the illusory energy?" People do not understand that they are actually sleeping in this material world, being devoid of knowledge of spiritual life. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore says:



enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāra lāgi'

hari-nāma-mahā-mantra lao tumi māgi'





"I have brought medicine to awaken every living being from perpetual sleep. Please receive the holy name of the Lord, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, and awaken." The Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.3.14) also says, uttiṣṭha jāgrata prāpya varān nibodhata: "O living entity, you are sleeping in this material world. Please get up and take advantage of your human form of life." The sleeping condition means loss of all knowledge. In Bhagavad-gītā (2.69) it is also said, yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī: "What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled." Even in the higher planets, everyone is under the spell of the illusory energy. No one is really interested in the real values of life. The sleeping condition, called kāla-sarpa (the time factor), keeps the conditioned soul in a state of ignorance, and therefore pure consciousness is lost. In the forest there are many blind wells, and if one falls down in one there is no chance of being rescued. In a state of sleep, one remains perpetually bitten by some animals, especially snakes.





TEXT 10



karhi sma cit kṣudra-rasān vicinvaṁs

tan-makṣikābhir vyathito vimānaḥ

tatrāti-kṛcchrāt pratilabdhamāno

balād vilumpanty atha taṁ tato 'nye

SYNONYMS



karhi sma cit-sometimes; kṣudra-very insignificant; rasān-sexual enjoyment; vicinvan-searching for; tat-of those women; makṣikābhiḥ-by honeybees, or the husbands or family members; vyathitaḥ-very much aggrieved; vimānaḥ-insulted; tatra-in that; ati-very much; kṛcchrāt-with difficulty because of spending money; pratilabdhamānaḥ-obtaining sexual enjoyment; balāt-by force; vilumpanti-kidnapped; atha-thereafter; tam-the object of sense enjoyment (the woman); tataḥ-from him; anye-another debauchee.





Sometimes, in order to have a little insignificant sex enjoyment, one searches after debauched women. In this attempt, one is insulted and chastised by the women's kinsmen. This is like going to take honey from a beehive and being attacked by the bees. Sometimes, after spending lots of money, one may acquire another woman for some extra sense enjoyment. Unfortunately, the object of sense enjoyment, the woman, is taken away or kidnapped by another debauchee.





In a great forest, honeycombs are very important. People often go there to collect honey from the combs, and sometimes the bees attack and punish them. In human society, those who are not Kṛṣṇa conscious remain in the forest of material life simply for the honey of sex life. Such debauchees are not at all satisfied with one wife. They want many women. Day after day, with great difficulty, they try to secure such women, and sometimes, while trying to taste this kind of honey, one is attacked by a woman's kinsmen and chastised very heavily. By bribing others, one may secure another woman for enjoyment, yet another debauchee may kidnap her or offer her something better. This woman hunting is going on in the forest of the material world, sometimes legally, and sometimes illegally. Consequently in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement the devotees are forbidden to have illicit sex. Thus they avoid so many difficulties. One should remain satisfied with one woman, being duly married. One can satisfy one's lusty desires with his wife without creating disturbances in society and being punished for doing so.





TEXT 11



kvacic ca śītātapa-vāta-varṣa-

pratikriyāṁ kartum anīśa āste

kvacin mitho vipaṇan yac ca kiñcid

vidveṣam ṛcchaty uta vitta-śāṭhyāt

SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; ca-also; śīta-ātapa-vāta-varṣa-of freezing cold, scorching heat, strong wind and excessive rainfall; pratikriyām-counteraction; kartum-to do; anīśaḥ-being unable; āste-remains in misery; kvacit-sometimes; mithaḥ-one another; vipaṇan-selling; yat ca-whatever; kiñcit-a little bit; vidveṣam-mutual enmity; ṛcchati-obtain; uta-it is so said; vitta-śāṭhyāt-because of cheating one another merely for money.





Sometimes the living entity is busy counteracting the natural disturbances of freezing cold, scorching heat, strong wind, excessive rainfall and so forth. When he is unable to do so, he becomes very unhappy. Sometimes he is cheated in business transactions one after another. In this way, by cheating, living entities create enmity among themselves.





This is an example of the struggle for existence, the attempt to counteract the onslaught of material nature. This creates enmity in society, and consequently society is filled with envious people. One person is envious of another, and this is the way of the material world. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement aims at creating an atmosphere of non-envy. Of course it is not possible for everyone to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, but the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement can create an exemplary society wherein there is no envy.





TEXT 12



kvacit kvacit kṣīṇa-dhanas tu tasmin

śayyāsana-sthāna-vihāra-hīnaḥ

yācan parād apratilabdha-kāmaḥ

pārakya-dṛṣṭir labhate 'vamānam

SYNONYMS



kvacit kvacit-sometimes; kṣīṇa-dhanaḥ-becoming bereft of all riches; tu-but; tasmin-in that forest; śayyā-of bedding for lying down; āsana-of a sitting place; sthāna-of a residential house; vihāra-of enjoyment with a family; hīnaḥ-being bereft; yācan-begging; parāt-from others (friends and relatives); apratilabdha-kāmaḥ-not getting his desires fulfilled; pārakya-dṛṣṭiḥ-becomes greedy for the wealth of others; labhate-he obtains; avamānam-dishonor.





On the forest path of material existence, sometimes a person is without wealth and due to this does not have a proper home, bed or sitting place, nor proper family enjoyment. He therefore goes to beg money from others, but when his desires are not fulfilled by begging, he wants to borrow or steal the property of others. Thus he is insulted in society.





The principles of beg, borrow or steal are very appropriate in this material world. When one is in want, he begs, borrows or steals. If begging is unsuccessful, he borrows. If he cannot pay, he steals, and when he is caught, he is insulted. This is the law of material existence. No one can live here very honestly; therefore by trickery, cheating, begging, borrowing or stealing, one tries to satisfy his senses. Thus no one in this material world is living peacefully.





TEXT 13



anyonya-vitta-vyatiṣaṅga-vṛddha-

vairānubandho vivahan mithaś ca

adhvany amuṣminn uru-kṛcchra-vitta-

bādhopasargair viharan vipannaḥ

SYNONYMS



anyonya-with one another; vitta-vyatiṣaṅga-by monetary transactions; vṛddha-increased; vaira-anubandhaḥ-one is encumbered by enmity; vivahan-sometimes marrying; mithaḥ-one another; ca-and; adhvani-on the path of material existence; amuṣmin-that; uru-kṛcchra-by great difficulties; vitta-bādha-by scarcity of money; upasargaiḥ-by diseases; viharan-wandering; vipannaḥ-one becomes fully embarrassed.





Due to monetary transactions, relationships become very strained and end in enmity. Sometimes the husband and wife walk on the path of material progress, and to maintain their relationship they work very hard. Sometimes due to scarcity of money or due to diseased conditions, they are embarrassed and almost die.





In this material world, there are many transactions between peoples and societies as well as between nations, but gradually these end in enmity between the two parties. Similarly, in the marriage relationship, monetary transactions are sometimes overpowered by the dangerous conditions of material life. One then becomes diseased or monetarily embarrassed. In the modern age most countries have developed economically, but due to business exchanges, relationships seem to be strained. Finally wars are declared between nations, and as a result of these upheavals there is destruction all over the world, and people suffer heavily.





TEXT 14



tāṁs tān vipannān sa hi tatra tatra

vihāya jātaṁ parigṛhya sārthaḥ

āvartate 'dyāpi na kaścid atra

vīrādhvanaḥ pāram upaiti yogam

SYNONYMS



tān tān-all of them; vipannān-embarrassed in various ways; saḥ-the living being; hi-certainly; tatra tatra-here and there; vihāya-giving up; jātam-those who are newly born; parigṛhya-taking; sa-arthaḥ-the living being searching for his own interest; āvartate-wanders in this forest; adya api-even until now; na-not; kaścit-any of them; atra-here in this forest; vīra-O hero; adhvanaḥ-of the path of material life; pāram-the ultimate end; upaiti-gets; yogam-the process of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





My dear King, on the forest path of material life, first a person is bereft of his father and mother, and after their death he becomes attached to his newly born children. In this way he wanders on the path of material progress and is eventually embarrassed. Nonetheless, no one knows how to get out of this, even up to the moment of death.





In this material world, family life is an institution of sex. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukham (Bhāg. 7.9.45). Through sex, the father and mother beget children, and the children get married and go down the same path of sexual life. After the death of the father and mother, the children get married and beget their own children. Thus generation after generation these things go on in the same way without anyone's attaining liberation from the embarrassment of material life. No one accepts the spiritual processes of knowledge and renunciation, which end in bhakti-yoga. Actually human life is meant for jñāna and vairāgya, knowledge and renunciation. Through these one can attain the platform of devotional service. Unfortunately people in this age avoid the association of liberated people (sādhu-saṅga) and continue in their stereotyped way of family life. Thus they are embarrassed by the exchange of money and sex.





TEXT 15



manasvino nirjita-dig-gajendrā

mameti sarve bhuvi baddha-vairāḥ

mṛdhe śayīran na tu tad vrajanti

yan nyasta-daṇḍo gata-vairo 'bhiyāti

SYNONYMS



manasvinaḥ-very great heroes (mental speculators); nirjita-dik-gajendrāḥ-who have conquered many other heroes as powerful as elephants; mama-my (my land, my country, my family, my community, my religion); iti-thus; sarve-all (great political, social and religious leaders); bhuvi-in this world; baddha-vairāḥ-who have created enmity among themselves; mṛdhe-in battle; śayīran-fall dead on the ground; na-not; tu-but; tat-the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vrajanti-approach; yat-which; nyasta-daṇḍaḥ-a sannyāsī; gata-vairaḥ-who has no enmity throughout the whole world; abhiyāti-attains that perfection.





There were and are many political and social heroes who have conquered enemies of equal power, yet due to their ignorance in believing that the land is theirs, they fight one another and lay down their lives in battle. They are not able to take up the spiritual path accepted by those in the renounced order. Although they are big heroes and political leaders, they cannot take to the path of spiritual realization.





Big political leaders might be able to conquer equally powerful political enemies, but unfortunately they cannot subdue their strong senses, the enemies that always accompany them. Not being able to conquer these nearby enemies, they simply try to conquer other enemies. and ultimately they die in the struggle for existence. They do not take to the path of spiritual realization or become sannyāsīs. Sometimes these big leaders take up the guise of a sannyāsī and call themselves mahātmās, but their only business is conquering their political enemies. Because they spoil their lives with the illusion of "this is my land and my family," they cannot progress spiritually and attain liberation from the clutches of māyā.





TEXT 16



prasajjati kvāpi latā-bhujāśrayas

tad-āśrayāvyakta-pada-dvija-spṛhaḥ

kvacit kadācid dhari-cakratas trasan

sakhyaṁ vidhatte baka-kaṅka-gṛdhraiḥ

SYNONYMS



prasajjati-becomes more and more attached; kvāpi-sometimes; latā-bhuja-āśrayaḥ-who takes shelter of the soft arms of his beautiful wife which are like creepers; tat-āśraya-who are sheltered by such creepers; avyakta-pada-who sing unclear songs; dvija-spṛhaḥ-desiring to hear birds; kvacit-sometimes; kadācit-somewhere; hari-cakrataḥ trasan-being afraid of the roaring sound of a lion; sakhyam-friendship; vidhatte-makes; baka-kaṅka-gṛdhraiḥ-with cranes, herons and vultures.





Sometimes the living entity in the forest of material existence takes shelter of creepers and desires to hear the chirping of the birds in those creepers. Being afraid of roaring lions in the forest, he makes friends with cranes, herons and vultures.





In the forest of the material world there are many animals and birds, trees and creepers. Sometimes the living entity wants to take shelter of the creepers; in other words, he wants to be happy by being embraced by the creeperlike arms of his wife. Within the creepers there are many chirping birds; this indicates that he wants to satisfy himself by hearing the sweet voice of his wife. In old age, however, he sometimes becomes afraid of imminent death, which is compared to a roaring lion. To save himself from the lion's attack, he takes shelter of some bogus svāmīs, yogīs, incarnations, pretenders and cheaters. Being misled by the illusory energy in this way, he spoils his life. It is said, hariṁ vinā mṛtiṁ na taranti: no one can be saved from the imminent danger of death without taking shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The word hari indicates the lion as well as the Supreme Lord. To be saved from the hands of Hari, the lion of death, one must take shelter of the supreme Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. People with a poor fund of knowledge take shelter of nondevotee cheaters and pretenders in order to be saved from the clutches of death. In the forest of the material world, the living entity first of all wants to be very happy by taking shelter of the creeperlike arms of his wife and hearing her sweet voice. Later, he sometimes takes shelter of so-called gurus and sādhus who are like crane, herons and vultures. Thus he is cheated both ways by not taking shelter of the Supreme Lord.





TEXT 17



tair vañcito haṁsa-kulaṁ samāviśann

arocayan śīlam upaiti vānarān

taj-jāti-rāsena sunirvṛtendriyaḥ

parasparodvīkṣaṇa-vismṛtāvadhiḥ

SYNONYMS



taiḥ-by them (the cheaters and pretenders, the so-called yogīs, svāmīs, incarnations and gurus); vañcitaḥ-being cheated; haṁsa-kulam-the association of great paramahaṁsas, or devotees; samāviśan-contacting; arocayan-not being satisfied with; śīlam-their behavior; upaiti-approaches; vānarān-the monkeys, which are all debauchees with no good character; tat-jāti-rāsena-by sense gratification in the association of such debauchees; sunirvṛta-indriyaḥ-being very satisfied with getting the opportunity of sense gratification; paraspara-of one another; udvīkṣaṇa-by seeing the faces; vismṛta-who has forgotten; avadhiḥ-the end of life.





Being cheated by them, the living entity in the forest of the material world tries to give up the association of these so-called yogīs, svāmīs and incarnations and come to the association of real devotees, but due to misfortune he cannot follow the instructions of the spiritual master or advanced devotees; therefore he gives up their company and again returns to the association of monkeys who are simply interested in sense gratification and women. He derives satisfaction by associating with sense gratifiers and enjoying sex and intoxication. In this way he spoils his life simply by indulging in sex and intoxication. Looking into the faces of other sense gratifiers, he becomes forgetful and thus approaches death.





Sometimes a foolish person becomes disgusted with bad association and comes to the association of devotees and brāhmaṇas and takes initiation from a spiritual master. As advised by the spiritual master, he tries to follow the regulative principles, but due to misfortune he cannot follow the instructions of the spiritual master. He therefore gives up the company of devotees and goes to associate with simian people who are simply interested in sex and intoxication. Those who are so-called spiritualists are compared to monkeys. Outwardly, monkeys sometimes resemble sādhus because they live naked in the forest and pick fruits, but their only desire is to keep many female monkeys and enjoy sex life. Sometimes so-called spiritualists seeking a spiritual life come to associate with Kṛṣṇa conscious devotees, but they cannot execute the regulative principles or follow the path of spiritual life. Consequently they leave the association of devotees and go to associate with sense gratifiers, who are compared to monkeys. Again they revive their sex and intoxication, and looking at one another's faces, they are thus satisfied. In this way they pass their lives up to the point of death.





TEXT 18



drumeṣu raṁsyan suta-dāra-vatsalo

vyavāya-dīno vivaśaḥ sva-bandhane

kvacit pramādād giri-kandare patan

vallīṁ gṛhītvā gaja-bhīta āsthitaḥ

SYNONYMS



drumeṣu-in the trees (or in houses standing like trees in which monkeys jump from one branch to another); raṁsyan-enjoying; suta-dāra-vatsalaḥ-being attached to the children and wife; vyavāya-dīnaḥ-who is poor-hearted because of acting on the platform of sex desire; vivaśaḥ-unable to give up; sva-bandhane-in bondage to the reactions of one's own activities; kvacit-sometimes; pramādāt-from fear of imminent death; giri-kandare-in a cave in a mountain; patan-falling down; vallīm-the branches of a creeper; gṛhītvā-capturing; gaja-bhītaḥ-being afraid of the elephant of death; āsthitaḥ-remains in that position.





When the living entity becomes exactly like a monkey jumping from one branch to another, he remains in the tree of household life without any profit but sex. Thus he is kicked by his wife just like the he-ass. Unable to gain release, he remains helplessly in that position. Sometimes he falls victim to am incurable disease, which is like falling into a mountain cave. He becomes afraid of death, which is like the elephant in the back of that cave, and he remains stranded, grasping at the twigs and branches of a creeper.





The precarious condition of a householder's life is described herein. A householder's life is full of misery, and the only attraction is sex with the wife who kicks him during sexual intercourse, just as the she-ass does her mate. Due to continuous sex life, he falls victim to many incurable diseases. At that time, being afraid of death, which is like an elephant. he remains hanging from the twigs and branches of the tree, just like a monkey.





TEXT 19



ataḥ kathañcit sa vimukta āpadaḥ

punaś ca sārthaṁ praviśaty arindama

adhvany amuṣminn ajayā niveśito

bhramañ jano 'dyāpi na veda kaścana

SYNONYMS



ataḥ-from this; kathañcit-somehow; saḥ-he; vimuktaḥ-liberated; āpadaḥ-from the danger; punaḥ ca-again; sa-artham-taking interest in that life; praviśati-begins; arim-dama-O King, killer of the enemies; adhvani-on the path of enjoyment; amuṣmin-that; ajayā-by the influence of the illusory energy; niveśitaḥ-being absorbed; bhraman-traveling; janaḥ-the conditioned soul; adya api-even up to death; na veda-does not understand; kaścana-anything.





O killer of enemies, Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa, if the conditioned soul somehow or other gets out of his dangerous position, he again returns to his home to enjoy sex life, for that is the way of attachment. Thus, under the spell of the Lord's material energy, he continues to loiter in the forest of material existence. He does not discover his real interest even at the point of death.





This is the way of material life. When one is captured by sexual attraction, he becomes implicated in so many ways and cannot understand the real aim of life. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.31) says, na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum: generally people do not understand the ultimate goal of life. As stated in the Vedas, oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ: those who are spiritually advanced simply look to the lotus feet of Viṣṇu. The conditioned soul. however, not being interested in reviving his relationship with Viṣṇu, becomes captivated by material activities and remains in everlasting bondage, being misled by so-called leaders.





TEXT 20



rahūgaṇa tvam api hy adhvano 'sya

sannyasta-daṇḍaḥ kṛta-bhūta-maitraḥ

asaj-jitātmā hari-sevayā śitaṁ

jñānāsim ādāya tarāti-pāram

SYNONYMS



rahūgaṇa-O King Rahūgaṇa; tvam-you; api-also; hi-certainly; adhvanaḥ-of the path of material existence; asya-this; sannyasta-daṇḍaḥ-having given up the king's rod for punishing criminals; kṛta-bhūta-maitraḥ-having become friendly to everyone; asat-jita-ātmā-whose mind is not attracted to the material pleasure of life; hari-sevayā-by the means of loving service to the Supreme Lord; śitam-sharpened; jñāna-asim-the sword of knowledge; ādāya-taking i n hand; tara-cross over; ati-pāram-to the ultimate end of spiritual existence.





My dear King Rahūgaṇa, you are also a victim of the external energy, being situated on the path of attraction to material pleasure. So that you may become an equal friend to all living entities, I now advise you to give up your kingly position and the rod by which you punish criminals. Give up attraction to the sense objects and take up the sword of knowledge sharpened by devotional service. Then you will be able to cut the hard knot of illusory energy and cross to the other side of the ocean of nescience.





In Bhagavad-gītā Lord Kṛṣṇa compares the material world to a tree of illusion from which one must cut oneself free:



na rūpam asyeha tathopalabhyate

nānto na cādir na ca sampratiṣṭhā

aśvattham enaṁ suvirūḍha-mūlam

asaṅga-śastreṇa dṛḍhena chittvā





tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ

yasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥ

tam eva cādyaṁ puruṣaṁ prapadye

yataḥ pravṛttiḥ prasṛtā purāṇī





"The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with determination, one must cut down this tree with the weapon of detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which, having once gone, one never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead from whom everything has begun and in whom everything is abiding since time immemorial." (Bg. 15.3–4)





TEXT 21



rājovāca

aho nṛ-janmākhila-janma-śobhanaṁ

kiṁ janmabhis tv aparair apy amuṣmin

na yad dhṛṣīkeśa-yaśaḥ-kṛtātmanāṁ

mahātmanāṁ vaḥ pracuraḥ samāgamaḥ

SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-King Rahūgaṇa said; aho-alas; nṛ-janma-you who have taken birth as a human being; akhila-janma-śobhanam-the best of all species of life; kim-what need; janmabhiḥ-with births in a higher species like the demigods in the heavenly planets; tu-but; aparaiḥ-not superior; api-indeed; amuṣmin-in the next birth; na-not; yat-which; hṛṣīkeśa-yaśaḥ-by the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of all senses; kṛta-ātmanām-of those whose hearts are purified; mahā-ātmanām-who are actually great souls; vaḥ-of us; pracuraḥ-abundant; samāgamaḥ-the association.





King Rahūgaṇa said: This birth as a human being is the best of all. Even birth among the demigods in the heavenly planets is not as glorious as birth as a human being on this earth. What is the use of the exalted position of a demigod? In the heavenly planets, due to profuse material comforts, there is no possibility of associating with devotees.





Human birth is a great opportunity for self-realization. One may take birth in a high planetary system among the demigods, but due to the profusion of material comforts, one cannot gain release from material bondage. Even on this earth those who are very opulent do not generally care to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. An intelligent person actually interested in getting freed from the material clutches must associate with pure devotees. By such association, one can gradually become detached from the material attraction of money and women. Money and women are the basic principles of material attachment. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore advised those who are actually serious about returning back to Godhead to give up money and women in order to be fit to enter the kingdom of God. Money and women can be fully utilized in the service of the Lord, and one who can utilize them in this way can become freed from material bondage. Satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ (Bhāg. 3.25.25). Only in the association of devotees can one relish the glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Just through a little association with a pure devotee. one can become successful in his journey back to Godhead.





TEXT 22



na hy adbhutaṁ tvac-caraṇābja-reṇubhir

hatāṁhaso bhaktir adhokṣaje 'malā

mauhūrtikād yasya samāgamāc ca me

dustarka-mūlo 'pahato 'vivekaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-certainly; adbhutam-wonderful; tvat-caraṇa-abja-reṇubhiḥ-by the dust of your lotus feet; hata-aṁhasaḥ-who am completely freed from the reactions of sinful life; bhaktiḥ-love and devotion; adhokṣaje-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the capture of experimental knowledge; amalā-completely freed from all material contamination; mauhūrtikāt-momentary; yasya-of whom; samāgamāt-by the visit and association; ca-also; me-my; dustarka-of false arguments; mūlaḥ-the root; apahataḥ-completely vanquished; avivekaḥ-not discriminating.





It is not at all wonderful that simply by being covered by the dust of your lotus feet, one immediately attains the platform of pure devotional service to Adhokṣaja, which is not available even to great demigods like Brahmā. By associating with you just for a moment, I am now freed from all argument, false prestige and lack of discrimination, which are the roots of entanglement in the material world. Now I am free from all these problems.





Association with pure devotees certainly frees one from the material clutches. This is certainly true of King Rahūgaṇa's association with Jaḍa Bharata. King Rahūgaṇa was immediately freed from the misgivings of material association. The arguments offered by pure devotees to their disciples are so convincing that even a dull-headed disciple is immediately enlightened with spiritual knowledge.





TEXT 23



namo mahadbhyo 'stu namaḥ śiśubhyo

namo yuvabhyo nama āvaṭubhyaḥ

ye brāhmaṇā gām avadhūta-liṅgāś

caranti tebhyaḥ śivam astu rājñām

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-all obeisances; mahadbhyaḥ-unto the great personalities; astu-let there be; namaḥ-my obeisances; śiśubhyaḥ-unto those great personalities who appear as boys; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; yuvabhyaḥ-unto those who appear as young men; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; ā-vaṭubhyaḥ-unto those who appear as children; ye-all those who; brāhmaṇāḥ-self-realized in transcendental knowledge; gām-the earth; avadhūta-liṅgāḥ-who remain hidden under different bodily guises; caranti-they traverse; tebhyaḥ-from them; śivam astu-let there be all good fortune; rājñām-unto the royal dynasties or kings (who are always very puffed up).





I offer my respectful obeisances unto the great personalities, whether they walk on the earth's surface as children, young boys, avadhūtas or great brāhmaṇas. Even if they are hidden under different guises, I offer my respects to all of them. By their mercy, may there be good fortune in the royal dynasties that are always offending them.





King Rahūgaṇa was very repentant because he had forced Jaḍa Bharata to carry his palanquin. He therefore began offering prayers to all kinds of brāhmaṇas and self-realized persons, even though they might be playing like children or hiding in some guises. The four Kumāras walked everywhere in the guise of five-year-old boys, and similarly there are many brāhmaṇas, knowers of Brahman, who traverse the globe either as young men, children or avadhūtas. Being puffed up due to their position, the royal dynasties generally offend these great personalities. Therefore King Rahūgaṇa began to offer his respectful obeisances unto them so that the offensive royal dynasties might not glide down into a hellish condition. If one offends a great personality. the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not excuse one, although the great personalities themselves might not take offense. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was offended by Durvāsā, who even approached Lord Viṣṇu for pardon. Lord Viṣṇu would not grant him pardon; therefore he had to fall down at the lotus feet of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, even though Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was a kṣatriya-gṛhastha. One should be very careful not to offend the lotus feet of Vaiṣṇavas and brāhmaṇas.





TEXT 24



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity evam uttarā-mātaḥ sa vai brahmarṣi-sutaḥ sindhu-pataya ātma-satattvaṁ vigaṇayataḥ parānubhāvaḥ parama-kāruṇikatayopadiśya rahūgaṇena sakaruṇam abhivandita-caraṇa āpūrṇārṇava iva nibhṛta-karaṇormy-āśayo dharaṇim imāṁ vicacāra.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti evam-in this way; uttarā-mātaḥ-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, son of mother Uttarā; saḥ-that brāhmaṇa; vai-indeed; brahma-ṛṣi-sutaḥ-Jaḍa Bharata, the son of a highly educated brāhmaṇa; sindhu-pataye-unto the king of the province of Sindhu; ātma-sa-tattvam-the actual constitutional position of the soul; vigaṇayataḥ-although insulting Jaḍa Bharata; para-anubhāvaḥ-who was very exalted in spiritual realization; parama-kāruṇikatayā-by his quality of being very kind to the fallen souls; upadiśya-instructing; rahūgaṇena-by King Rahūgaṇa; sa-karuṇam-piteously; abhivandita-caraṇaḥ-whose lotus feet were worshiped; āpūrṇa-arṇavaḥ iva-like the full ocean; nibhṛta-completely silenced; karaṇa-of the senses; ūrmi-the waves; āśayaḥ-possessing a heart in which; dharaṇim-the earth; imām-this; vicacāra-continued to roam.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, O son of mother Uttarā, there were some waves of dissatisfaction in the mind of Jaḍa Bharata due to his being insulted by King Rahūgaṇa, who made him carry his palanquin, but Jaḍa Bharata neglected this, and his heart again became calm and quiet like an ocean. Although King Rahūgaṇa had insulted him, he was a great paramahaṁsa. Being a Vaiṣṇava, he was naturally very kindhearted, and he therefore told the King about the constitutional position of the soul. He then forgot the insult because King Rahūgaṇa pitifully begged pardon at his lotus feet. After this, he began to wander all over the earth, just as before.





In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.21), Kapiladeva describes the symptoms of great personalities: titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām. A saintly devotee is certainly very tolerant. He is the friend of all living entities, and he does not create enemies within the world. A pure devotee has all the qualities of a sādhu. Jaḍa Bharata is an example of this. Due to the material body, his senses were certainly agitated when he was insulted by King Rahūgaṇa, but later, due to the King's humble submission, Jaḍa Bharata excused him. It is the duty of everyone desiring to return to Godhead to become submissive like King Rahūgaṇa and beg pardon of Vaiṣṇavas one may have offended. Vaiṣṇavas are generally very kindhearted; therefore if one immediately submits himself at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava, one is immediately cleared of offensive reactions. If one does not do so, the reactions will remain, and the results will not be very palatable.





TEXT 25



sauvīra-patir api sujana-samavagata-paramātma-satattva ātmany avidyādhyāropitāṁ ca dehātma-matiṁ visasarja; evaṁ hi nṛpa bhagavad-āśritāśritānubhāvaḥ.



SYNONYMS



sauvīra-patiḥ-the King of the state of Sauvīra; api-certainly; su-jana-from an elevated person; samavagata-having completely understood; paramātma-sa-tattvaḥ-the truth of the constitutional position of the spirit soul and the Supersoul; ātmani-in himself; avidyā-by nescience; adhyāropitām-erroneously attributed; ca-and; deha-in the body; ātma-matim-the concept of the self; visasarja-completely gave up; evam-thus; hi-certainly; nṛpa-O King; bhagavat-āśrita-āśrita-anubhāvaḥ-the consequence of taking shelter of a devotee who has similarly taken shelter of a spiritual master in the paramparā system (one is sure to get out of the great nescience of the bodily concept of life).





After receiving lessons from the great devotee Jaḍa Bharata, King Rahūgaṇa of the state of Sauvīra became completely aware of the constitutional position of the soul. He thus gave up the bodily conception completely. My dear King, whoever takes shelter of the servant of the servant of the Lord is certainly glorified because he can without difficulty give up the bodily conception.





As stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.54):



"sādhu-saṅga", "sādhu-saṅga"--sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya





It is a fact that if one takes shelter of a pure devotee, one attains all perfection, even if the association is a short one. A sādhu is a pure devotee of the Lord. It has been our practical experience that the first instruction of our spiritual master infused us with Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that now we are at least on the path of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and can understand the philosophy. As a result, there are many devotees engaged in this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. The whole world is revolving under the bodily conception; therefore there must be devotees all over the world to deliver people from the false bodily conception and fully engage them in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 26



rājovāca

yo ha vā iha bahu-vidā mahā-bhāgavata tvayābhihitaḥ parokṣeṇa vacasā jīva-loka-bhavādhvā sa hy ārya-manīṣayā kalpita-viṣayo nāñjasāvyutpanna-loka-samadhigamaḥ; atha tad evaitad duravagamaṁ samavetānukalpena nirdiśyatām iti.



SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; yaḥ-which; ha-certainly; vā-or; iha-in this narration; bahu-vidā-who are aware of many incidents of transcendental knowledge; mahā-bhāgavata-O great devotee sage; tvayā-by you; abhihitaḥ-described; parokṣeṇa-figuratively; vacasā-by words; jīva-loka-bhava-adhvā-the path of material existence of the conditioned soul; saḥ-that; hi-indeed; ārya-manīṣayā-by the intelligence of advanced devotees; kalpita-viṣayaḥ-the subject matter is imagined; na-not; añjasā-directly; avyutpanna-loka-of persons who are not very experienced or intelligent; samadhigamaḥ-the complete understanding; atha-therefore; tat eva-because of that; etat-this matter; duravagamam-which is difficult to understand; samaveta-anukalpena-by substituting the direct meaning of such incidents; nirdiśyatām-let it be described; iti-thus.





King Parīkṣit then told Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My dear lord, O great devotee sage, you are omniscient. You have very nicely described the position of the conditioned soul, who is compared to a merchant in the forest. From these instructions intelligent men can understand that the senses of a person in the bodily conception are like rogues and thieves in that forest, and one's wife and children are like jackals and other ferocious animals. However, it is not very easy for the unintelligent to understand the purport of this story because it is difficult to extricate the exact meaning from the allegory. I therefore request Your Holiness to give the direct meaning.





There are many stories and incidents in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that are described figuratively. Such allegorical descriptions may not be understood by unintelligent men; therefore it is the duty of the student to approach a bona fide spiritual master for the direct explanation.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "Further Talks Between King Rahūgaṇa and Jaḍa Bharata."



Chapter Fourteen



The Material World as the Great Forest of Enjoyment





The direct meaning of the forest of material existence is given in this chapter. Merchants sometimes enter the forest to collect many rare things and sell them at a good profit in the city, but the forest path is always bedecked with dangers. When the pure soul wants to give up the Lord's service to enjoy the material world, Kṛṣṇa certainly gives him a chance to enter the material world. As stated in the Prema-vivarta: kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga vāñchā kare. This is the reason the pure spirit soul falls down to the material world. Due to his activities under the influence of the three modes of material nature, the living entity takes different positions in different species. Sometimes he is a demigod in the heavenly planets and sometimes a most insignificant creature in the lower planetary systems. In this regard, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, nānā yoni sadā phire: the living entity passes through various species. Kardarya bhakṣaṇa kare: he is obliged to eat and enjoy abominable things. Tāra janma adhaḥ-pāte yāya: in this way his whole life is spoiled. Without the protection of an all-merciful Vaiṣṇava. the conditioned soul cannot get out of the clutches of māyā. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]), the living entity begins material life with his mind and the five knowledge-acquiring senses, and with these he struggles for existence within the material world. These senses are compared to rogues and thieves within the forest. They take away a man's knowledge and place him in a network of nescience. Thus the senses are like rogues and thieves that plunder his spiritual knowledge. Over and above this, there are family members, wife and children. who are exactly like ferocious animals in the forest. The business of such ferocious animals is to eat a man's flesh. The living entity allows himself to be attacked by jackals and foxes (wife and children), and thus his real spiritual life is finished. In the forest of material life, everyone is envious like mosquitoes, and rats and mice are always creating disturbances. Everyone in this material world is placed in many awkward positions and surrounded by envious people and disturbing animals. The result is that the living entity in the material world is always plundered and bitten by many living entities. Nonetheless, despite these disturbances, he does not want to give up his family life, and he continues his fruitive activities in an attempt to become happy in the future. He thus becomes more and more entangled in the results of karma, and thus he is forced to act impiously. His witnesses are the sun during the day and the moon during the night. The demigods also witness, but the conditioned soul thinks that his attempts at sense gratification are not being witnessed by anyone. Sometimes, when he is detected, he temporarily renounces everything, but due to his great attachment for the body, his renunciation is given up before he can attain perfection.





In this material world there are many envious people. There is the tax-exacting government, which is compared to an owl, and there are invisible crickets that create unbearable sounds. The conditioned soul is certainly greatly harassed by the agents of material nature, but his intelligence is lost due to undesirable association. In an attempt to gain relief from the disturbances of material existence, he falls victim to so-called yogīs, sādhus and incarnations who can display some magic but who do not understand devotional service. Sometimes the conditioned soul is bereft of all money, and consequently he becomes unkind to his family members. In this material world there is not a pinch of actual happiness, for which the conditioned soul is longing life after life. The government officials are like carnivorous Rākṣasas who exact heavy taxes for the maintenance of the government. The hard-working conditioned soul is very saddened due to these heavy taxes.





The path of fruitive activities leads to difficult mountains, and sometimes the conditioned soul wants to cross these mountains, but he is never successful, and consequently he becomes more and more aggrieved and disappointed. Becoming materially and financially embarrassed, the conditioned soul unnecessarily chastises his family. In the material condition there are four principal needs, out of which sleep is compared to a python. When asleep, the conditioned soul completely forgets his real existence, and in sleep he does not feel the tribulations of material life. Sometimes, being in need of money, the conditioned soul steals and cheats, although he may apparently be associated with devotees for spiritual advancement. His only business is getting out of the clutches of māyā, but due to improper guidance he becomes more and more entangled in material dealings. This material world is simply an embarrassment and is composed of tribulations presented as happiness. distress, attachment, enmity and envy. On the whole it is simply full of tribulation and misery. When a person loses his intelligence due to attachment to wife and sex, his entire consciousness becomes polluted. He thus only thinks of the association of women. The time factor, which is like a serpent, takes away everyone's life, including that of Lord Brahmā and the insignificant ant. Sometimes the conditioned soul tries to save himself from inexorable time and thus takes shelter of some bogus savior. Unfortunately. the bogus savior cannot even save himself. How, then. can he protect others? The bogus saviors do not care for bona fide knowledge received from qualified brāhmaṇas and Vedic sources. Their only business is indulging in sex and recommending sexual freedom even for widows. Thus they are like monkeys in the forest. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī thus explains the material forest and its difficult path to Mahārāja Parīkṣit.





TEXT 1



sa hovāca

sa eṣa dehātma-mānināṁ sattvādi-guṇa-viśeṣa-vikalpita-kuśalāku-śala-samavahāra-vinirmita-vividha-dehāvalibhir viyoga-saṁyogādy-anādi-saṁsārānubhavasya dvāra-bhūtena ṣaḍ-indriya-vargeṇa tasmin durgādhvavad asugame 'dhvany āpatita īśvarasya bhagavato viṣṇor vaśa-vartinyā māyayā jīva-loko 'yaṁ yathā vaṇik-sārtho 'rtha-paraḥ sva-deha-niṣpādita-karmānubhavaḥ śmaśānavad aśivatamāyāṁ saṁsārāṭavyāṁ gato nādyāpi viphala-bahu-pratiyogehas tat-tāpopaśamanīṁ hari-guru-caraṇāravinda-madhukarānupadavīm avarundhe.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-the self-realized devotee (Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī); ha-indeed; uvāca-spoke; saḥ-he (the conditioned soul); eṣaḥ-this one; deha-ātma-māninām-of those who foolishly take the body to be the self; sattva-ādi-of sattva, rajaḥ and tamaḥ; guṇa-by the modes; viśeṣa-particular; vikalpita-falsely constituted; kuśala-sometimes by favorable actions; akuśala-sometimes by very unfavorable actions; samavahāra-by a mixture of both; vinirmita-obtained; vividha-various types; deha-āvalibhiḥ-by the series of bodies; viyoga-saṁyoga-ādi-symptomized by giving up one type of body (viyoga) and accepting another (saṁyoga); anādi-saṁsāra-anubhavasya-of the perception of the beginningless process of transmigration; dvāra-bhūtena-existing as the doorways; ṣaṭ-indriya-vargeṇa-by these six senses (the mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses, namely the eyes, ears, tongue, nose and skin); tasmin-on that; durga-adhva-vat-like a path that is very difficult to traverse; asugame-being difficult to pass through; adhvani-on a path in the forest; āpatitaḥ-happened; īśvarasya-of the controller; bhagavataḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; vaśa-vartinyā-acting under the control; māyayā-by the material energy; jīva-lokaḥ-the conditioned living entity; ayam-this; yathā-exactly like; vaṇik-a merchant; sa-arthaḥ-having an object; artha-paraḥ-who is very attached to money; sva-deha-niṣpādita-performed by his own body; karma-the fruits of activities; anubhavaḥ-who experiences; śmaśāna-vat aśivatamāyām-like an inauspicious cemetery or place of burial; saṁsāra-aṭavyām-in the forest of material life; gataḥ-having entered; na-not; adya api-until now; viphala-unsuccessful; bahu-pratiyoga-full of great difficulties and varieties of miserable conditions; īhaḥ-whose activities here in this material world; tat-tāpa-upaśa-manīm-which pacifies the miseries of the forest of material life; hari-guru-caraṇa-aravinda-to the lotus feet of the Lord and His devotee; madhukara-anupadavīm-the road followed in pursuance of devotees who are attached like bumblebees; avarundhe-gain.





When King Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī about the direct meaning of the material forest, Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied as follows: My dear King, a man belonging to the mercantile community [vaṇik] is always interested in earning money. Sometimes he enters the forest to acquire some cheap commodities like wood and earth and sell them in the city at good prices. Similarly, the conditioned soul, being greedy, enters this material world for some material profit. Gradually he enters the deepest part of the forest, not really knowing how to get out. Having entered the material world, the pure soul becomes conditioned by the material atmosphere, which is created by the external energy under the control of Lord Viṣṇu. Thus the living entity comes under the control of the external energy, daivī māyā. Living independently and bewildered in the forest, he does not attain the association of devotees who are always engaged in the service of the Lord. Once in the bodily conception, he gets different types of bodies one after the other under the influence of material energy and impelled by the modes of material nature [sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa]. In this way the conditioned soul goes sometimes to the heavenly planets, sometimes to the earthly planets and sometimes to the lower planets and lower species. Thus he suffers continuously due to different types of bodies. These sufferings and pains are sometimes mixed. Sometimes they are very severe, and sometimes they are not. These bodily conditions are acquired due to the conditioned soul's mental speculation. He uses his mind and five senses to acquire knowledge, and these bring about the different bodies and different conditions. Using the senses under the control of the external energy, māyā, the living entity suffers the miserable conditions of material existence. He is actually searching for relief, but he is generally baffled, although sometimes he is relieved after great difficulty. Struggling for existence in this way, he cannot get the shelter of pure devotees, who are like bumblebees engaged in loving service at the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu.





The most important information in this verse is hari-guru-caraṇa-aravinda-madhukara-anupadavīm. In this material world the conditioned souls are baffled by their activities, and sometimes they are relieved after great difficulty. On the whole the conditioned soul is never happy. He simply struggles for existence. Actually his only business is to accept the spiritual master, the guru, and through him he must accept the lotus feet or the Lord. This is explained by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja. people struggling for existence in the forests or cities of the material world are not actually enjoying life. They are simply suffering different pains and pleasures, generally pains that are always inauspicious. They try to gain release from these pains, but they cannot due to ignorance. For them it is stated in the Vedas: tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12]. When the living entity is lost in the forest of the material world, in the struggle for existence, his first business is to find a bona fide guru who is always engaged at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. After all, if he is at all eager to be relieved of the struggle for existence, he must find a bona fide guru and take instructions at his lotus feet. In this way he can get out of the struggle.



Since the material world is compared herein to a forest, it may be argued that in Kali-yuga modern civilization is mainly situated in the cities. A great city, however, is like a great forest. Actually city life is more dangerous than life in the forest. If one enters an unknown city without friend or shelter, living in that city is more difficult than living in a forest. There are many big cities all over the surface of the globe, and wherever one looks he sees the struggle for existence going on twenty-four hours a day. people rush about in cars going seventy and eighty miles an hour, constantly coming and going, and this sets the scene of the great struggle for existence. One has to rise early in the morning and travel in that car at breakneck speed. There is always the danger of an accident, and one has to take great care. In his automobile, the living entity is full of anxieties, and his struggle is not at all auspicious. Apart from human beings, other species like cats and dogs are also struggling very hard day and night for existence. Thus the struggle for existence continues, and the conditioned soul changes from one position to another. For a while, he is a child, but he has to become a boy. From a boy, he has to change into a youth, and from youth to manhood and old age. Finally, when the body is no longer workable, he has to accept a new body in a different species. Giving up the body is called death, and accepting another body is called birth. The human form is an opportunity to take shelter of the bona fide spiritual master and, through him, the Supreme Lord. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has been started to give an opportunity to all the members of human society, who are misled by foolish leaders. No one can get out of this struggle for existence, which is full of miseries, without accepting a pure devotee of the Lord. The material attempt changes from one position to another, and no one actually gains relief from the struggle for existence. The only resort is the lotus feet of a bona fide spiritual master, and, through him, the lotus feet of the Lord.





TEXT 2



yasyām u ha vā ete ṣaḍ-indriya-nāmānaḥ karmaṇā dasyava eva te; tad yathā puruṣasya dhanaṁ yat kiñcid dharmaupayikaṁ bahu-kṛcchrādhigataṁ sākṣāt parama-puruṣārādhana-lakṣaṇo yo 'sau dharmas taṁ tu sāmparāya udāharanti; tad-dharmyaṁ dhanaṁ darśana-sparśana-śravaṇāsvādanāvaghrāṇa-saṅkalpa-vyavasāya-gṛha-grāmyopabhogena kunāthasyājitātmano yathā sārthasya vilum-panti.



SYNONYMS



yasyām-in which; u ha-certainly; vā-or; ete-all these; ṣaṭ-indriya-nāmānaḥ-who are named the six senses (the mind and the five knowledge-acquiring senses); karmaṇā-by their activity; dasyavaḥ-the plunderers; eva-certainly; te-they; tat-that; yathā-as; puruṣasya-of a person; dhanam-the wealth; yat-whatever; kiñcit-something; dharma-aupayikam-which is a means to religious principles; bahu-kṛcchra-adhigatam-earned after much hard labor; sākṣāt-directly; parama-puruṣa-ārādhana-lakṣaṇaḥ-whose symptoms are worship of the Supreme Lord by performance of sacrifices and so on; yaḥ-which; asau-that; dharmaḥ-religious principles; tam-that; tu-but; sāmparāye-for the benefit of the living entity after death; udāharanti-the wise declare; tat-dharmyam-religious (relating to the prosecution of the varṇāśrama-dharma); dhanam-wealth; darśana-by seeing; sparśana-by touching; śravaṇa-by hearing; āsvādana-by tasting; avaghrāṇa-by smelling; saṅkalpa-by determination; vyavasāya-by a conclusion; gṛha-in the material home; grāmya-upabhogena-by material sense gratification; kunāthasya-of the misguided conditioned soul; ajita-ātmanaḥ-who has not controlled himself; yathā-just as; sārthasya-of the living entity interested in sense gratification; vilumpanti-they plunder.





In the forest of material existence, the uncontrolled senses are like plunderers. The conditioned soul may earn some money for the advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but unfortunately the uncontrolled senses plunder his money through sense gratification. The senses are plunderers because they make one spend his money unnecessarily for seeing, smelling, tasting, touching, hearing, desiring and willing. In this way the conditioned soul is obliged to gratify his senses, and thus all his money is spent. This money is actually acquired for the execution of religious principles, but it is taken away by the plundering senses.





pūrva jamnārjitā vidyā pūrva janmārjitaṁ dhanaṁ agre dhāvati dhāvati. By following the principles of the varṇāśrama-dharma, one attains a better position in the material world. One may be rich, learned, beautiful or highborn. One who has all these assets should know that they are all meant for the advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Unfortunately, when a person is misguided he misuses his high position for sense gratification. Therefore the uncontrolled senses are considered plunderers. The good position one attains by executing religious principles is wasted as the plundering senses take it away. By executing religious principles under the laws of varṇa-śrama-dharma, one is placed in a comfortable position. One may very easily use his assets for the further advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One should understand that the wealth and opportunity one gets in the material world should not be squandered in sense gratification. They are meant for the advancement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore teaching people to control the mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses by a definite process. One should practice a little austerity and not spend money on anything other than the regulative life of devotional service. The senses demand that one see beautiful things; therefore money should be spent for decorating the Deity in the temple. Similarly, the tongue has to taste good food, which should be bought and offered to the Deity. The nose can be utilized in smelling the flowers offered to the Deity, and the hearing can be utilized by listening to the vibration of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. In this way the senses can be regulated and utilized to advance Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Thus a good position might not be spoiled by material sense gratification in the form of illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. One spoils an opulent position in the material world by driving cars, spending time in nightclubs or tasting abominable food in restaurants. In these ways. the plundering senses take away all the assets that the conditioned soul has acquired with great difficulty.





TEXT 3



atha ca yatra kauṭumbikā dārāpatyādayo nāmnā karmaṇā vṛka-sṛgālā evānicchato 'pi kadaryasya kuṭumbina uraṇakavat saṁrakṣyamāṇaṁ miṣato 'pi haranti.



SYNONYMS



atha-in this way; ca-also; yatra-in which; kauṭumbikāḥ-the family members; dāra-apatya-ādayaḥ-beginning with the wife and children; nāmnā-by name only; karmaṇā-by their behavior; vṛka-sṛgālāḥ-tigers and jackals; eva-certainly; anicchataḥ-of one who does not desire to spend his wealth; api-certainly; kadaryasya-being too miserly; kuṭumbinaḥ-who is surrounded by family members; uraṇaka-vat-like a lamb; saṁrakṣyamāṇam-although protected; miṣataḥ-of one who is observing; api-even; haranti-they forcibly take away.





My dear King, family members in this material world go under the names of wife and children, but actually they behave like tigers and jackals. A herdsman tries to protect his sheep to the best of his ability, but the tigers and foxes take them away by force. Similarly, although a miserly man wants to guard his money very carefully, his family members take away all his assets forcibly, even though he is very vigilant.





One Hindi poet has sung: din kā dakinī rāt kā bāghinī pālak pālak rahu cuse. During the daytime, the wife is compared to a witch, and at night she is compared to a tigress. Her only business is sucking the blood of her husband both day and night. During the day there are household expenditures, and the money earned by the husband at the cost of his blood is taken away. At night, due to sex pleasure, the husband discharges blood in the form of semen. In this way he is bled by his wife both day and night, yet he is so crazy that he very carefully maintains her. Similarly, the children are also like tigers, jackals and foxes. As tigers, jackals and foxes take away lambs despite the herdsman's vigilant protection, children take away the father's money, although the father supervises the money himself. Thus family members may be called wives and children, but actually they are plunderers.





TEXT 4



yathā hy anuvatsaraṁ kṛṣyamāṇam apy adagdha-bījaṁ kṣetraṁ punar evāvapana-kāle gulma-tṛṇa-vīrudbhir gahvaram iva bhavaty evam eva gṛhāśramaḥ karma-kṣetraṁ yasmin na hi karmāṇy utsīdanti yad ayaṁ kāma-karaṇḍa eṣa āvasathaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; hi-certainly; anuvatsaram-every year; kṛṣyamāṇam-being plowed; api-although; adagdha-bījam-in which the seeds are not burned; kṣetram-the field; punaḥ-again; eva-certainly; āvapana-kāle-at the times for sowing the seeds; gulma-by bushes; tṛṇa-by grasses; vīrudbhiḥ-by the creepers; gahvaram iva-like a bower; bhavati-becomes; evam-thus; eva-certainly; gṛha-āśramaḥ-family life; karma-kṣetram-the field of activities; yasmin-in which; na-not; hi-certainly; karmāṇi utsīdanti-fruitive activities disappear; yat-therefore; ayam-this; kāma-karaṇḍaḥ-the storehouse of fruitive desire; eṣaḥ-this; āvasathaḥ-abode.





Every year the plowman plows over his grain field, completely uprooting all weeds. Nonetheless, the seeds lie there and, not being completely burned, again come up with the plants sown in the field. Even after being plowed under, the weeds come up densely. Similarly, the gṛhastha-āśrama [family life] is a field of fruitive activity. Unless the desire to enjoy family life is completely burned out, it grows up again and again. Even though camphor may be removed from a pot, the pot nonetheless retains the aroma of camphor. As long as the seeds of desire are not destroyed, fruitive activities are not destroyed.





Unless one's desires are completely transferred to the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the desire for family life continues. even after one has taken sannyāsa. Sometimes in our society, ISKCON. a person out of sentiment may take sannyāsa, but because his desires are not burned completely, he again takes to family life, even at the risk of losing his prestige and disgracing his good name. These strong desires can be burned out completely when one fully engages in the service of the Lord in devotional service.





TEXT 5



tatra gato daṁśa-maśaka-samāpasadair manujaiḥ śalabha-śakunta-taskara-mūṣakādibhir uparudhyamāna-bahiḥ-prāṇaḥ kvacit parivartamāno 'sminn adhvany avidyā-kāma-karmabhir uparakta-manasānupapannārthaṁ nara-lokaṁ gandharva-nagaram upapannam iti mithyā-dṛṣṭir anupaśyati.



SYNONYMS



tatra-to that household life; gataḥ-gone; daṁśa-gadflies; maśaka-mosquitoes; sama-equal to; apasadaiḥ-who are low-class; manu-jaiḥ-by men; śalabha-locusts; śakunta-a large bird of prey; taskara-thieves; mūṣaka-ādibhiḥ-by rats and so on; uparudhyamāna-being disturbed; bahiḥ-prāṇaḥ-the external life air in the form of wealth and so on; kvacit-sometimes; parivartamānaḥ-wandering; asmin-in this; adhvani-path of material existence; avidyā-kāma-by ignorance and lust; karmabhiḥ-and by fruitive activities; uparakta-manasā-due to the mind's being influenced; anupapanna-artham-in which the desired results are never obtained; nara-lokam-this material world; gandharva-nagaram-a will-o'-the-wisp city; upapannam-existing; iti-taking it as; mithyā-dṛṣṭiḥ-he whose vision is mistaken; anupaśyati-observes.





Sometimes the conditioned soul in household life, being attached to material wealth and possessions, is disturbed by gadflies and mosquitoes, and sometimes locusts, birds of prey and rats give him trouble. Nonetheless, he still wanders down the path of material existence. Due to ignorance he becomes lusty and engages in fruitive activity. Because his mind is absorbed in these activities, he sees the material world as permanent, although it is temporary like a phantasmagoria, a house in the sky.





The following song is sung by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura:



ahaṅkāre matta hañā, nitāi-pada pāsariyā,

asatyere satya kari māni

Due to forgetting the lotus feet of Lord Nityānanda and being puffed up by material possessions, wealth and opulence, one thinks the false, temporary material world to be an actual fact. This is the material disease. The living entity is eternal and blissful, but despite miserable material conditions, he thinks the material world to be real and factual due to his ignorance.





TEXT 6



tatra ca kvacid ātapodaka-nibhān viṣayān upadhāvati pāna-bhojana-vyavāyādi-vyasana-lolupaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tatra-there (in this phantom place); ca-also; kvacit-sometimes; ātapa-udaka-nibhān-like the water in a mirage in the desert; viṣayān-the objects of sense enjoyment; upadhāvati-runs after; pāna-to drinking; bhojana-to eating; vyavāya-to sex life; ādi-and so on; vyasana-with addiction; lolupaḥ-a debauchee.





Sometimes in this house in the sky [gandharva-pura] the conditioned soul drinks, eats and has sex. Being overly attached, he chases after the objects of the senses just as a deer chases a mirage in the desert.





There are two worlds-the spiritual and the material. The material world is false like a mirage in the desert. In the desert, animals think they see water, but actually there is none. Similarly, those who are animalistic try to find peace within the desert of material life. It is repeatedly said in different śāstras that there is no pleasure in this material world. Furthermore, even if we agree to live without pleasure, we are not allowed to do so. In Bhagavad-gītā, Lord Kṛṣṇa says that the material world is not only full of miseries (duḥkhālayam) but also temporary (aśāśvatam). Even if we want to live here amid miseries, material nature will not allow us to do so. It will oblige us to change bodies and enter another atmosphere full of miserable conditions.





TEXT 7



kvacic cāśeṣa-doṣa-niṣadanaṁ purīṣa-viśeṣaṁ tad-varṇa-guṇa-nirmita-matiḥ suvarṇam upāditsaty agni-kāma-kātara ivolmuka-piśācam.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; ca-also; aśeṣa-unlimited; doṣa-of faults; niṣadanam-the source of; purīṣa-of stool; viśeṣam-a particular type; tat-varṇa-guṇa-whose color is the same as that of the mode of passion (reddish); nirmita-matiḥ-whose mind is absorbed in that; suvarṇam-gold; upāditsati-desiring to get; agni-kāma-by the desire for fire; kātaraḥ-who is troubled; iva-like; ulmuka-piśācam-a phosphorescent light known as a will-o'-the-wisp, which is sometimes mistaken for a ghost.





Sometimes the living entity is interested in the yellow stool known as gold and runs after it. That gold is the source of material opulence and envy, and it can enable one to afford illicit sex, gambling, meat-eating and intoxication. Those whose minds are overcome by the mode of passion are attracted by the color of gold, just as a man suffering from cold in the forest runs after a phosphorescent light in a marshy land, considering it to be fire.





Parīkṣit Mahārāja told Kali-yuga to leave his kingdom immediately and reside in four places: brothels, liquor shops, slaughterhouses and gambling casinos. However, Kali-yuga requested him to give him only one place where these four places are included, and Parīkṣit Mahārāja gave him the place where gold is stored. Gold encompasses the four principles of sin, and therefore, according to spiritual life, gold should be avoided as far as possible. If there is gold, there is certainly illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling and intoxication. Because people in the Western world have a great deal of gold, they are victims of these four sins. The color of gold is very glittering, and a materialistic person becomes very much attracted by its yellow color. However, this gold is actually a type of stool. A person with a bad liver generally passes yellow stool. The color of this stool attracts a materialistic person, just as the will-o'-the-wisp attracts one who needs heat.





TEXT 8



atha kadācin nivāsa-pānīya-draviṇādy-anekātmopajīvanābhiniveśa etasyāṁ saṁsārāṭavyām itas tataḥ paridhāvati.



SYNONYMS



atha-in this way; kadācit-sometimes; nivāsa-residence; pānīya-water; draviṇa-wealth; ādi-and so on; aneka-in various items; ātma-upajīvana-which are considered necessary to maintain body and soul together; abhiniveśaḥ-a person fully absorbed; etasyām-in this; saṁsāra-aṭavyām-the material world, which is like a great forest; itaḥ tataḥ-here and there; paridhāvati-runs around.





Sometimes the conditioned soul is absorbed in finding residential quarters or apartments and getting a supply of water and riches to maintain his body. Absorbed in acquiring a variety of necessities, he forgets everything and perpetually runs around the forest of material existence.





As originally mentioned, a poor man belonging to the mercantile community goes to the forest to get some cheap goods to bring back to the city to sell at a profit. He is so absorbed in the thought of maintaining body and soul together that he forgets his original relationship with Kṛṣṇa and seeks only the bodily comforts. Thus material activities are the conditioned soul's only engagement. Not knowing the aim of life, the materialist perpetually wanders in material existence, struggling to get the necessities of life. Not understanding the aim of life, even though he acquires sufficient necessities, he manufactures artificial necessities and thus becomes more and more entangled. He creates a mental situation whereby he needs greater and greater comforts. The materialist does not know the secret of nature's ways. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (3.27):



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are in actuality carried out by nature." Due to lusty desire, the living entity creates a certain mental situation whereby he wants to enjoy this material world. He thus becomes entangled, enters different bodies and suffers in them.





TEXT 9



kvacic ca vātyaupamyayā pramadayāroham āropitas tat-kāla-rajasā rajanī-bhūta ivāsādhu-maryādo rajas-valākṣo 'pi dig-devatā atirajas-vala-matir na vijānāti.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; ca-also; vātyā aupamyayā-compared to a whirlwind; pramadayā-by a beautiful woman; āroham āropitaḥ-raised onto the lap for sex enjoyment; tat-kāla-rajasā-by the passion of lusty desires at that moment; rajanī-bhūtaḥ-the darkness of night; iva-like; asādhu-maryādaḥ-who is without proper respect for the higher witnesses; rajaḥ-vala-akṣaḥ-blinded by strong lusty desires; api-certainly; dik-devatāḥ-the demigods in charge of different directions, like the sun and the moon; atirajaḥ-vala-matiḥ-whose mind is overcome by lust; na vijānāti-he does not know (that witnesses all around take note of his impudent sexual act).





Sometimes, as if blinded by the dust of a whirlwind, the conditioned soul sees the beauty of the opposite sex, which is called pramadā. Being thus bewildered, he is raised upon the lap of a woman, and at that time his good senses are overcome by the force of passion. He thus becomes almost blind with lusty desire and disobeys the rules and regulations governing sex life. He does not know that his disobedience is witnessed by different demigods, and he enjoys illicit sex in the dead of night, not seeing the future punishment awaiting him.





In Bhagavad-gītā (7.11) it is said: dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu kāmo 'smi bharatarṣabha. Sex is allowed only for the begetting of children, not for enjoyment. One can indulge in sex to beget a good child for the benefit of the family, society and world. Otherwise, sex is against the rules and regulations of religious life. A materialistic person does not believe that everything is managed in nature, and he does not know that if one does something wrong, he is witnessed by different demigods. A person enjoys illicit sex, and due to his blind, lusty desire. he thinks that no one can see him, but this illicit sex is thoroughly observed by the agents of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the person is punished in so many ways. presently in Kali-yuga there are many pregnancies due to illicit sex, and sometimes abortions ensue. These sinful activities are witnessed by the agents of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and a man and woman who create such a situation are punished in the future by the stringent laws of material nature (daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā). Illicit sex is never excused, and those who indulge in it are punished life after life. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (16.20):



āsurīṁ yonim āpannā

mūḍhā janmani janmani

mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya

tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim





"Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of existence."



The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not allow anyone to act against the stringent laws of material nature; therefore illicit sex is punished life after life. Illicit sex creates pregnancies, and these unwanted pregnancies lead to abortion. Those involved become implicated in these sins, so much so that they are punished in the same way the next life. Thus in the next life they also enter the womb of a mother and are killed in the same way. All these things can be avoided by remaining on the transcendental platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In this way one does not commit sinful activity. Illicit sex is the most prominent sin due to lusty desire. When one associates with the mode of passion, he is implicated in suffering life after life.





TEXT 10



kvacit sakṛd avagata-viṣaya-vaitathyaḥ svayaṁ parābhidhyānena vibhraṁśita-smṛtis tayaiva marīci-toya-prāyāṁs tān evābhidhāvati.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; sakṛt-once; avagata-viṣaya-vaitathyaḥ-becoming conscious of the uselessness of enjoying material sense gratification; svayam-himself; para-abhidhyānena-by the bodily concept of the self; vibhraṁśita-destroyed; smṛtiḥ-whose remembrance; tayā-by that; eva-certainly; marīci-toya-water in a mirage; prāyān-similar to; tān-those sense objects; eva-certainly; abhidhāvati-runs after.





The conditioned soul sometimes personally appreciates the futility of sense enjoyment in the material world, and he sometimes considers material enjoyment to be full of miseries. However, due to his strong bodily conception, his memory is destroyed, and again and again he runs after material enjoyment, just as an animal runs after a mirage in the desert.





The main disease in material life is the bodily conception. Being baffled again and again in material activity, the conditioned soul temporarily thinks of the futility of material enjoyment, but he again tries the same thing. By the association of devotees, a person may become convinced of the material futility, but he cannot give up his engagement, although he is very eager to return home, back to Godhead. Under these circumstances, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart, compassionately takes away all the material possessions of such a devotee. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.88.8): yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ. Lord Kṛṣṇa says that He takes everything away from the devotee whom He especially favors when that devotee is overly attached to material possessions. When everything is taken away, the devotee feels helpless and frustrated in society, friendship and love. He feels that his family does not care for him any longer, and he therefore completely surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord. This is a special favor granted by the Lord to a devotee who cannot fully surrender to the Lord due to a strong bodily conception. As explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.39): āmi-vijña, ei mūrkhe 'viṣaya' kene diba. The Lord understands the devotee who hesitates to engage in the Lord's service, not knowing whether he should again try to revive his material life. After repeated attempts and failures, he fully surrenders to the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord then gives him directions, and, attaining happiness, he forgets all material engagement.





TEXT 11



kvacid ulūka-jhillī-svanavad ati-paruṣa-rabhasāṭopaṁ pratyakṣaṁ parokṣaṁ vā ripu-rāja-kula-nirbhartsitenāti-vyathita-karṇa-mūla-hṛdayaḥ.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; ulūka-of the owl; jhillī-and the cricket; svana-vat-exactly like intolerable sounds; ati-paruṣa-extremely piercing; rabhasa-by perseverance; āṭopam-agitation; pratyakṣam-directly; parokṣam-indirectly; vā-or; ripu-of enemies; rāja-kula-and of government officers; nirbhartsitena-by chastisement; ati-vyathita-very aggrieved; karṇa-mūla-hṛdayaḥ-whose ear and heart.





Sometimes the conditioned soul is very aggrieved by the chastisement of his enemies and government servants, who use harsh words against him directly or indirectly. At that time his heart and ears become very saddened. Such chastisement may be compared to the sounds of owls and crickets.





There are different types of enemies within this material world. The government chastises one due to not paying income taxes. Such criticism, direct or indirect, saddens one, and sometimes the conditioned soul tries to counteract that chastisement. Unfortunately, he cannot do anything.





TEXT 12



sa yadā dugdha-pūrva-sukṛtas tadā kāraskara-kākatuṇḍādy-apuṇya-druma-latā-viṣoda-pānavad ubhayārtha-śūnya-draviṇān jīvan-mṛtān svayaṁ jīvan-mriyamāṇa upadhāvati.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that conditioned soul; yadā-when; dugdha-exhausted; pūrva-previous; sukṛtaḥ-pious activities; tadā-at that time; kāraskara-kākatuṇḍa-ādi-named kāraskara, kākatuṇḍa, etc.; apuṇya-druma-latā-impious trees and creepers; viṣa-uda-pāna-vat-like wells with poisonous water; ubhaya-artha-śūnya-which cannot give happiness either in this life or in the next; draviṇān-those who possess wealth; jīvat-mṛtān-who are dead, although apparently alive; svayam-he himself; jīvat-living; mriyamāṇaḥ-being dead; upadhāvati-approaches for material acquisition.





Due to his pious activities in previous lives, the conditioned soul attains material facilities in this life, but when they are finished, he takes shelter of wealth and riches, which cannot help him in this life or the next. Because of this, he approaches the living dead who possess these things. Such people are compared to impure trees, creepers and poisonous wells.





The wealth and riches acquired through previous pious activities should not be misused for sense gratification. Enjoying them for sense gratification is like enjoying the fruits of a poisonous tree. Such activities will not help the conditioned soul in any way, neither in this life nor the next. However, if one engages his possessions in the service of the Lord under the guidance of a proper spiritual master. he will attain happiness both in this life and the next. Unless he does so, he eats a forbidden apple and thereby loses his paradise. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore advises that one's possessions should be given unto Him.



yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam





"O son of Kuntī, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an offering unto Me." (Bg. 9.27) Material wealth and opulence attained through previous pious activities can be fully utilized for one's benefit in this life and the next if one is Kṛṣṇa conscious. One should not try to possess more than he needs for the bare necessities. If one gets more than is needed, the surplus should be fully engaged in the Lord's service. That will make the conditioned soul, the world and Kṛṣṇa happy, and this is the aim of life.





TEXT 13



ekadāsat-prasaṅgān nikṛta-matir vyudaka-srotaḥ-skhalanavad ubhayato 'pi duḥkhadaṁ pākhaṇḍam abhiyāti.



SYNONYMS



ekadā-sometimes; asat-prasaṅgāt-by association of nondevotees who are against the Vedic principles and who manufacture different paths of religion; nikṛta-matiḥ-whose intelligence has been brought to the abominable status of defying the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vyudaka-srotaḥ-into rivers without sufficient water; skhalana-vat-like jumping; ubhayataḥ-from both sides; api-although; duḥkha-dam-giving distress; pākhaṇḍam-the atheistic path; abhiyāti-he approaches.





Sometimes, to mitigate distresses in this forest of the material world, the conditioned soul receives cheap blessings from atheists. He then loses all intelligence in their association. This is exactly like jumping in a shallow river. As a result one simply breaks his head. He is not able to mitigate his sufferings from the heat, and in both ways he suffers. The misguided conditioned soul also approaches so-called sādhus and svāmīs who preach against the principles of the Vedas. He does not receive benefit from them, either in the present or in the future.





Cheaters are always there to manufacture their own way of spiritual realization. To get some material benefit, the conditioned soul approaches these pseudo sannyāsīs and yogīs for cheap blessings, but he does not receive any benefit from them, either spiritual or material. In this age there are many cheaters who show some jugglery and magic. They even create gold to amaze their followers, and their followers accept them as God. This type of cheating is very prominent in Kali-yuga. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes the real guru in this way.



saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-

trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam

prāptasya kalyāṇa-guṇārṇavasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam



One should approach a guru who can extinguish the blazing fire of this material world, the struggle for existence. people want to be cheated. and therefore they go to yogīs and svāmīs who play tricks, but tricks do not mitigate the miseries of material life. If being able to manufacture gold is a criterion for becoming God, then why not accept Kṛṣṇa, the proprietor of the entire universe, wherein there are countless tons of gold? As mentioned before, the color of gold is compared to the will-O'-the-wisp or yellow stool; therefore one should not be allured by gold-manufacturing gurus but should sincerely approach a devotee like Jaḍa Bharata. Jaḍa Bharata instructed Rahūgaṇa Mahārāja so well that the King was relieved from the bodily conception. One cannot become happy by accepting a false guru. A guru should be accepted as advised in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21). Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam: One should approach a bona fide guru to inquire about the highest benefit of life. Such a guru is described as follows: śābde pare ca niṣṇātam. Such a guru does not manufacture gold or juggle words. He is well versed in the conclusions of Vedic knowledge (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]). He is freed from all material contamination and is fully engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. If one is able to obtain the dust of the lotus feet of such a guru, his life becomes successful. Otherwise he is baffled both in this life and in the next.





TEXT 14



yadā tu para-bādhayāndha ātmane nopanamati tadā hi pitṛ-putra-barhiṣmataḥ pitṛ-putrān vā sa khalu bhakṣayati.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; tu-but (because of misfortune); para-bādhayā-in spite of exploiting all others; andhaḥ-blind; ātmane-for himself; na upanamati-does not fall into one's share; tadā-at that time; hi-certainly; pitṛ-putra-of the father or sons; barhiṣmataḥ-as insignificant as a piece of grass; pitṛ-putrān-father or sons; vā-or; saḥ-he (the conditioned soul); khalu-indeed; bhakṣayati-gives trouble to.





In this material world, when the conditioned soul cannot arrange for his own maintenance, despite exploiting others, he tries to exploit his own father or son, taking away that relative's possessions, although they may be very insignificant. If he cannot acquire things from his father, son or other relatives, he is prepared to give them all kinds of trouble.





Once we actually saw a distressed man steal ornaments from his daughter just to maintain himself. As the English proverb goes, necessity knows no law. When a conditioned soul needs something, he forgets his relationship with his relatives and exploits his own father or son. We also receive information from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that in this age of Kali the time is quickly approaching when a relative will kill another relative for a small farthing. Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, people will deteriorate further and further into a hellish condition wherein they will perform abominable acts.





TEXT 15



kvacid āsādya gṛhaṁ dāvavat priyārtha-vidhuram asukhodarkaṁ śokāgninā dahyamāno bhṛśaṁ nirvedam upagacchati.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; āsādya-experiencing; gṛham-the home life; dāva-vat-exactly like a blazing fire in the forest; priya-artha-vidhuram-without any beneficial object; asukha-udarkam-resulting only in more and more unhappiness; śoka-agninā-by the fire of lamentation; dahyamānaḥ-being burned; bhṛśam-very great; nirvedam-disappointment; upagacchati-he obtains.





In this world, family life is exactly like a blazing fire in the forest. There is not the least happiness, and gradually one becomes more and more implicated in unhappiness. In household life, there is nothing favorable for perpetual happiness. Being implicated in home life, the conditioned soul is burned by the fire of lamentation. Sometimes he condemns himself as being very unfortunate, and sometimes he claims that he suffers because he performed no pious activities in his previous life.





In the Gurv-aṣṭaka, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has sung:



saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka-

trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam



A life in this material world is exactly like a blazing forest fire. No one goes to set fire to the forest, yet the fire takes place. Similarly. everyone wants to be happy in the material world, but the miserable conditions of material life simply increase. Sometimes a person caught in the blazing fire of material existence condemns himself, but due to his bodily conception he cannot get out of the entanglement, and thus he suffers more and more.





TEXT 16



kvacit kāla-viṣa-mita-rāja-kula-rakṣasāpahṛta-priyatama-dhanāsuḥ pramṛtaka iva vigata-jīva-lakṣaṇa āste.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; kāla-viṣa-mita-made crooked by time; rāja-kula-the government men; rakṣasā-by those who are like carnivorous human beings; apahṛta-being plundered; priya-tama-most dear; dhana-in the form of wealth; asuḥ-whose life air; pramṛtakaḥ-dead; iva-like; vigata-jīva-lakṣaṇaḥ-bereft of all signs of life; āste-he remains.





Government men are always like carnivorous demons called Rākṣasas [man-eaters]. Sometimes these government men turn against the conditioned soul and take away all his accumulated wealth. Being bereft of his life's reserved wealth, the conditioned soul loses all enthusiasm. Indeed, it is as though he loses his life.





The word rāja-kula-rakṣasā is very significant. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was compiled about five thousand years ago, yet government men are referred to as Rākṣasas, or carnivorous demons. If government men are opposed to a person, that person will be bereft of all his riches, which he has accumulated with great care over a long period of time. Actually no one wants to pay income taxes-even government men themselves try to avoid these taxes-but at unfavorable times income taxes are exacted forcibly, and the taxpayers become very morose.





TEXT 17



kadācin manorathopagata-pitṛ-pitāmahādy asat sad iti svapna-nirvṛti-lakṣaṇam anubhavati.



SYNONYMS



kadācit-sometimes; manoratha-upagata-obtained by mental concoction; pitṛ-the father; pitā-maha-ādi-or grandfather and others; asat-although long dead (and although no one knows that the soul has gone); sat-again the father or grandfather has come; iti-thus thinking; svapna-nirvṛti-lakṣaṇam-the kind of happiness found in dreams; anubhavati-the conditioned soul feels.





Sometimes the conditioned soul imagines that his father or grandfather has again come in the form of his son or grandson. In this way he feels the happiness one sometimes feels in a dream, and the conditioned soul sometimes takes pleasure in such mental concoctions.





Due to ignorance of the real existence of the Lord, the conditioned soul imagines many things. Influenced by fruitive activity, he comes together with his relatives, fathers, sons and grandfathers, exactly as straws gather together in a moving stream. In a moment the straws are thrown everywhere, and they lose contact. In conditional life, the living entity is temporarily with many other conditioned souls. They gather together as family members, and the material affection is so strong that even after a father or grandfather passes away, one takes pleasure in thinking that they return to the family in different forms. Sometimes this may happen. but in any case the conditioned soul likes to take pleasure in such concocted thoughts.





TEXT 18



kvacid gṛhāśrama-karma-codanāti-bhara-girim ārurukṣamāṇo loka-vyasana-karṣita-manāḥ kaṇṭaka-śarkarā-kṣetraṁ praviśann iva sīdati.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; gṛha-āśrama-in householder life; karma-codana-of the rules of fruitive activity; ati-bhara-girim-the big hill; ārurukṣamāṇaḥ-desiring to ascend; loka-material; vyasana-to pursuits; karṣita-manāḥ-whose mind is attracted; kaṇṭaka-śarkarā-kṣetram-a field covered with thorns and sharp pebbles; praviśan-entering; iva-like; sīdati-he laments.





In household life one is ordered to execute many yajñas and fruitive activities, especially the vivāha-yajña [the marriage ceremony for sons and daughters] and the sacred thread ceremony. These are all the duties of a gṛhastha, and they are very extensive and troublesome to execute. They are compared to a big hill over which one must cross when one is attached to material activities. A person desiring to cross over these ritualistic ceremonies certainly feels pains like the piercing of thorns and pebbles endured by one attempting to climb a hill. Thus the conditioned soul suffers unlimitedly.





There are many social functions for keeping a prestigious position in society. In different countries and societies there are various festivals and rituals. In India, the father is supposed to get his children married. When he does so, his responsibility to the family is complete. Arranging marriages is very difficult, especially in these days. At the present moment no one can perform the proper ritual of sacrifice, nor can anyone afford to pay for the marriage ceremony of sons and daughters. Therefore householders are very much distressed when they are confronted by these social duties. It is as though they were pierced by thorns and hurt by pebbles. Material attachment is so strong that despite the suffering, one cannot give it up. Prahlāda Mahārāja therefore recommends (Bhāg. 7.5.5):



hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta





The so-called comfortable family position is compared to a dark well in a field. If one falls in a dark well covered by grass, his life is lost, despite his cry for rescue. Highly advanced spiritualists therefore recommend that one should not enter the gṛhastha-āśrama. It is better to prepare oneself in the brahmacarya-āśrama for austerities and remain a pure brahmacārī throughout one's life so that one will not feel the piercing thorns of material life in the gṛhastha-āśrama. In the gṛhastha-āśrama one has to accept invitations from friends and relatives and perform ritualistic ceremonies. By so doing, one becomes captivated by such things, although he may not have sufficient resources to continue them. To maintain the gṛhastha life-style, one has to work very hard to acquire money. Thus one is implicated in material life, and he suffers the thorn pricks.





TEXT 19



kvacic ca duḥsahena kāyābhyantara-vahninā gṛhīta-sāraḥ sva-kuṭumbāya krudhyati.



SYNONYMS



kvacit ca-and sometimes; duḥsahena-unbearable; kāya-abhyantara-vahninā-because of the fire of hunger and thirst within the body; gṛhīta-sāraḥ-whose patience is exhausted; sva-kuṭumbāya-unto his own family members; krudhyati-he becomes angry.





Sometimes, due to bodily hunger and thirst, the conditioned soul becomes so disturbed that he loses his patience and becomes angry with his own beloved sons, daughters and wife. Thus, being unkind to them, he suffers all the more.





Śrīla Vidyāpati Ṭhākura has sung:



tātala saikate, vāri-bindu-sama,

suta-mita-ramaṇī-samāje

The happiness of family life is compared to a drop of water in the desert. No one can be happy in family life. According to the Vedic civilization, one cannot give up the responsibilities of family life, but today everyone is giving up family life by divorce. This is due to the miserable condition experienced in the family. Sometimes, due to misery, one becomes very hardened toward his affectionate sons, daughters and wife. This is but part of the blazing fire of the forest of material life.





TEXT 20



sa eva punar nidrājagara-gṛhīto 'ndhe tamasi magnaḥ śūnyāraṇya iva śete nānyat-kiñcana veda śava ivāpaviddhaḥ.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that conditioned soul; eva-certainly; punaḥ-again; nidrā-ajagara-by the python of deep sleep; gṛhītaḥ-being devoured; andhe-in deep darkness; tamasi-in ignorance; magnaḥ-being absorbed; śūnya-araṇye-in the isolated forest; iva-like; śete-he lies down; na-not; anyat-else; kiñcana-anything; veda-knows; śavaḥ-a dead body; iva-like; apaviddhaḥ-thrown away.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued speaking to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, sleep is exactly like a python. Those who wander in the forest of material life are always devoured by the python of sleep. Being bitten by this python, they always remain in the darkness of ignorance. They are like dead bodies thrown in a distant forest. Thus the conditioned souls cannot understand what is going on in life.





Material life means being fully absorbed in eating, sleeping. mating and defending. Out of these, sleep is taken very seriously. While asleep, one completely forgets the object of life and what to do. For spiritual realization, one should try to avoid sleep as much as possible. The Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana practically did not sleep at all. Of course, they slept some, for the body requires sleep, but they slept only about two hours, and sometimes not even that. They always engaged in spiritual cultivation. Nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau. Following in the footsteps of the Gosvāmīs, we should try to reduce sleeping, eating, mating and defending.





TEXT 21



kadācid bhagna-māna-daṁṣṭro durjana-danda-śūkair alabdha-nidrā-kṣaṇo vyathita-hṛdayenānukṣīyamāṇa-vijñāno 'ndha-kūpe 'ndhavat patati.



SYNONYMS



kadācit-sometimes; bhagna-māna-daṁṣṭraḥ-whose teeth of pride are broken; durjana-danda-śūkaiḥ-by the envious activities of evil men, who are compared to a kind of serpent; alabdha-nidrā-kṣaṇaḥ-who does not get an opportunity to sleep; vyathita-hṛdayena-by a disturbed mind; anukṣīyamāṇa-gradually being decreased; vijñānaḥ-whose real consciousness; andha-kūpe-in a blind well; andha-vat-like illusion; patati-he falls down.





In the forest of the material world, the conditioned soul is sometimes bitten by envious enemies, which are compared to serpents and other creatures. Through the tricks of the enemy, the conditioned soul falls from his prestigious position. Being anxious, he cannot even sleep properly. He thus becomes more and more unhappy, and he gradually loses his intelligence and consciousness. In that state he becomes almost perpetually like a blind man who has fallen into a dark well of ignorance.





TEXT 22



karhi sma cit kāma-madhu-lavān vicinvan yadā para-dāra-para-drav-yāṇy avarundhāno rājñā svāmibhir vā nihataḥ pataty apāre niraye.



SYNONYMS



karhi sma cit-sometimes; kāma-madhu-lavān-little drops of honeylike sense gratification; vicinvan-searching after; yadā-when; para-dāra-another's wife, or a woman other than his own wife; para-dravyāṇi-another's money and possessions; avarundhānaḥ-taking as his own property; rājñā-by the government; svāmibhiḥ vā -or by the husband or relatives of the woman; nihataḥ-severely beaten; patati-he falls down; apāre-into unlimitedly; niraye-hellish conditions of life (the government's prison for criminal activities like rape, kidnapping or theft of others' property).





The conditioned soul is sometimes attracted to the little happiness derived from sense gratification. Thus he has illicit sex or steals another's property. At such a time he may be arrested by the government or chastised by the woman's husband or protector. Thus simply for a little material satisfaction, he falls into a hellish condition and is put into jail for rape, kidnapping, theft and so forth.





Material life is such that due to indulgence in illicit sex, gambling, intoxication and meat-eating, the conditioned soul is always in a dangerous condition. Meat-eating and intoxication excite the senses more and more, and the conditioned soul falls victim to women. In order to keep women, money is required, and to acquire money, one begs, borrows or steals. Indeed, he commits abominable acts that cause him to suffer both in this life and in the next. Consequently illicit sex must be stopped by those who are spiritually inclined or who are on the path of spiritual realization. Many devotees fall down due to illicit sex. They may steal money and even fall down from the highly honored renounced order. Then for a livelihood they accept menial services and become beggars. It is therefore said in the śāstras, yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] materialism is based on sex, whether licit or illicit. Sex is full of dangers even for those who are addicted to household life. Whether one has a license for sex or not, there is great trouble. Bahu-duḥkha-bhāk: after one indulges in sex, many volumes of miseries ensue. One suffers more and more in material life. A miserly person cannot properly utilize the wealth he has, and similarly a materialistic person misuses the human form. Instead of using it for spiritual emancipation, he uses the body for sense gratification. Therefore he is called a miser.





TEXT 23



atha ca tasmād ubhayathāpi hi karmāsminn ātmanaḥ saṁsārāvapanam udāharanti.



SYNONYMS



atha-now; ca-and; tasmāt-because of this; ubhayathā api-both in this life and in the next; hi-undoubtedly; karma-fruitive activities; asmin-on this path of sense enjoyment; ātmanaḥ-of the living entity; saṁsāra-of material life; āvapanam-the cultivation ground or source; udāharanti-the authorities of the Vedas say.





Learned scholars and transcendentalists therefore condemn the materialistic path of fruitive activity because it is the original source and breeding ground of material miseries, both in this life and in the next.





Not knowing the value of life, karmīs create situations whereby they suffer in this life and the next. Unfortunately, karmīs are very attached to material sense gratification, and they cannot appreciate the miserable condition of material life, neither in this life nor in the next. Therefore the Vedas enjoin that one should awaken to spiritual consciousness and utilize all his activities to attain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.27):



yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam





"O son of Kuntī, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as an offering unto Me."



The results of all one's activities should be utilized not for sense gratification but for the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord gives all information in Bhagavad-gītā about the aim of life, and at the end of Bhagavad-gītā He demands surrender unto Him. people do not generally like this demand, but one who cultivates spiritual knowledge for many births eventually surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord (bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]).





TEXT 24



muktas tato yadi bandhād devadatta upācchinatti tasmād api viṣṇumitra ity anavasthitiḥ.



SYNONYMS



muktaḥ-liberated; tataḥ-from that; yadi-if; bandhāt-from the government imprisonment or being beaten by the protector of the woman; deva-dattaḥ-person named Devadatta; upācchinatti-takes the money from him; tasmāt-from the person named Devadatta; api-again; viṣṇu-mitraḥ-a person named Viṣṇumitra; iti-thus; anavasthitiḥ-the riches do not stay in one place but pass from one hand to another.





Stealing or cheating another person out of his money, the conditioned soul somehow or other keeps it in his possession and escapes punishment. Then another man, named Devadatta, cheats him and takes the money away. Similarly, another man, named Viṣṇumitra, steals the money from Devadatta and takes it away. In any case, the money does not stay in one place. It passes from one hand to another. Ultimately no one can enjoy the money, and it remains the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Riches come from Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, and the goddess of fortune is the property of Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The goddess of fortune cannot stay anywhere but by the side of Nārāyaṇa; therefore another of her names is Cañcalā, restless. She cannot be peaceful unless she is in the company of her husband, Nārāyaṇa. For example, Lakṣmī was carried away by the materialistic Rāvaṇa. Rāvaṇa kidnapped Sītā, the goddess of fortune belonging to Lord Rāma. As a result, Rāvaṇa's entire family, opulence and kingdom were smashed, and Sītā, the goddess of fortune, was recovered from his clutches and reunited with Lord Rāma. Thus all property, riches and wealth belong to Kṛṣṇa. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (5.29):



bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the true beneficiary of all sacrifices and austerities, and He is the supreme proprietor of all the planetary systems."



Foolish materialistic people collect money and steal from other thieves. but they cannot keep it. In any case, it must be spent. One person cheats another, and another person cheats someone else; therefore the best way to possess Lakṣmī is to keep her by the side of Nārāyaṇa. This is the point of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We worship Lakṣmī (Rādhārāṇī) along with Nārāyaṇa (Kṛṣṇa). We collect money from various sources, but that money does not belong to anyone but Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa (Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa). If money is utilized in the service of Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa, the devotee automatically lives in an opulent way. However, if one wants to enjoy Lakṣmī the way Rāvaṇa did, he will be vanquished by the laws of nature, and whatever few possessions he has will be taken away. Finally death will take everything away, and death is the representative of Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 25



kvacic ca śīta-vātādy-anekādhidaivika-bhautikātmīyānāṁ daśānāṁ pratinivāraṇe 'kalpo duranta-cintayā viṣaṇṇa āste.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; ca-also; śīta-vāta-ādi-such as cold and strong wind; aneka-various; adhidaivika-created by the demigods; bhautika-adhibhautika, created by other living beings; ātmīyānām-adhyātmika, created by the body and mind; daśānām-of conditions of misery; pratinivāraṇe-in the counteracting; akalpaḥ-unable; duranta-very severe; cintayā-by anxieties; viṣaṇṇaḥ-morose; āste-he remains.





Being unable to protect himself from the threefold miseries of material existence, the conditioned soul becomes very morose and lives a life of lamentation. These threefold miseries are miseries suffered by mental calamity at the hands of the demigods [such as freezing wind and scorching heat], miseries offered by other living entities, and miseries arising from the mind and body themselves.





The so-called happy materialistic person is constantly having to endure the threefold miseries of life, called adhidaivika, adhyātmika and adhibhautika. Actually no one can counteract these threefold miseries. All three may assail one at one time, or one misery may be absent and the other present. Thus the living entity is full of anxiety, fearing misery from one side or the other. The conditioned soul must be disturbed by at least one of these three miseries. There is no escape.





TEXT 26



kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat kiñcid dhanam anyebhyo vā kākiṇikā-mātram apy apaharan yat kiñcid vā vidveṣam eti vitta-śāṭhyāt.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; mithaḥ-with one another; vyavaharan-trading; yat kiñcit-whatever little bit; dhanam-money; anyebhyaḥ-from others; vā-or; kākiṇikā-mātram-a very small amount (twenty cowries); api-certainly; apaharan-taking away by cheating; yat kiñcit-whatever small amount; vā-or; vidveṣam eti-creates enmity; vitta-śāṭhyāt-because of cheating.





As far as transactions with money are concerned, if one person cheats another by a farthing or less, they become enemies.





This is called saṁsāra-dāvānala. Even in ordinary transactions between two people, there is invariably cheating because the conditioned soul is defective in four ways-he is illusioned, he commits mistakes, his knowledge is imperfect, and he has a propensity to cheat. Unless one is liberated from material conditioning, these four defects must be there. Consequently every man has a cheating propensity, which is employed in business or money transactions. Although two friends may be living peacefully together, due to their propensity to cheat they become enemies when there is a transaction between them. A philosopher accuses an economist of being a cheater, and an economist may accuse a philosopher of being a cheater when he comes in contact with money. In any case, this is the condition of material life. One may profess a high philosophy, but when one is in need of money, he becomes a cheater. In this material world, so-called scientists, philosophers and economists are nothing but cheaters in one way or another. The scientists are cheaters because they present so many bogus things in the name of science. They propose going to the moon, but actually they end up cheating the entire public of large sums of money for their experiments. They cannot do anything useful. Unless one can find a person transcendental to the four basic defects, one should not accept advice and become a victim of the material condition. The best process is to take the advice and instructions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or His bona fide representative. In this way one can be happy in this life and the next.





TEXT 27



adhvany amuṣminn ima upasargās tathā sukha-duḥkha-rāga-dveṣa-bhayābhimāna-pramādonmāda-śoka-moha-lobha-mātsaryerṣyāva-māna-kṣut-pipāsādhi-vyādhi-janma-jarā-maraṇādayaḥ.



SYNONYMS



adhvani-on the path of material life; amuṣmin-on that; ime-all these; upasargāḥ-eternal difficulties; tathā-so much also; sukha-so-called happiness; duḥkha-unhappiness; rāga-attachment; dveṣa-hate; bhaya-fear; abhimāna-false prestige; pramāda-illusion; unmāda-madness; śoka-lamentation; moha-bewilderment; lobha-greed; mātsarya-envy; īrṣya-enmity; avamāna-insult; kṣut-hunger; pipāsā-thirst; ādhi-tribulations; vyādhi-disease; janma-birth; jarā-old age; maraṇa-death; ādayaḥ-and so on.





In this materialistic life, there are many difficulties, as I have just mentioned, and all of these are insurmountable. In addition, there are difficulties arising from so-called happiness, distress, attachment, hate, fear, false prestige, illusion, madness, lamentation, bewilderment, greed, envy, enmity, insult, hunger, thirst, tribulation, disease, birth, old age and death. All these combine together to give the materialistic conditioned soul nothing but misery.





The conditioned soul has to accept all these conditions simply to enjoy sense gratification in this world. Although people declare themselves great scientists, economists, philosophers, politicians and sociologists. they are actually nothing but rascals. Therefore they have been described as mūḍhas and narādhamas in Bhagavad-gītā (7.15):



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ





"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind. whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me."



Due to their foolishness, all these materialists are described in Bhagavad-gītā as narādhamas. They have attained the human form in order to get released from material bondage, but instead of doing so. they become further embarrassed amid the miserable material conditions. Therefore they are narādhamas, the lowest of men. One may ask whether scientists, philosophers, economists and mathematicians are also narādhamas, the lowest of men, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead replies that they are because they have no actual knowledge. They are simply proud of their false prestige and position. Actually they do not know how to get relief from the material condition and renovate their spiritual life of transcendental bliss and knowledge. Consequently they waste time and energy in the search for so-called happiness. These are the qualifications of the demons. In Bhagavad-gītā it says that when one has all these demonic qualities, he becomes a mūḍha. Due to this. he envies the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore birth after birth he is born into a demonic family, and he transmigrates from one demonic body to another. Thus he forgets his relationship with Kṛṣṇa and remains a narādhama in an abominable condition life after life.





TEXT 28



kvāpi deva-māyayā striyā bhuja-latopagūḍhaḥ praskanna-viveka-vijñāno yad-vihāra-gṛhārambhākula-hṛdayas tad-āśrayāvasakta-suta-duhitṛ-kalatra-bhāṣitāvaloka-viceṣṭitāpahṛta-hṛdaya ātmānam ajitātmāpāre 'ndhe tamasi prahiṇoti.



SYNONYMS



kvāpi-somewhere; deva-māyayā-by the influence of the illusory energy; striyā-in the form of one's girl friend or wife; bhuja-latā-by beautiful arms, which are compared to tender creepers in the forest; upagūḍhaḥ-being deeply embarrassed; praskanna-lost; viveka-all intelligence; vijñānaḥ-scientific knowledge; yat-vihāra-for the enjoyment of the wife; gṛha-ārambha-to find a house or apartment; ākula-hṛdayaḥ-whose heart becomes engrossed; tat-of that house; āśraya-avasakta-who are under the shelter; suta-of sons; duhitṛ-of daughters; kalatra-of the wife; bhāṣita-avaloka-by the conversations and by their beautiful glances; viceṣṭita-by activities; apahṛta-hṛdayaḥ-whose consciousness is taken away; ātmānam-himself; ajita-uncontrolled; ātmā-whose self; apāre-in unlimited; andhe-blind darkness; tamasi-in hellish life; prahiṇoti-he hurls.





Sometimes the conditioned soul is attracted by illusion personified (his wife or girl friend) and becomes eager to be embraced by a woman. Thus he loses his intelligence as well as knowledge of life's goal. At that time, no longer attempting spiritual cultivation, he becomes overly attached to his wife or girl friend and tries to provide her with a suitable apartment. Again, he becomes very busy under the shelter of that home and is captivated by the talks, glances and activities of his wife and children. In this way he loses his Kṛṣṇa consciousness and throws himself in the dense darkness of material existence.





When the conditioned soul is embraced by his beloved wife, he forgets everything about Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The more he becomes attached to his wife, the more he becomes implicated in family life. One Bengali poet, Bankim Chandra, says that to the eyes of the lover the beloved is always very beautiful, even though ugly. This attraction is called deva-māyā. The attraction between man and woman is the cause of bondage for both. Actually both belong to the parā prakṛti, the superior energy of the Lord, but both are actually prakṛti (female). However, because both want to enjoy one another, they are sometimes described as puruṣa (male). Actually neither is puruṣa, but both can be superficially described as puruṣa. As soon as man and woman are united, they become attached to home, hearth, land, friendship and money. In this way they are both entrapped in material existence. The word bhuja-latā-upagūḍha, meaning "being embraced by beautiful arms which are compared to creepers," describes the way the conditioned soul is bound within this material world. The products of sex life-sons and daughters-certainly follow. This is the way of material existence.





TEXT 29



kadācid īśvarasya bhagavato viṣṇoś cakrāt paramāṇv-ādi-dvi-parārdhāpavarga-kālopalakṣaṇāt parivartitena vayasā raṁhasā harata ābrahma-tṛṇa-stambādīnāṁ bhūtānām animiṣato miṣatāṁ vitrasta-hṛdayas tam eveśvaraṁ kāla-cakra-nijāyudhaṁ sākṣād bhagavantaṁ yajña-puruṣam anādṛtya pākhaṇḍa-devatāḥ kaṅka-gṛdhra-baka-vaṭa-prāyā ārya-samaya-parihṛtāḥ sāṅketyenābhidhatte.



SYNONYMS



kadācit-sometimes; īśvarasya-of the Supreme Lord; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; cakrāt-from the disc; paramāṇu-ādi-beginning from the time of minute atoms; dvi-parārdha-the duration of the life of Brahmā; apavarga-ending; kāla-of time; upalakṣaṇāt-having the symptoms; parivartitena-revolving; vayasā-by the chronological order of ages; raṁhasā-swiftly; harataḥ-taking away; ā-brahma-beginning from Lord Brahmā; tṛṇa-stamba-ādīnām-down to the small clumps of grass; bhūtānām-of all living entities; animiṣataḥ-without blinking the eyes (without fail); miṣatām-before the eyes of the living entities (without their being able to stop it); vitrasta-hṛdayaḥ-being afraid in the heart; tam-Him; eva-certainly; īśvaram-the Supreme Lord; kāla-cakra-nija-āyudham-whose personal weapon is the disc of time; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-puruṣam-who accepts all kinds of sacrificial ceremonies; anādṛtya-without caring for; pākhaṇḍa-devatāḥ-concocted incarnations of God (man-made gods or demigods); kaṅka-buzzards; gṛdhra-vultures; baka-herons; vaṭa-prāyāḥ-like crows; ārya-samaya-parihṛtāḥ-who are rejected by authorized Vedic scriptures accepted by the Āryans; sāṅketyena-by concoction or with no basis of authority indicated by scripture; abhidhatte-he accepts as worshipable.





The personal weapon used by Lord Kṛṣṇa, the disc, is called hari-cakra, the disc of Hari. This cakra is the wheel of time. It expands from the beginning of the atoms up to the time of Brahmā's death, and it controls all activities. It is always revolving and spending the lives of the living entities, from Lord Brahmā down to an insignificant blade of grass. Thus one changes from infancy, to childhood, to youth and maturity, and thus one approaches the end of life. It is impossible to check this wheel of time. This wheel is very exacting because it is the personal weapon of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes the conditioned soul, fearing the approach of death, wants to worship someone who can save him from imminent danger. Yet he does not care for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose weapon is the indefatigable time factor. The conditioned soul instead takes shelter of a man-made god described in unauthorized scriptures. Such gods are like buzzards, vultures, herons and crows. Vedic scriptures do not refer to them. Imminent death is like the attack of a lion, and neither vultures, buzzards, crows nor herons can save one from such an attack. One who takes shelter of unauthorized man-made gods cannot be saved from the clutches of death.





It is stated: hariṁ vinā mṛtiṁ na taranti. No one can save himself from the cruel hands of death without being favored by Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gītā it is stated, mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te: [Bg. 7.14] whoever fully surrenders unto Kṛṣṇa can be saved from the cruel hands of material nature. The conditioned soul, however, sometimes wants to take shelter of a demigod, man-made god, pseudo incarnation or bogus svāmī or yogī. All these cheaters claim to follow religious principles, and all this has become very popular in this age of Kali. There are many pāṣaṇḍīs who, without referring to the śāstras, pose themselves as incarnations, and foolish people follow them. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has left behind Him Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā. Not referring to these authorized scriptures, rascals take shelter of man-made scriptures and try to compete with Lord Kṛṣṇa. That is the greatest difficulty one encounters when trying to promote spiritual consciousness in human society. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying its best to bring people back to Kṛṣṇa consciousness in its pure form, but the pāṣaṇḍīs and atheists, who are cheaters, are so numerous that sometimes we become perplexed and wonder how to push this movement forward. In any case, we cannot accept the unauthorized ways of so-called incarnations, gods, cheaters and bluffers, who are described here as crows, vultures, buzzards and herons.





TEXT 30



yadā pākhaṇḍibhir ātma-vañcitais tair uru vañcito brahma-kulaṁ samāvasaṁs teṣāṁ śīlam upanayanādi-śrauta-smārta-karmānuṣṭhā-nena bhagavato yajña-puruṣasyārādhanam eva tad arocayan śūdra-kulaṁ bhajate nigamācāre 'śuddhito yasya mithunī-bhāvaḥ kuṭumba-bharaṇaṁ yathā vānara-jāteḥ.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; pākhaṇḍibhiḥ-by pāṣaṇḍīs (godless atheists); ātma-vañcitaiḥ-who themselves are cheated; taiḥ-by them; uru-more and more; vañcitaḥ-being cheated; brahma-kulam-the bona fide brāhmaṇas strictly following the Vedic culture; samāvasan-settling among them to advance spiritually; teṣām-of them (the brāhmaṇas who strictly follow Vedic principles); śīlam-the good character; upanayana-ādi-beginning with offering the sacred thread or training the conditioned soul to qualify as a bona fide brāhmaṇa; śrauta-according to the Vedic principles; smārta-according to the authorized scriptures derived from the Vedas; karma-anuṣṭhānena-the performance of activities; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-puruṣasya-who is worshiped by Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; ārādhanam-the process of worshiping Him; eva-certainly; tat arocayan-not finding pleasure in it due to its being difficult for unscrupulous persons to perform; śūdra-kulam-the society of śūdras; bhajate-he turns to; nigama-ācāre-in behaving according to Vedic principles; aśuddhitaḥ-not purified; yasya-of whom; mithunī-bhāvaḥ-sex enjoyment or the materialistic way of life; kuṭumba-bharaṇam-the maintenance of the family; yathā-as it is; vānara-jāteḥ-of the society of monkeys, or the descendants of the monkey.





The pseudo svāmīs, yogīs and incarnations who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead are known as pāṣaṇḍīs. They themselves are fallen and cheated because they do not know the real path of spiritual advancement, and whoever goes to them is certainly cheated in his turn. When one is thus cheated, he sometimes takes shelter of the real followers of Vedic principles [brāhmaṇas or those in Kṛṣṇa consciousness], who teach everyone how to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to the Vedic rituals. However, being unable to stick to these principles, these rascals again fall down and take shelter among śūdras who are very expert in making arrangements for sex indulgence. Sex is very prominent among animals like monkeys, and such people who are enlivened by sex may be called descendants of monkeys.





By fulfilling the process of evolution from the aquatics to the animal platform, a living entity eventually reaches the human form. The three modes of material nature are always working in the evolutionary process. Those who come to the human form through the quality of sattva-guṇa were cows in their last animal incarnation. Those who come to the human form through the quality of rajo-guṇa were lions in their last animal incarnation. And those who come to the human form through the quality of tamo-guṇa were monkeys in their last animal incarnation. In this age, those who come through the monkey species are considered by modern anthropologists like Darwin to be descendants of monkeys. We receive information herein that those who are simply interested in sex are actually no better than monkeys. Monkeys are very expert in sexual enjoyment, and sometimes sex glands are taken from monkeys and placed in the human body so that a human being can enjoy sex in old age. In this way modern civilization has advanced. Many monkeys in India were caught and sent to Europe so that their sex glands could serve as replacements for those of old people. Those who actually descend from the monkeys are interested in expanding their aristocratic families through sex. In the Vedas there are also certain ceremonies especially meant for sexual improvement and promotion to higher planetary systems, where the demigods are enjoying sex. The demigods are also very much inclined toward sex because that is the basic principle of material enjoyment.



First of all, the conditioned soul is cheated by so-called svāmīs, yogīs and incarnations when he approaches them to be relieved of material miseries. When the conditioned soul is not satisfied with them. he comes to devotees and pure brāhmaṇas who try to elevate him for final liberation from material bondage. However, the unscrupulous conditioned soul cannot rigidly follow the principles prohibiting illicit sex. intoxication, gambling and meat-eating. Thus he falls down and takes shelter of people who are like monkeys. In the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement these monkey disciples, being unable to follow the strict regulative principles, sometimes fall down and try to form societies based on sex. This is proof that such people are descendants of monkeys, as confirmed by Darwin. In this verse it is therefore clearly stated: yathā vānara jāteḥ.





TEXT 31



tatrāpi niravarodhaḥ svaireṇa viharann ati-kṛpaṇa-buddhir anyonya-mukha-nirīkṣaṇādinā grāmya-karmaṇaiva vismṛta-kālāvadhiḥ.



SYNONYMS



tatra api-in that condition (in the society of human beings descended from monkeys); niravarodhaḥ-without hesitation; svaireṇa-independently, without reference to the goal of life; viharan-enjoying like monkeys; ati-kṛpaṇa-buddhiḥ-whose intelligence is dull because he does not properly utilize his assets; anyonya-of one another; mukha-nirīkṣaṇa-ādinā-by seeing the faces (when a man sees the beautiful face of a woman and the woman sees the strong build of the man's body, they always desire one another); grāmya-karmaṇā-by material activities for sense gratification; eva-only; vismṛta-forgotten; kāla-avadhiḥ-the limited span of life (after which one's evolution may be degrading or elevating).





In this way the descendants of the monkeys intermingle with each other, and they are generally known as śūdras. Without hesitating, they live and move freely, not knowing the goal of life. They are captivated simply by seeing the faces of one another, which remind them of sense gratification. They are always engaged in material activities, known as grāmya-karma, and they work hard for material benefit. Thus they forget completely that one day their small life spans will be finished and they will be degraded in the evolutionary cycle.





Materialistic people are sometimes called śūdras, or descendants of monkeys, due to their monkeylike intelligence. They do not care to know how the evolutionary process is taking place, nor are they eager to know what will happen after they finish their small human life span. This is the attitude of śūdras. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is trying to elevate śūdras to the brāhmaṇa platform so that they will know the real goal of life. Unfortunately, being overly attached to sense gratification, materialists are not serious in helping this movement. Instead, some of them try to suppress it. Thus it is the business of monkeys to disturb the activities of the brāhmaṇas. The descendants of monkeys completely forget that they have to die, and they are very proud of scientific knowledge and the progress of material civilization. The word grāmya-karmaṇā indicates activities meant only for the improvement of bodily comforts. presently all human society is engaged in improving economic conditions and bodily comforts. people are not interested in knowing what is going to happen after death, nor do they believe in the transmigration of the soul. When one scientifically studies the evolutionary theory, one can understand that human life is a junction where one may take the path of promotion or degradation. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (9.25):



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām





"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with Me."



In this life we have to prepare ourselves for promotion to the next life. Those who are in the mode of rajo-guṇa are generally interested in being promoted to the heavenly planets. Some, unknowingly, are degraded to lower animal forms. Those in the mode of goodness can engage in devotional service, and after that they can return home, back to Godhead (yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām). That is the real purpose of human life. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to bring intelligent human beings to the platform of devotional service. Instead of wasting time trying to attain a better position in material life, one should simply endeavor to return home, back to Godhead. Then all problems will be solved. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17):



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti su-hṛt-satām





"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses the desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted."



One simply has to follow the regulative principles, act like a brāhmaṇa, chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and read Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In this way one purifies himself of the baser material modes (tamo-guṇa and rajo-guṇa) and, becoming freed from the greed of these modes, can attain complete peace of mind. In this way one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and one's relationship with Him and thus be promoted to the highest perfection (siddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ).





TEXT 32



kvacid drumavad aihikārtheṣu gṛheṣu raṁsyan yathā vānaraḥ suta-dāra-vatsalo vyavāya-kṣaṇaḥ.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; druma-vat-like trees (as monkeys jump from one tree to another, the conditioned soul transmigrates from one body to another); aihika-artheṣu-simply to bring about better worldly comforts; gṛheṣu-in houses (or bodies); raṁsyan-delighting (in one body after another, either in animal life, human life or demigod life); yathā-exactly as; vānaraḥ-the monkey; suta-dāra-vatsalaḥ-very affectionate to the children and wife; vyavāya-kṣaṇaḥ-whose leisure time is spent in sex pleasure.





Just as a monkey jumps from one tree to another, the conditioned soul jumps from one body to another. As the monkey is ultimately captured by the hunter and is unable to get out of captivity, the conditioned soul, being captivated by momentary sex pleasure, becomes attached to different types of bodies and is encaged in family life. Family life affords the conditioned soul a festival of momentary sex pleasure, and thus he is completely unable to get out of the material clutches.





As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.9.29): viṣayaḥ khalu sarvataḥ syāt. Bodily necessities-eating, sleeping, mating and defending-are all very easily available in any form of life. It is stated here that the vānara (monkey) is very much attracted to sex. Each monkey keeps at least two dozen wives, and he jumps from one tree to another to capture the female monkeys. Thus he immediately engages in sexual intercourse. In this way the monkey's business is to jump from one tree to another and enjoy sex with his wives. The conditioned soul is doing the same thing, transmigrating from one body to another and engaging in sex. He thus completely forgets how to become free from the clutches of material encagement. Sometimes the monkey is captured by a hunter. who sells its body to doctors so that its glands can be removed for the benefit of another monkey. All this is going on in the name of economic development and improved sex life.





TEXT 33



evam adhvany avarundhāno mṛtyu-gaja-bhayāt tamasi giri-kandara-prāye.



SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; adhvani-on the path of sense gratification; avarundhānaḥ-being confined, he forgets the real purpose of life; mṛtyu-gaja-bhayāt-out of fear of the elephant of death; tamasi-in the darkness; giri-kandara-prāye-similar to the dark caves in the mountains.





In this material world, when the conditioned soul forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and does not care for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he simply engages in different types of mischievous and sinful activities. He is then subjected to the threefold miseries, and, out of fear of the elephant of death, he falls into the darkness found in a mountain cave.





Everyone is afraid of death, and however strong a materialistic person may be, when there is disease and old age one must certainly accept death's notice. The conditioned soul becomes very morose to receive notice of death. His fear is compared to the fear experienced upon entering a dark mountain cave, and death is compared to a great elephant.





TEXT 34



kvacic chīta-vātādy-aneka-daivika-bhautikātmīyānāṁ duḥkhānāṁ pratinivāraṇe 'kalpo duranta-viṣaya-viṣaṇṇa āste.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; śīta-vāta-ādi-such as extreme cold or wind; aneka-many; daivika-offered by the demigods or powers beyond our control; bhautika-offered by other living entities; ātmīyānām-offered by the conditioned material body and mind; duḥkhānām-the many miseries; pratinivāraṇe-in counteracting; akalpaḥ-being unable; duranta-insurmountable; viṣaya-from connection with sense gratification; viṣaṇṇaḥ-morose; āste-he remains.





The conditioned soul suffers many miserable bodily conditions, such as being affected by severe cold and strong winds. He also suffers due to the activities of other living beings and due to natural disturbances. When he is unable to counteract them and has to remain in a miserable condition, he naturally becomes very morose because he wants to enjoy material facilities.





TEXT 35



kvacin mitho vyavaharan yat kiñcid dhanam upayāti vitta-śāṭhyena.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes or somewhere; mithaḥ vyavaharan-transacting with each other; yat-whatever; kiñcit-little bit; dhanam-material benefit or wealth; upayāti-he obtains; vitta-śāṭhyena-by means of cheating someone of his wealth.





Sometimes conditioned souls exchange money, but in due course of time, enmity arises because of cheating. Although there may be a tiny profit, the conditioned souls cease to be friends and become enemies.





As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.8):



puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti





The monkeylike conditioned soul first becomes attached to sex. and when intercourse actually takes place he becomes more attached. He then requires some material comforts-apartment, house, food, friends. wealth and so on. In order to acquire these things he has to cheat others, and this creates enmity even among the most intimate friends. Sometimes this enmity is created between the conditioned soul and the father or spiritual master. Unless one is firmly fixed in the regulative principles, one may perform mischievous acts, even if one is a member of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We therefore advise our disciples to strictly follow the regulative principles; otherwise the most important movement for the upliftment of humanity will be hampered due to dissension among its members. Those who are serious about pushing forward this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should remember this and strictly follow the regulative principles so that their minds will not be disturbed.





TEXT 36



kvacit kṣīṇa-dhanaḥ śayyāsanāśanādy-upabhoga-vihīno yāvad apratilabdha-manorathopagatādāne 'vasita-matis tatas tato 'vamānādīni janād abhilabhate.



SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; kṣīṇa-dhanaḥ-not having sufficient money; śayyā-āsana-aśana-ādi-accommodations for sleeping, sitting or eating; upabhoga-of material enjoyment; vihīnaḥ-being bereft; yāvat-as long as; apratilabdha-not achieved; manoratha-by his desire; upagata-obtained; ādāne-in seizing by unfair means; avasita-matiḥ-whose mind is determined; tataḥ-because of that; tataḥ-from that; avamāna-ādīni-insults and punishment; janāt-from the people in general; abhilabhate-he gets.





Sometimes, having no money, the conditioned soul does not get sufficient accommodations. Sometimes he doesn't even have a place to sit, nor does he have the other necessities. In other words, he falls into scarcity, and at that time, when he is unable to secure the necessities by fair means, he decides to seize the property of others unfairly. When he cannot get the things he wants, he simply receives insults from others and thus becomes very morose.





It is said that necessity knows no law. When the conditioned soul needs money to acquire life's bare necessities, he adopts any means. He begs, borrows or steals. Instead of receiving these things. he is insulted and chastised. Unless one is very well organized, one cannot accumulate riches by unfair means. Even if one acquires riches by unfair means, he cannot avoid punishment and insult from the government or the general populace. There are many instances of important people's embezzling money, getting caught and being put in prison. One may be able to avoid the punishment of prison, but one cannot avoid the punishment of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who works through the agency of material nature. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14): daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā. Nature is very cruel. She does not excuse anyone. When people do not care for nature, they commit all kinds of sinful activities, and consequently they have to suffer.





TEXT 37



evaṁ vitta-vyatiṣaṅga-vivṛddha-vairānubandho 'pi pūrva-vāsanayā mitha udvahaty athāpavahati.



SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; vitta-vyatiṣaṅga-because of monetary transactions; vivṛddha-increased; vaira-anubandhaḥ-having relationships of enmity; api-although; pūrva-vāsanayā-by the fructifying results of previous impious activities; mithaḥ-with each other; udvahati-become united by means of the marriage of sons and daughters; atha-thereafter; apavahati-they give up the marriage or get a divorce.





Although people may be enemies, in order to fulfill their desires again and again, they sometimes get married. Unfortunately, these marriages do not last very long, and the people involved are separated again by divorce or other means.





As stated previously, every conditioned soul has the propensity to cheat, even in marriage. Everywhere in this material world, one conditioned soul is envious of another. For the time being, people may remain friends, but eventually they become enemies again and fight over money. Sometimes they marry and then separate by divorce or other means. On the whole, unity is never permanent. Due to the cheating propensity, both parties always remain envious. Even in Kṛṣṇa. consciousness, separation and enmity take place due to the prominence of material propensities.





TEXT 38



etasmin saṁsārādhvani nānā-kleśopasarga-bādhita āpanna-vipanno yatra yas tam u ha vāvetaras tatra visṛjya jātaṁ jātam upādāya śocan muhyan bibhyad-vivadan krandan saṁhṛṣyan gāyan nahyamānaḥ sādhu-varjito naivāvartate 'dyāpi yata ārabdha eṣa nara-loka-sārtho yam adhvanaḥ pāram upadiśanti.



SYNONYMS



etasmin-on this; saṁsāra-of miserable conditions; adhvani-path; nānā-various; kleśa-by miseries; upasarga-by the troubles of material existence; bādhitaḥ-disturbed; āpanna-sometimes having gained; vipannaḥ-sometimes having lost; yatra-in which; yaḥ-who; tam-him; u ha vāva-or; itaraḥ-someone else; tatra-thereupon; visṛjya-giving up; jātam jātam-newly born; upādāya-accepting; śocan-lamenting; muhyan-being illusioned; bibhyat-fearing; vivadan-sometimes exclaiming loudly; krandan-sometimes crying; saṁhṛṣyan-sometimes being pleased; gāyan-singing; nahyamānaḥ-being bound; sādhu-varjitaḥ-being away from saintly persons; na-not; eva-certainly; āvartate-achieves; adya api-even until now; yataḥ-from whom; ārabdhaḥ-commenced; eṣaḥ-this; nara-loka-of the material world; sa-arthaḥ-the self-interested living entities; yam-whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); adhvanaḥ-of the path of material existence; pāram-the other end; upadiśanti-saintly persons indicate.





The path of this material world is full of material miseries, and various troubles disturb the conditioned souls. Sometimes he loses, and sometimes he gains. In either case, the path is full of danger. Sometimes the conditioned soul is separated from his father by death or other circumstances. Leaving him aside he gradually becomes attached to others, such as his children. In this way, the conditioned soul is sometimes illusioned and afraid. Sometimes he cries loudly out of fear. Sometimes he is happy maintaining his family, and sometimes he is overjoyed and sings melodiously. In this way he becomes entangled and forgets his separation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead since time immemorial. Thus he traverses the dangerous path of material existence, and on this path he is not at all happy. Those who are self-realized simply take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in order to get out of this dangerous material existence. Without accepting the devotional path, one cannot get out of the clutches of material existence. The conclusion is that no one can be happy in material life. One must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





By thoroughly analyzing the materialistic way of life, any sane man can understand that there is not the least happiness in this world. However, due to continuing on the path of danger from time immemorial and not associating with saintly persons, the conditioned soul, under illusion, wants to enjoy this material world. Material energy sometimes gives him a chance at so-called happiness, but the conditioned soul is perpetually being punished by material nature. It is therefore said: daṇḍya-jane rājā yena nadīte cubāya (Cc. Madhya 20.118). Materialistic life means continuous unhappiness, but sometimes we accept happiness as it appears between the gaps. Sometimes a condemned person is submerged in water and hauled out. Actually all of this is meant for punishment, but he feels a little comfort when he is taken out of the water. This is the situation with the conditioned soul. All the śāstras therefore advise that one associate with devotees and saintly people.



'sādhu-saṅga', 'sādhu-saṅga'--sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya





(Cc. Madhya 22.54)



Even by a little association with devotees, the conditioned soul can get out of this miserable material condition. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore trying to give everyone a chance to associate with saintly people. Therefore all the members of this Kṛṣṇa consciousness society must themselves be perfect sādhus in order to give a chance to fallen conditioned souls. This is the best humanitarian work.





TEXT 39



yad idaṁ yogānuśāsanaṁ na vā etad avarundhate yan nyasta-daṇḍā munaya upaśama-śīlā uparatātmānaḥ samavagacchanti.



SYNONYMS



yat-which; idam-this ultimate abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yoga-anuśāsanam-only to be achieved by practicing devotional service; na-not; vā-either; etat-this path of liberation; avarundhate-obtain; yat-therefore; nyasta-daṇḍāḥ-persons who have given up envying others; munayaḥ-saintly persons; upaśama-śīlāḥ-who are now situated in a most peaceful existence; uparata-ātmānaḥ-who have control over the mind and senses; samavagacchanti-very easily obtain.





Saintly persons, who are friends to all living entities, have a peaceful consciousness. They have controlled their senses and minds, and they easily attain the path of liberation, the path back to Godhead. Being unfortunate and attached to the miserable material conditions, a materialistic person cannot associate with them.





The great saint Jaḍa Bharata described both the miserable condition and the means to get out. The only way out of it is association with devotees, and this association is very easy. Although unfortunate people also get this opportunity, due to their great misfortune they cannot take shelter of pure devotees, and consequently they continuously suffer. Nonetheless, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement insists that everyone take to this path by adopting the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. The preachers of Kṛṣṇa consciousness go from door to door to inform people how they can be relieved from the miserable conditions of material life. As stated by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja: by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and guru, one can get the seed of devotional service. If one is a little intelligent he can cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness and be freed from the miserable conditions of material life.





TEXT 40



yad api dig-ibha-jayino yajvino ye vai rājarṣayaḥ kiṁ tu paraṁ mṛdhe śayīrann asyām eva mameyam iti kṛta-vairānubandhāyāṁ visṛjya svayam upasaṁhṛtāḥ.



SYNONYMS



yat api-although; dik-ibha-jayinaḥ-who are victorious in all directions; yajvinaḥ-expert in performing great sacrifices; ye-all of whom; vai-indeed; rāja-ṛṣayaḥ-very great saintly kings; kim tu-but; param-only this earth; mṛdhe-in battle; śayīran-lying down; asyām-on this (earth); eva-indeed; mama-mine; iyam-this; iti-considering in that way; kṛta-on which is created; vaira-anu-bandhāyām-a relationship of enmity with others; visṛjya-giving up; svayam-his own life; upasaṁhṛtāḥ-being killed.





There were many great saintly kings who were very expert in performing sacrificial rituals and very competent in conquering other kingdoms, yet despite their power they could not attain the loving service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is because those great kings could not even conquer the false consciousness of "I am this body, and this is my property." Thus they simply created enmity with rival kings, fought with them and died without having discharged life's real mission.





The real mission of life for the conditioned soul is to reestablish the forgotten relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engage in devotional service so that he may revive Kṛṣṇa consciousness after giving up the body. One doesn't have to give up his occupation as a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra or whatever. In any position, while discharging his prescribed duty, one can develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness simply by associating with devotees who are representatives of Kṛṣṇa and who can teach this science. Regretfully, the big politicians and leaders in the material world simply create enmity and are not interested in spiritual advancement. Material advancement may be very pleasing to an ordinary man, but ultimately he is defeated because he identifies himself with the material body and considers everything related to it to be his property. This is ignorance. Actually nothing belongs to him, not even the body. By one's karma, one gets a particular body, and if he does not utilize his body to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all his activities are frustrated. The real purpose of life is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.13):



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam





It really doesn't matter what activity a man engages in. If he can simply satisfy the Supreme Lord, his life is successful.





TEXT 41



karma-vallīm avalambya tata āpadaḥ kathañcin narakād vimuktaḥ punar apy evaṁ saṁsārādhvani vartamāno nara-loka-sārtham upayāti evam upari gato 'pi.



SYNONYMS



karma-vallīm-the creeper of fruitive activities; avalambya-taking shelter of; tataḥ-from that; āpadaḥ-dangerous or miserable condition; kathañcit-somehow or other; narakāt-from the hellish condition of life; vimuktaḥ-being freed; punaḥ api-again; evam-in this way; saṁsāra-adhvani-on the path of material existence; vartamānaḥ-existing; nara-loka-sa-artham-the field of self-interested material activities; upayāti-he enters; evam-thus; upari-above (in the higher planetary systems); gataḥ api-although promoted.





When the conditioned soul accepts the shelter of the creeper of fruitive activity, he may be elevated by his pious activities to higher planetary systems and thus gain liberation from hellish conditions, but unfortunately he cannot remain there. After reaping the results of his pious activities, he has to return to the lower planetary systems. In this way he perpetually goes up and comes down.





In this regard Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja





(Cc. Madhya 19.151)



Even if one wanders for many millions of years, from the time of creation until the time of annihilation, one cannot get free from the path of material existence unless one receives shelter at the lotus feet of a pure devotee. As a monkey takes shelter of the branch of a banyan tree and thinks he is enjoying, the conditioned soul, not knowing the real interest of his life, takes shelter of the path of karma-kāṇḍa, fruitive activities. Sometimes he is elevated to the heavenly planets by such activities, and sometimes he again descends to earth. This is described by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu as brahmāṇḍa bhramite. However, if by Kṛṣṇa's grace one is fortunate enough to come under the shelter of the guru, by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa he receives lessons on how to execute devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In this way he receives a clue of how to get out of his continuous struggle up and down within the material world. Therefore the Vedic injunction is that one should approach a spiritual master. The Vedas declare: tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12]. Similarly in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34) the Supreme Personality of Godhead advises:



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ





"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21) gives similar advice:



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam





"Any person who seriously desires to achieve real happiness must seek out a bona fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of his spiritual master is that he must have realized the conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and be able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all material considerations, are to be understood as bona fide spiritual masters." Similarly, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, a great Vaiṣṇava, also advises, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ: "By the mercy of the spiritual master one receives the mercy of Kṛṣṇa." This is the same advice given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja). This is essential. One must come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and therefore one must take shelter of a pure devotee. Thus one can become free from the clutches of matter.





TEXT 42



tasyedam upagāyanti--

ārṣabhasyeha rājarṣer

manasāpi mahātmanaḥ

nānuvartmārhati nṛpo

makṣikeva garutmataḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Jaḍa Bharata; idam-this glorification; upagāyanti-they sing; ārṣabhasya-of the son of Ṛṣabhadeva; iha-here; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of the great saintly King; manasā api-even by the mind; mahā-ātmanaḥ-of the great personality Jaḍa Bharata; na-not; anuvartma arhati-able to follow the path; nṛpaḥ-any king; makṣikā-a fly; iva-like; garutmataḥ-of Garuḍa, the carrier of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Having summarized the teachings of Jaḍa Bharata, Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King Parīkṣit, the path indicated by Jaḍa Bharata is like the path followed by Garuḍa, the carrier of the Lord, and ordinary kings are just like flies. Flies cannot follow the path of Garuḍa, and to date none of the great kings and victorious leaders could follow this path of devotional service, not even mentally.





As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.3):



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ





"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth." The path of devotional service is very difficult, even for great kings who have conquered many enemies. Although these kings were victorious on the battlefield, they could not conquer the bodily conception. There are many big leaders, yogīs, svāmīs and so-called incarnations who are very much addicted to mental speculation and who advertise themselves as perfect personalities, but they are not ultimately successful. The path of devotional service is undoubtedly very difficult to follow, but it becomes very easy if the candidate actually wants to follow the path of the mahājana. In this age there is the path of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who appeared to deliver all fallen souls. This path is so simple and easy that everyone can take to it by chanting the holy name of the Lord.



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





We are very satisfied that this path is being opened by this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement because so many European and American boys and girls are taking this philosophy seriously and gradually attaining perfection.





TEXT 43



yo dustyajān dāra-sutān

suhṛd rājyaṁ hṛdi-spṛśaḥ

jahau yuvaiva malavad

uttamaśloka-lālasaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-the same Jaḍa Bharata who was formerly Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Ṛṣabhadeva; dustyajān-very difficult to give up; dāra-sutān-the wife and children or the most opulent family life; suhṛt-friends and well-wishers; rājyam-a kingdom that extended all over the world; hṛdi-spṛśaḥ-that which is situated within the core of one's heart; jahau-he gave up; yuvā eva-even as a young man; mala-vat-like stool; uttama-śloka-lālasaḥ-who was so fond of serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Uttamaśloka.





While in the prime of life, the great Mahārāja Bharata gave up everything because he was fond of serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Uttamaśloka. He gave up his beautiful wife, nice children, great friends and an enormous empire. Although these things were very difficult to give up, Mahārāja Bharata was so exalted that he gave them up just as one gives up stool after evacuating. Such was the greatness of His Majesty.





The name of God is Kṛṣṇa, because He is so attractive that the pure devotee can give up everything within this material world on His behalf. Mahārāja Bharata was an ideal king, instructor and emperor of the world. He possessed all the opulences of the material world, but Kṛṣṇa is so attractive that He attracted Mahārāja Bharata from all his material possessions. Yet somehow or other, the King became affectionate to a little deer and, falling from his position, had to accept the body of a deer in his next life. Due to Kṛṣṇa's great mercy upon him, he could not forget his position, and he could understand how he had fallen. Therefore in the next life, as Jaḍa Bharata, Mahārāja Bharata was careful not to spoil his energy, and therefore he presented himself as a deaf and dumb person. In this way he could concentrate on his devotional service. We have to learn from the great King Bharata how to become cautious in cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness. A little inattention will retard our devotional service for the time being. Yet any service rendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is never lost: svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt (Bg. 2.40). A little devotional service rendered sincerely is a permanent asset. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.17):



tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer

bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi

yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ

ko vārtha āpto 'bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ





Somehow or other, if one is attracted to Kṛṣṇa, whatever he does in devotional service is a permanent asset. Even if one falls down due to immaturity or bad association, his devotional assets are never lost. There are many examples of this-Ajāmila, Mahārāja Bharata, and many others. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is giving everyone a chance to engage in devotional service for at least some time. A little service will give one an impetus to advance and thus make one's life successful.



In this verse the Lord is described as Uttamaśloka. Uttama means "the best," and śloka means "reputation." Lord Kṛṣṇa is full in six opulences, one of which is reputation. Aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ. Kṛṣṇa's reputation is still expanding. We are spreading the glories of Kṛṣṇa by pushing forward this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Kṛṣṇa's reputation, five thousand years after the Battle of Kurukṣetra, is still expanding throughout the world. Every important individual within this world must have heard of Kṛṣṇa, especially at the present moment, due to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Even people who do not like us and want to suppress the movement are also somehow or other chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. They say, "The Hare Kṛṣṇa people should be chastised." Such foolish people do not realize the true value of this movement, but the mere fact that they want to criticize it gives them a chance to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, and this is its success.





TEXT 44



yo dustyajān kṣiti-suta-svajanārtha-dārān

prārthyāṁ śriyaṁ sura-varaiḥ sadayāvalokām

naicchan nṛpas tad-ucitaṁ mahatāṁ madhudviṭ-

sevānurakta-manasām abhavo 'pi phalguḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-who; dustyajān-very difficult to give up; kṣiti-the earth; suta-children; sva-jana-artha-dārān-relatives, riches and a beautiful wife; prārthyām-desirable; śriyam-the goddess of fortune; sura-varaiḥ-by the best of the demigods; sa-daya-avalokām-whose merciful glance; na-not; aicchat-desired; nṛpaḥ-the King; tat-ucitam-this is quite befitting him; mahatām-of great personalities (mahātmās); madhu-dviṭ-of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who killed the demon Madhu; sevā-anurakta-attracted by the loving service; manasām-of those whose minds; abhavaḥ api-even the position of liberation; phalguḥ-insignificant.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, the activities of Bharata Mahārāja are wonderful. He gave up everything difficult for others to give up. He gave up his kingdom, his wife and his family. His opulence was so great that even the demigods envied it, yet he gave it up. It was quite befitting a great personality like him to be a great devotee. He could renounce everything because he was so attracted to the beauty, opulence, reputation, knowledge, strength and renunciation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is so attractive that one can give up all desirable things for His sake. Indeed, even liberation is considered insignificant for those whose minds are attracted to the loving service of the Lord.





This verse confirms Kṛṣṇa's all-attractiveness. Mahārāja Bharata was so attracted to Kṛṣṇa that he gave up all his material possessions. Generally materialistic people are attracted by such possessions.



ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti





(Bhāg. 5.5.8)



"One becomes attracted to his body, home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and thinks in terms of 'I and mine.' " The attraction for material things is certainly due to illusion. There is no value in attraction to material things, for the conditioned soul is diverted by them. One's life is successful if he is absorbed in the attraction of Kṛṣṇa's strength, beauty and pastimes as described in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The Māyāvādīs are attracted to merging into the existence of the Lord, but Kṛṣṇa is more attractive than the desire to merge. The word abhavaḥ means "not to take birth again in this material world." A devotee doesn't care whether he is going to be reborn or not. He is simply satisfied with the Lord's service in any condition. That is real mukti.



īhā yasya harer dāsye

karmaṇā manasā girā

nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu

jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate





"One who acts to serve Kṛṣṇa with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person, even within this material world." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.187) A person who always desires to serve Kṛṣṇa is interested in ways to convince people that there is a Supreme Personality of Godhead and that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is Kṛṣṇa. That is his ambition. It doesn't matter whether he is in heaven or in hell. This is called uttamaśloka-lālasa.





TEXT 45



yajñāya dharma-pataye vidhi-naipuṇāya

yogāya sāṅkhya-śirase prakṛtīśvarāya

nārāyaṇāya haraye nama ity udāraṁ

hāsyan mṛgatvam api yaḥ samudājahāra

SYNONYMS



yajñāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enjoys the results of all great sacrifices; dharma-pataye-unto the master or propounder of religious principles; vidhi-naipuṇāya-who gives the devotee the intelligence to follow the regulative principles expertly; yogāya-the personification of mystic yoga; sāṅkhya-śirase-who taught the Sāṅkhya philosophy or who actually gives knowledge of Sāṅkhya to the people of the world; prakṛti-īśvarāya-the supreme controller of this cosmic manifestation; nārāyaṇāya-the resting place of the innumerable living entities (nara means the living entities, and ayana means the shelter); haraye-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Hari; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; iti-thus; udāram-very loudly; hāsyan-smiling; mṛgatvam api-although in the body of a deer; yaḥ-who; samudājahāra-chanted.





Even though in the body of a deer, Mahārāja Bharata did not forget the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore when he was giving up the body of a deer, he loudly uttered the following prayer: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is sacrifice personified. He gives the results of ritualistic activity. He is the protector of religious systems, the personification of mystic yoga, the source of all knowledge, the controller of the entire creation, and the Supersoul in every living entity. He is beautiful and attractive. I am quitting this body offering obeisances unto Him and hoping that I may perpetually engage in His transcendental loving service." Uttering this, Mahārāja Bharata left his body.





The entire Vedas are meant for the understanding of karma, jñāna and yoga-fruitive activity, speculative knowledge and mystic yoga. Whatever way of spiritual realization we accept, the ultimate goal is Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entities are eternally connected with Him via devotional service. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ: the perfection of life is to remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of death. Although Bharata Mahārāja had to accept the body of a deer, he could remember Nārāyaṇa at the time of death. Consequently he took birth as a perfect devotee in a brāhmaṇa family. This confirms the statement of Bhagavad-gītā (6.41), śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate: "One who falls from the path of self-realization takes birth in a family of brāhmaṇas or wealthy aristocrats." Although Mahārāja Bharata appeared in the royal family, he became neglectful and took birth as a deer. Because he was very cautious within his deer body, he took birth in a brāhmaṇa family as Jaḍa Bharata. During this lifetime, he remained perfectly Kṛṣṇa conscious and preached the gospel of Kṛṣṇa consciousness directly, beginning with his instructions to Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa. In this regard, the word yogāya is very significant. The purpose of aṣṭāṅga-yoga, as stated by Madhvācārya, is to link or connect with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The goal is not to display some material perfections.





TEXT 46



ya idaṁ bhāgavata-sabhājitāvadāta-guṇa-karmaṇo rājarṣer bharatasyānucaritaṁ svasty-ayanam āyuṣyaṁ dhanyaṁ yaśasyaṁ svargyāpavargyaṁ vānuśṛṇoty ākhyāsyaty abhinandati ca sarvā evāśiṣa ātmana āśāste na kāñcana parata iti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; idam-this; bhāgavata-by exalted devotees; sabhājita-greatly worshiped; avadāta-pure; guṇa-whose qualities; karmaṇaḥ-and activities; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of the great saintly King; bharatasya-of Bharata Mahārāja; anucaritam-the narration; svasti-ayanam-the abode of auspiciousness; āyuṣyam-which increases one's duration of life; dhanyam-increases one's fortune; yaśasyam-bestows reputation; svargya-gives promotion to the higher planetary systems (the goal of the karmīs); apavargyam-gives liberation from this material world and enables one to merge into the Supreme (the goal of the jñānīs); vā-or; anuśṛṇoti-always hears, following the path of devotional service; ākhyāsyati-describes for the benefit of others; abhinandati-glorifies the characteristics of devotees and the Supreme Lord; ca-and; sarvāḥ-all; eva-certainly; āśiṣaḥ-blessings; ātmanaḥ-for himself; āśāste-he achieves; na-not; kāñcana-anything; parataḥ-from anyone else; iti-thus.





Devotees interested in hearing and chanting [śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam] regularly discuss the pure characteristics of Bharata Mahārāja and praise his activities. If one submissively hears and chants about the all-auspicious Mahārāja Bharata, one's life span and material opulences certainly increase. One can become very famous and easily attain promotion to the heavenly planets, or attain liberation by merging into the existence of the Lord. Whatever one desires can be attained simply by hearing, chanting and glorifying the activities of Mahārāja Bharata. In this way, one can fulfill all his material and spiritual desires. One does not have to ask anyone else for these things, for simply by studying the life of Mahārāja Bharata, one can attain all desirable things.





The forest of material existence is summarized in this Fourteenth Chapter. The word bhavāṭavī refers to the path of material existence. The merchant is the living entity who comes to the forest of material existence to try to make money for sense gratification. The six plunderers are the senses-eyes, ears, nose, tongue, touch and mind. The bad leader is diverted intelligence. Intelligence is meant for Kṛṣṇa consciousness. but due to material existence we divert all our intelligence to achieve material facilities. Everything belongs to Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but due to our perverted mind and senses. we plunder the property of the Lord and engage in satisfying our senses. The jackals and tigers in the forest are our family members, and the herbs and creepers are our material desires. The mountain cave is our happy home, and the mosquitoes and serpents are our enemies. The rats, beasts and vultures are different types of thieves who take away our possessions, and the gandharva-pura is the phantasmagoria of the body and home. The will-o'-the-wisp is our attraction for gold and its color, and material residence and wealth are the ingredients for our material enjoyment. The whirlwind is our attraction for our wife, and the dust storm is our blinding passion experienced during sex. The demigods control the different directions, and the cricket is the harsh words spoken by our enemy during our absence. The owl is the person who directly insults us, and the impious trees are impious men. The waterless river represents atheists who give us trouble in this world and the next. The meat-eating demons are the government officials, and the pricking thorns are the impediments of material life. The little taste experienced in sex is our desire to enjoy another's wife, and the flies are the guardians of women, like the husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law and so forth. The creeper itself is women in general. The lion is the wheel of time, and the herons, crows and vultures are so-called demigods, pseudo svāmīs, yogīs and incarnations. All of these are too insignificant to give one relief. The swans are the perfect brāhmaṇas, and the monkeys are the extravagant śūdras engaged in eating, sleeping, mating and defending. The trees of the monkeys are our households, and the elephant is ultimate death. Thus all the constituents of material existence are described in this chapter.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Material World as the Great Forest of Enjoyment."



Chapter Fifteen



The Glories of the Descendants of King Priyavrata





In this chapter the descendants of Bharata Mahārāja and many other kings are described. The son of Mahārāja Bharata was named Sumati. He followed the path of liberation given by Ṛṣabhadeva. Some people mistakenly thought Sumati to be the direct incarnation of Lord Buddha. The son of Sumati was Devatājit, and his son was Devadyumna. Devadyumna's son was Parameṣṭhī, and his son was Pratīha. Pratīha was a very great devotee of Lord Viṣṇu, and he had three sons, named Pratihartā, Prastotā and Udgātā. Pratihartā had two sons, Aja and Bhūmā. The son of Bhūmā was Udgītha, and the son of Udgītha was Prastāva. The son of Prastāva was Vibhu, and the son of Vibhu was Pṛthuṣeṇa, whose son was Nakta. The wife of Nakta, Druti, gave birth to Gaya, who was a very famous and saintly king. Actually King Gaya was a partial incarnation of Lord Viṣṇu, and because of his great devotion to Lord Viṣṇu he received the title Mahāpuruṣa. King Gaya had sons named Citraratha, Sumati and Avarodhana. The son of Citraratha was the emperor Samrāṭ, and his son was Marīci, whose son was Bindu. Bindu's son was Madhu, and Madhu's son was Vīravrata. Vīravrata's two sons were Manthu and Pramanthu, and the son of Manthu was Bhauvana. The son of Bhauvana was Tvaṣṭā, and the son of Tvaṣṭā was Viraja, who glorified the whole dynasty. Viraja had one hundred sons and one daughter. Of these, the son named Śatajit became very famous.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

bharatasyātmajaḥ sumatir nāmābhihito yam u ha vāva kecit pākhaṇḍina ṛṣabha-padavīm anuvartamānaṁ cānāryā aveda-samāmnātāṁ devatāṁ sva-manīṣayā pāpīyasyā kalau kalpayiṣyanti.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; bharatasya-of Bharata Mahārāja; ātma-jaḥ-the son; sumatiḥ nāma-abhihitaḥ-named Sumati; yam-unto whom; u ha vāva-indeed; kecit-some; pākhaṇḍinaḥ-atheists, men without Vedic knowledge; ṛṣabha-padavīm-the path of King Ṛṣabhadeva; anuvartamānam-following; ca-and; anāryāḥ-not belonging to the Āryans who strictly follow the Vedic principles; aveda-samāmnātām-not enumerated in the Vedas; devatām-to be Lord Buddha or a similar Buddhist deity; sva-manīṣayā-by their own mental speculation; pāpīyasyā-most sinful; kalau-in this age of Kali; kalpayiṣyanti-will imagine.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The son of Mahārāja Bharata known as Sumati followed the path of Ṛṣabhadeva, but some unscrupulous people imagined him to be Lord Buddha himself. These people, who were actually atheistic and of bad character, took up the Vedic principles in an imaginary, infamous way to support their activities. Thus these sinful people accepted Sumati as Lord Buddhadeva and propagated the theory that everyone should follow the principles of Sumati. In this way they were carried away by mental concoction.





Those who are Āryans strictly follow the Vedic principles, but in this age of Kali a community has sprung up known as the ārya-samāja, which is ignorant of the import of the Vedas in the paramparā system. Their leaders decry all bona fide ācāryas, and they pose themselves as the real followers of the Vedic principles. These ācāryas who do not follow the Vedic principles are presently known as the ārya-samājas, or the Jains. Not only do they not follow the Vedic principles, but they have no relationship with Lord Buddha. Imitating the behavior of Sumati, they claim to be the descendants of Ṛṣabhadeva. Those who are Vaiṣṇavas carefully avoid their company because they are ignorant of the path of the Vedas. In Bhagavad-gītā (15.15) Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: "The real purpose of the Vedas is to understand Me." This is the injunction of all Vedic literatures. One who does not know the greatness of Lord Kṛṣṇa cannot be accepted as an Āryan. Lord Buddha, an incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, adopted a particular means to propagate the philosophy of bhāgavata-dharma. He preached almost exclusively among atheists. Atheists do not want any God, and Lord Buddha therefore said that there is no God, but he adopted the means to instruct his followers for their benefit. Therefore he preached in a duplicitous way, saying that there is no God. Nonetheless, he himself was an incarnation of God.





TEXT 2



tasmād vṛddhasenāyāṁ devatājin-nāma putro 'bhavat.



SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from Sumati; vṛddha-senāyām-in the womb of his wife, named Vṛddhasenā; devatājit-nāma-named Devatājit; putraḥ-a son; abhavat-was born.





From Sumati, a son named Devatājit was born by the womb of his wife named Vṛddhasenā.





TEXT 3



athāsuryāṁ tat-tanayo devadyumnas tato dhenumatyāṁ sutaḥ parameṣṭhī tasya suvarcalāyāṁ pratīha upajātaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; āsuryām-in the womb of his wife, named Āsurī; tat-tanayaḥ-one son of Devatājit; deva-dyumnaḥ-named Devadyumna; tataḥ-from Devadyumna; dhenu-matyām-in the womb of Dhenumatī, the wife of Devadyumna; sutaḥ-one son; parameṣṭhī-named Parameṣṭhī; tasya-of Parameṣṭhī; suvarcalāyām-in the womb of his wife, named Suvarcalā; pratīhaḥ-the son named Pratīha; upajātaḥ-appeared.





Thereafter, in the womb of Āsurī, the wife of Devatājit, a son named Devadyumna was begotten. Devadyumna begot in the womb of his wife, Dhenumatī, a son named Parameṣṭhī. Parameṣṭhī begot a son named Pratīha in the womb of his wife, Suvarcalā.





TEXT 4



ya ātma-vidyām ākhyāya svayaṁ saṁśuddho mahā-puruṣam anusasmāra.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-who (King Pratīha); ātma-vidyām ākhyāya-after instructing many people about self-realization; svayam-personally; saṁśuddhaḥ-being very advanced and purified in self-realization; mahā-puruṣam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; anusasmāra-perfectly understood and always remembered.





King Pratīha personally propagated the principles of self-realization. In this way, not only was he purified, but he became a great devotee of the Supreme Person, Lord Viṣṇu, and directly realized Him.





The word anusasmāra is very significant. God consciousness is not imaginary or concocted. The devotee who is pure and advanced realizes God as He is. Mahārāja Pratīha did so, and due to his direct realization of Lord Viṣṇu, he propagated self-realization and became a preacher. A real preacher cannot be bogus; he must first of all realize Lord Viṣṇu as He is. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34), upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ: "one who has seen the truth can impart knowledge." The word tattva-darśī refers to one who has perfectly realized the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a person can become a guru and propound Vaiṣṇava philosophy all over the world. The paragon of bona fide preachers and guru is King Pratīha.





TEXT 5



pratīhāt suvarcalāyāṁ pratihartrādayas traya āsann ijyā-kovidāḥ sūnavaḥ pratihartuḥ stutyām aja-bhūmānāv ajaniṣātām.



SYNONYMS



pratīhāt-from King Pratīha; suvarcalāyām-in the womb of his wife, named Suvarcalā; pratihartṛ-ādayaḥ trayaḥ-the three sons Pratihartā, Prastotā and Udgātā; āsan-came into being; ijyā-kovidāḥ-who were all very expert in the ritualistic ceremonies of the Vedas; sūnavaḥ-sons; pratihartuḥ-from Pratihartā; stutyām-in the womb of Stutī, his wife; aja-bhūmānau-the two sons Aja and Bhūmā; ajaniṣātām-were brought into existence.





In the womb of his wife Suvarcalā, Pratīha begot three sons, named Pratihartā, Prastotā and Udgātā. These three sons were very expert in performing Vedic rituals. Pratihartā begot two sons, named Aja and Bhūmā, in the womb of his wife, named Stutī.





TEXT 6



bhūmna ṛṣikulyāyām udgīthas tataḥ prastāvo devakulyāyāṁ prastāvān niyutsāyāṁ hṛdayaja āsīd vibhur vibho ratyāṁ ca pṛthuṣeṇas tasmān nakta ākūtyāṁ jajñe naktād druti-putro gayo rājarṣi-pravara udāra-śravā ajāyata sākṣād bhagavato viṣṇor jagad-rirakṣiṣayā gṛhīta-sattvasya kalātmavattvādi-lakṣaṇena mahā-puruṣatāṁ prāptaḥ.



SYNONYMS



bhūmnaḥ-from King Bhūmā; ṛṣi-kulyāyām-in the womb of his wife, named Ṛṣikulyā; udgīthaḥ-the son named Udgītha; tataḥ-again from King Udgītha; prastāvaḥ-the son named Prastāva; deva-kulyāyām-his wife, named Devakulyā; prastāvāt-from King Prastāva; niyutsāyām-in his wife, named Niyutsā; hṛdaya-jaḥ-the son; āsīt-was begotten; vibhuḥ-named Vibhu; vibhoḥ-from King Vibhu; ratyām-in his wife, named Ratī; ca-also; pṛthu-ṣeṇaḥ-named Pṛthuṣeṇa; tasmāt-from him (King Pṛthuṣeṇa); naktaḥ-a son named Nakta; ākūtyām-in his wife, named Ākūti; jajñe-was begotten; naktāt-from King Nakta; druti-putraḥ-a son in the womb of Druti; gayaḥ-named King Gaya; rāja-ṛṣi-pravaraḥ-most exalted among the saintly royal order; udāra-śravāḥ-famous as a very pious king; ajāyata-was born; sākṣāt bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; jagat-rirak-ṣiṣayā-for the purpose of giving protection to the whole world; gṛhīta-who is conceived; sattvasya-in the śuddha-sattva qualities; kalā-ātma-vattva-ādi-of being a direct incarnation of the Lord; lakṣaṇena-by symptoms; mahā-puruṣatām-the chief quality of being the leader of the human society (exactly like the chief leader of all living beings, Lord Viṣṇu); prāptaḥ-achieved.





In the womb of his wife, Ṛṣikulyā, King Bhūmā begot a son named Udgītha. From Udgītha's wife, Devakulyā, a son named Prastāva was born, and Prastāva begot a son named Vibhu through his wife, Niyutsā. In the womb of his wife, Ratī, Vibhu begot a son named Pṛthuṣeṇa. Pṛthuṣeṇa begot a son named Nakta in the womb of his wife, named Ākūti. Nakta's wife was Druti, and from her womb the great King Gaya was born. Gaya was very famous and pious; he was the best of saintly kings. Lord Viṣṇu and His expansions, who are meant to protect the universe, are always situated in the transcendental mode of goodness, known as viśuddha-sattva. Being the direct expansion of Lord Viṣṇu, King Gaya was also situated in the viśuddha-sattva. Because of this, Mahārāja Gaya was fully equipped with transcendental knowledge. Therefore he was called Mahāpuruṣa.





From this verse it appears that the incarnations of God are various. Some are part and parcel of the direct expansions, and some are direct expansions of Lord Viṣṇu. A direct incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called aṁśa or svāṁśa, whereas an incarnation from aṁśa is called kalā. Among the kalās there are the vibhinnāṁśa-jīvas, or living entities. These are counted among the jīva-tattvas. Those who come directly from Lord Viṣṇu are called viṣṇu-tattva and are sometimes designated as Mahāpuruṣa. Another name for Kṛṣṇa is Mahāpuruṣa, and a devotee is sometimes called mahā-pauruṣika.





TEXT 7



sa vai sva-dharmeṇa prajā-pālana-poṣaṇa-prīṇanopalālanānuśāsana-lakṣaṇenejyādinā ca bhagavati mahā-puruṣe parāvare brahmaṇi sarvātmanārpita-paramārtha-lakṣaṇena brahmavic-caraṇānusevayāpādita-bhagavad-bhakti-yogena cābhīkṣṇaśaḥ paribhāvitāti-śuddha-matir uparatānātmya ātmani svayam upalabhyamāna-brahmātmānubhavo 'pi nirabhimāna evāvanim ajūgupat.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that King Gaya; vai-indeed; sva-dharmeṇa-by his own duty; prajā-pālana-of protecting the subjects; poṣaṇa-of maintaining them; prīṇana-of making them happy in all respects; upalālana-of treating them as sons; anuśāsana-of sometimes chastising them for their mistakes; lakṣaṇena-by the symptoms of a king; ijyā-ādinā-by performing the ritualistic ceremonies as recommended in the Vedas; ca-also; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; mahā-puruṣe-the chief of all living entities; para-avare-the source of all living entities, from the highest, Lord Brahmā, to the lowest, like the insignificant ants; brahmaṇi-unto Parabrahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva; sarva-ātmanā-in all respects; arpita-of being surrendered; parama-artha-lakṣaṇena-with spiritual symptoms; brahma-vit-of self-realized, saintly devotees; caraṇa-anusevayā-by the service of the lotus feet; āpādita-achieved; bhagavat-bhakti-yogena-by the practice of devotional service to the Lord; ca-also; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ-continuously; paribhāvita-saturated; ati-śuddha-matiḥ-whose completely pure consciousness (full realization that the body and mind are separate from the soul); uparata-anātmye-wherein identification with material things was stopped; ātmani-in his own self; svayam-personally; upalabhyamāna-being realized; brahma-ātma-anubhavaḥ-perception of his own position as the Supreme Spirit; api-although; nirabhimānaḥ-without false prestige; eva-in this way; avanim-the whole world; ajūgupat-ruled strictly according to the Vedic principles.





King Gaya gave full protection and security to the citizens so that their personal property would not be disturbed by undesirable elements. He also saw that there was sufficient food to feed all the citizens. [This is called poṣaṇa.] He would sometimes distribute gifts to the citizens to satisfy them. [This is called prīṇana.] He would sometimes call meetings and satisfy the citizens with sweet words. [This is called upalālana.] He would also give them good instructions on how to become first-class citizens. [This is called anuśāsana.] Such were the characteristics of King Gaya's royal order. Besides all this, King Gaya was a householder who strictly observed the rules and regulations of household life. He performed sacrifices and was an unalloyed pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He was called Mahāpuruṣa because as a king he gave the citizens all facilities, and as a householder he executed all his duties so that at the end he became a strict devotee of the Supreme Lord. As a devotee, he was always ready to give respect to other devotees and to engage in the devotional service of the Lord. This is the bhakti-yoga process. Due to all these transcendental activities, King Gaya was always free from the bodily conception. He was full in Brahman realization, and consequently he was always jubilant. He did not experience material lamentation. Although he was perfect in all respects, he was not proud, nor was he anxious to rule the kingdom.





As Lord Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gītā, when He descends on earth, He has two types of business-to give protection to the faithful and annihilate the demons (paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]). Since the king is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is sometimes called nara-deva, that is, the Lord as a human being. According to the Vedic injunctions, he is worshiped as God on the material platform. As a representative of the Supreme Lord, the king had the duty to protect the citizens in a perfect way so that they would not be anxious for food and protection and so that they would be jubilant. The king would supply everything for their benefit, and because of this he would levy taxes. If the king or government otherwise levies taxes on the citizens, he becomes responsible for the sinful activities of the citizens. In Kali-yuga, monarchy is abolished because the kings themselves are subjected to the influence of Kali-yuga. It is understood from the Rāmāyaṇa that when Bibhīṣaṇa became friends with Lord Rāmacandra, he promised that if by chance or will he broke the laws of friendship with Lord Rāmacandra, he would become a brāhmaṇa or a king in Kali-yuga. In this age, as Bibhīṣaṇa indicated, both brāhmaṇas and kings are in a wretched condition. Actually there are no kings or brāhmaṇas in this age, and due to their absence the whole world is in a chaotic condition and is always in distress. Compared to present standards, Mahārāja Gaya was a true representative of Lord Viṣṇu; therefore he was known as Mahāpuruṣa.





TEXT 8



tasyemāṁ gāthāṁ pāṇḍaveya purāvida upagāyanti.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of King Gaya; imām-these; gāthām-poetic verses of glorification; pāṇḍaveya-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; purā-vidaḥ-those learned in the historical events of the purāṇas; upagāyanti-sing.





My dear King Parīkṣit, those who are learned scholars in the histories of the Purāṇas eulogize and glorify King Gaya with the following verses.





The historical references to exalted kings serve as a good example for present rulers. Those who are ruling the world at the present moment should take lessons from King Gaya, King Yudhiṣṭhira and King Pṛthu and rule the citizens so that they will be happy. presently the governments are levying taxes without improving the citizens in any cultural, religious, social or political way. According to the Vedas, this is not recommended.





TEXT 9



gayaṁ nṛpaḥ kaḥ pratiyāti karmabhir

yajvābhimānī bahuvid dharma-goptā

samāgata-śrīḥ sadasas-patiḥ satāṁ

sat-sevako 'nyo bhagavat-kalām ṛte

SYNONYMS



gayam-King Gaya; nṛpaḥ-king; kaḥ-who; pratiyāti-is a match for; karmabhiḥ-by his execution of ritualistic ceremonies; yajvā-who performed all sacrifices; abhimānī-so widely respected all over the world; bahu-vit-fully aware of the conclusion of Vedic literature; dharma-goptā-protector of the occupational duties of everyone; samāgata-śrīḥ-possessing all kinds of opulence; sadasaḥ-patiḥ satām-the dean of the assembly of great persons; sat-sevakaḥ-servant of the devotees; anyaḥ-anyone else; bhagavat-kalām-the plenary incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛte-besides.





The great King Gaya used to perform all kinds of Vedic rituals. He was highly intelligent and expert in studying all the Vedic literatures. He maintained the religious principles and possessed all kinds of opulence. He was a leader among gentlemen and a servant of the devotees. He was a totally qualified plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore who could equal him in the performance of gigantic ritualistic ceremonies?





TEXT 10



yam abhyaṣiñcan parayā mudā satīḥ

satyāśiṣo dakṣa-kanyāḥ saridbhiḥ

yasya prajānāṁ duduhe dharāśiṣo

nirāśiṣo guṇa-vatsa-snutodhāḥ

SYNONYMS



yam-whom; abhyaṣiñcan-bathed; parayā-with great; mudā-satisfaction; satīḥ-all chaste and devoted to their husbands; satya-true; āśiṣaḥ-whose blessings; dakṣa-kanyāḥ-the daughters of King Dakṣa; saridbhiḥ-with sanctified water; yasya-whose; prajānām-of the citizens; duduhe-fulfilled; dharā-the planet earth; āśiṣaḥ-of all desires; nirāśiṣaḥ-although personally having no desire; guṇa-vatsa-snuta-udhāḥ-earth becoming like a cow whose udders flowed upon seeing Gaya's qualities in ruling over the citizens.





All the chaste and honest daughters of Mahārāja Dakṣa, such as Śraddhā, Maitrī and Dayā, whose blessings were always effective, bathed Mahārāja Gaya with sanctified water. Indeed, they were very satisfied with Mahārāja Gaya. The planet earth personified came as a cow, and, as though she saw her calf, she delivered milk profusely when she saw all the good qualities of Mahārāja Gaya. In other words, Mahārāja Gaya was able to derive all benefits from the earth and thus satisfy the desires of his citizens. However, he personally had no desire.





The earth over which Mahārāja Gaya ruled is compared to a cow. The good qualities whereby he maintained and ruled the citizens are compared to the calf. A cow delivers milk in the presence of her calf; similarly the cow, or earth, fulfilled the desires of Mahārāja Gaya, who was able to utilize all the resources of the earth to benefit his citizens. This was possible because he was bathed in sanctified water by the honest daughters of Dakṣa. Unless a king or ruler is blessed by authorities, he cannot rule the citizens very satisfactorily. Through the good qualities of the ruler, the citizens become very happy and well qualified.





TEXT 11



chandāṁsy akāmasya ca yasya kāmān

dudūhur ājahrur atho baliṁ nṛpāḥ

pratyañcitā yudhi dharmeṇa viprā

yadāśiṣāṁ ṣaṣṭham aṁśaṁ paretya

SYNONYMS



chandāṁsi-all the different parts of the Vedas; akāmasya-of one who has no desire for personal sense gratification; ca-also; yasya-whose; kāmān-all desirables; dudūhuḥ-yielded; ājahruḥ-offered; atho-thus; balim-presentation; nṛpāḥ-all the kings; pratyañcitāḥ-being satisfied by his fighting in opposition; yudhi-in the war; dharmeṇa-by religious principles; viprāḥ-all the brāhmaṇas; yadā-when; āśiṣām-of blessings; ṣaṣṭham aṁśam-one sixth; paretya-in the next life.





Although King Gaya had no personal desire for sense gratification, all his desires were fulfilled by virtue of his performance of Vedic rituals. All the kings with whom Mahārāja Gaya had to fight were forced to fight on religious principles. They were very satisfied with his fighting, and they would present all kinds of gifts to him. Similarly, all the brāhmaṇas in his kingdom were very satisfied with King Gaya's munificent charities. Consequently the brāhmaṇas contributed a sixth of their pious activities for King Gaya's benefit in the next life.





As a kṣatriya or emperor, Mahārāja Gaya sometimes had to fight with subordinate kings to maintain his government, but the subordinate kings were not dissatisfied with him because they knew that he fought for religious principles. Consequently they accepted their subordination and offered all kinds of gifts to him. Similarly, the brāhmaṇas who performed Vedic rituals were so satisfied with the King that they very readily agreed to part with a sixth of their pious activities for his benefit in the next life. Thus the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas were all satisfied with Mahārāja Gaya because of his proper administration. In other words. Mahārāja Gaya satisfied the kṣatriya kings by his fighting and satisfied the brāhmaṇas by his charities. The vaiśyas were also encouraged by kind words and affectionate dealings, and due to Mahārāja Gaya's constant sacrifices, the śūdras were satisfied by sumptuous food and charity. In this way Mahārāja Gaya kept all the citizens very satisfied. When brāhmaṇas and saintly persons are honored, they part with their pious activities, giving them to those who honor them and render them service. Therefore, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34), tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā: one should try to approach a spiritual master submissively and render service unto him.





TEXT 12



yasyādhvare bhagavān adhvarātmā

maghoni mādyaty uru-soma-pīthe

śraddhā-viśuddhācala-bhakti-yoga-

samarpitejyā-phalam ājahāra

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom (King Gaya); adhvare-in his different sacrifices; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhvara-ātmā-the supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices, the yajña-puruṣa; maghoni-when King Indra; mādyati-intoxicated; uru-greatly; soma-pīthe-drinking the intoxicant called soma; śraddhā-by devotion; viśuddha-purified; acala-and steady; bhakti-yoga-by devotional service; samarpita-offered; ijyā-of worshiping; phalam-the result; ājahāra-accepted personally.





In Mahārāja Gaya's sacrifices, there was a great supply of the intoxicant known as soma. King Indra used to come and become intoxicated by drinking large quantities of soma-rasa. Also, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu [the yajña-puruṣa] also came and personally accepted all the sacrifices offered unto Him with pure and firm devotion in the sacrificial arena.





Mahārāja Gaya was so perfect that he satisfied all the demigods, who were headed by the heavenly King Indra. Lord Viṣṇu Himself also personally came to the sacrificial arena to accept the offerings. Although Mahārāja Gaya did not want them, he received all the blessings of the demigods and the Supreme Lord Himself.





TEXT 13



yat-prīṇanād barhiṣi deva-tiryaṅ-

manuṣya-vīrut-tṛṇam āviriñcāt

prīyeta sadyaḥ sa ha viśva-jīvaḥ

prītaḥ svayaṁ prītim agād gayasya

SYNONYMS



yat-prīṇanāt-because of pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead; barhiṣi-in the sacrificial arena; deva-tiryak-the demigods and lower animals; manuṣya-human society; vīrut-the plants and trees; tṛṇam-the grass; ā-viriñcāt-beginning from Lord Brahmā; prīyeta-becomes satisfied; sadyaḥ-immediately; saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead; ha-indeed; viśva-jīvaḥ-maintains the living entities all over the universe; prītaḥ-although naturally satisfied; svayam-personally; prītim-satisfaction; agāt-he obtained; gayasya-of Mahārāja Gaya.





When the Supreme Lord is pleased by a person's actions, automatically all the demigods, human beings, animals, birds, bees, creepers, trees, grass and all other living entities, beginning with Lord Brahmā, are pleased. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Supersoul of everyone, and He is by nature fully pleased. Nonetheless, He came to the arena of Mahārāja Gaya and said, "I am fully pleased."





It is explicitly stated herein that simply by satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one satisfies the demigods and all other living entities without differentiation. If one pours water on the root of a tree, all the branches, twigs, flowers and leaves are nourished. Although the Supreme Lord is self-satisfied, He was so pleased with the behavior of Mahārāja Gaya that He personally came to the sacrificial arena and said, "I am fully satisfied." Who can compare to Mahārāja Gaya?





TEXTS 14–15



gayād gayantyāṁ citrarathaḥ sugatir avarodhana iti trayaḥ putrā babhūvuś citrarathād ūrṇāyāṁ samrāḍ ajaniṣṭa; tata utkalāyāṁ marīcir marīcer bindumatyāṁ bindum ānudapadyata tasmāt saraghāyāṁ madhur nāmābhavan madhoḥ sumanasi vīravratas tato bhojāyāṁ manthu-pramanthū jajñāte manthoḥ satyāyāṁ bhauvanas tato dūṣaṇāyāṁ tvaṣṭājaniṣṭa tvaṣṭur virocanāyāṁ virajo virajasya śatajit-pravaraṁ putra-śataṁ kanyā ca viṣūcyāṁ kila jātam.



SYNONYMS



gayāt-from Mahārāja Gaya; gayantyām-in his wife, named Gayantī; citra-rathaḥ-named Citraratha; sugatiḥ-named Sugati; avarodhanaḥ-named Avarodhana; iti-thus; trayaḥ-three; putrāḥ-sons; babhūvuḥ-were born; citrarathāt-from Citraratha; ūrṇāyām-in the womb of Ūrṇā; samrāṭ-named Samrāṭ; ajaniṣṭa-was born; tataḥ-from him; utkalāyām-in his wife named Utkalā; marīciḥ-named Marīci; marīceḥ-from Marīci; bindu-matyām-in the womb of his wife Bindumatī; bindum-a son named Bindu; ānudapadyata-was born; tasmāt-from him; saraghāyām-in the womb of his wife Saraghā; madhuḥ-Madhu; nāma-named; abhavat-was born; madhoḥ-from Madhu; sumanasi-in the womb of his wife, Sumanā; vīra-vrataḥ-a son named Vīravrata; tataḥ-from Vīravrata; bhojāyām-in the womb of his wife Bhojā; manthu-pramanthū-two sons named Manthu and Pramanthu; jajñāte-were born; manthoḥ-from Manthu; satyāyām-in his wife, Satyā; bhauvanaḥ-a son named Bhauvana; tataḥ-from him; dūṣaṇāyām-in the womb of his wife Dūṣaṇā; tvaṣṭā-one son named Tvaṣṭā; ajaniṣṭa-was born; tvaṣṭuḥ-from Tvaṣṭā; virocanāyām-in his wife named Virocanā; virajaḥ-a son named Viraja; virajasya-of King Viraja; śatajit-pravaram-headed by Śatajit; putra-śatam-one hundred sons; kanyā-a daughter; ca-also; viṣūcyām-in his wife Viṣūcī; kila-indeed; jātam-took birth.





In the womb of Gayantī, Mahārāja Gaya begot three sons, named Citraratha, Sugati and Avarodhana. In the womb of his wife Ūrṇā, Citraratha begot a son named Samrāṭ. The wife of Samrāṭ was Utkalā, and in her womb Samrāṭ begot a son named Marīci. In the womb of his wife Bindumatī, Marīci begot a son named Bindu. In the womb of his wife Saraghā, Bindu begot a son named Madhu. In the womb of his wife named Sumanā, Madhu begot a son named Vīravrata. In the womb of his wife Bhojā, Vīravrata begot two sons named Manthu and Pramanthu. In the womb of his wife Satyā, Manthu begot a son named Bhauvana, and in the womb of his wife Dūṣaṇā, Bhauvana begot a son named Tvaṣṭā. In the womb of his wife Virocanā, Tvaṣṭā begot a son named Viraja. The wife of Viraja was Viṣūcī, and in her womb Viraja begot one hundred sons and one daughter. Of all these sons, the son named Śatajit was predominant.





TEXT 16



tatrāyaṁ ślokaḥ--

praiyavrataṁ vaṁśam imaṁ

virajaś caramodbhavaḥ

akarod aty-alaṁ kīrtyā

viṣṇuḥ sura-gaṇaṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



tatra-in that connection; ayam ślokaḥ-there is this famous verse; praiyavratam-coming from King Priyavrata; vaṁśam-the dynasty; imam-this; virajaḥ-King Viraja; carama-udbhavaḥ-the source of one hundred sons (headed by Śatajit); akarot-decorated; ati-alam-very greatly; kīrtyā-by his reputation; viṣṇuḥ-Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sura-gaṇam-the demigods; yathā-just as.





There is a famous verse about King Viraja. "Because of his high qualities and wide fame, King Viraja became the jewel of the dynasty of King Priyavrata, just as Lord Viṣṇu, by His transcendental potency, decorates and blesses the demigods."





Within a garden, a flowering tree attains a good reputation because of its fragrant flowers. Similarly, if there is a famous man in a family, he is compared to a fragrant flower in a forest. Because of him, an entire family can become famous in history. Because Lord Kṛṣṇa took birth in the Yadu dynasty, the Yadu dynasty and the Yādavas have remained famous for all time. Because of King Viraja's appearance, the family of Mahārāja Priyavrata has remained famous for all time.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, "The Glories of the Descendants of King Priyavrata."



Chapter Sixteen



A Description of Jambūdvīpa





While describing the character of Mahārāja Priyavrata and his descendants, Śukadeva Gosvāmī also described Meru Mountain and the planetary system known as Bhū-maṇḍala. Bhū-maṇḍala is like a lotus flower, and its seven islands are compared to the whorl of the lotus. The place known as Jambūdvīpa is in the middle of that whorl. In Jambūdvīpa there is a mountain known as Sumeru, which is made of solid gold. The height of this mountain is 84,000 yojanas, of which 16,000 yojanas are below the earth. Its width is estimated to be 32,000 yojanas at its summit and 16,000 yojanas at its foot. (One yojana equals approximately eight miles.) This king of mountains, Sumeru, is the support of the planet earth.





On the southern side of the land known as Ilāvṛta-varṣa are the mountains known as Himavān, Hemakūṭa and Niṣadha, and on the northern side are the mountains Nīla, Śveta and Śṛṅga. Similarly, on the eastern and western side there are Mālyavān and Gandhamādana, two large mountains. Surrounding Sumeru Mountain are four mountains known as Mandara, Merumandara, Supārśva and Kumuda, each 10,000 yojanas long and 10,000 yojanas high. On these four mountains there are trees a banyan tree. There are also lakes full of milk, honey, sugarcane juice and pure water. These lakes can fulfill all desires. There are also gardens named Nandana, Citraratha, Vaibhrājaka and Sarvatobhadra. On the side of Supārśva Mountain is a kadamba tree with streams of honey flowing from its hollows, and on Kumuda Mountain there is a banyan tree named Śatavalśa, from whose roots flow rivers containing milk, yogurt and many other desirable things. Surrounding Sumeru Mountain like filaments of the whorl of a lotus are twenty mountain ranges such as Kuraṅga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikaṅka and Trikūṭa. To the east of Sumeru are the mountains Jaṭhara and Devakūṭa, to the west are Pavana and Pāriyātra, to the south are Kailāsa and Karavīra, and to the north are Triśṛṅga and Makara. These eight mountains are about 18,000 yojanas long, 2,000 yojanas wide and 2,000 yojanas high. On the summit of Mount Sumeru is Brahmapurī, the residence of Lord Brahmā. Each of its four sides is 10,000 yojanas long. Surrounding Brahmapurī are the cities of King Indra and seven other demigods. These cities are one fourth the size of Brahmapurī.





TEXT 1



rājovāca

uktas tvayā bhū-maṇḍalāyāma-viśeṣo yāvad ādityas tapati yatra cāsau jyotiṣāṁ gaṇaiś candramā vā saha dṛśyate.



SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-Mahārāja Parīkṣit said; uktaḥ-already been said; tvayā-by you; bhū-maṇḍala-of the planetary system known as Bhū-maṇḍala; āyāma-viśeṣaḥ-the specific length of the radius; yāvat-as far as; ādityaḥ-the sun; tapati-heats; yatra-wherever; ca-also; asau-that; jyotiṣām-of the luminaries; gaṇaiḥ-with hordes; candramā-the moon; vā-either; saha-with; dṛśyate-is seen.





King Parīkṣit said to Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O brāhmaṇa, you have already informed me that the radius of Bhū-maṇḍala extends as far as the sun spreads its light and heat and as far as the moon and all the stars can be seen.





In this verse it is stated that the planetary system known as Bhū-maṇḍala extends to the limits of the sunshine. According to modern science, the sunshine reaches earth from a distance of 93,000,000 miles. If we calculate according to this modern information, 93,000,000 miles can be considered the radius of Bhū-maṇḍala. In the Gāyatrī mantra, we chant oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ. The word bhūr refers to Bhū-maṇḍala. Tat savitur vareṇyam: the sunshine spreads throughout Bhū-maṇḍala. Therefore the sun is worshipable. The stars, which are known as nakṣatra, are not different suns, as modern astronomers suppose. From Bhagavad-gītā (10.21) we understand that the stars are similar to the moon (nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī). Like the moon, the stars reflect the sunshine. Apart from our modern distinguished estimations of where the planetary systems are located, we can understand that the sky and its various planets were studied long, long before Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was compiled. Śukadeva Gosvāmī explained the location of the planets, and this indicates that the information was known long, long before Śukadeva Gosvāmī related it to Mahārāja Parīkṣit. The location of the various planetary systems was not unknown to the sages who flourished in the Vedic age.





TEXT 2



tatrāpi priyavrata-ratha-caraṇa-parikhātaiḥ saptabhiḥ sapta sindhava upakḷptā yata etasyāḥ sapta-dvīpa-viśeṣa-vikalpas tvayā bhagavan khalu sūcita etad evākhilam ahaṁ mānato lakṣaṇataś ca sarvaṁ vi-jijñāsāmi.



SYNONYMS



tatra api-in that Bhū-maṇḍala; priyavrata-ratha-caraṇa-parikhātaiḥ-by the ditches made by the wheels of the chariot used by Priyavrata Mahārāja while circumambulating Sumeru behind the sun; saptabhiḥ-by the seven; sapta-seven; sindhavaḥ-oceans; upakḷptāḥ-created; yataḥ-because of which; etasyāḥ-of this Bhū-maṇḍala; sapta-dvīpa-of the seven islands; viśeṣa-vikalpaḥ-the mode of the construction; tvayā-by you; bhagavan-O great saint; khalu-indeed; sūcitaḥ-described; etat-this; eva-certainly; akhilam-whole subject; aham-I; mānataḥ-from the point of view of measurement; lakṣaṇataḥ-and from symptoms; ca-also; sarvam-everything; vijijñāsāmi-wish to know.





My dear Lord, the rolling wheels of Mahārāja Priyavrata's chariot created seven ditches, in which the seven oceans came into existence. Because of these seven oceans, Bhū-maṇḍala is divided into seven islands. You have given a very general description of their measurement, names and characteristics. Now I wish to know of them in detail. Kindly fulfill my desire.





TEXT 3



bhagavato guṇamaye sthūla-rūpa āveśitaṁ mano hy aguṇe 'pi sūkṣmatama ātma-jyotiṣi pare brahmaṇi bhagavati vāsudevākhye kṣamam āveśituṁ tad u haitad guro 'rhasy anuvarṇayitum iti.



SYNONYMS



bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-maye-into the external features, consisting of the three modes of material nature; sthūla-rūpe-the gross form; āveśitam-entered; manaḥ-the mind; hi-indeed; aguṇe-transcendental; api-although; sūkṣmatame-in His smaller form as Paramātmā within the heart; ātma-jyotiṣi-who is full of Brahman effulgence; pare-the supreme; brahmaṇi-spiritual entity; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeva-ākhye-known as Bhagavān Vāsudeva; kṣamam-suitable; āveśitum-to absorb; tat-that; u ha-indeed; etat-this; guro-O my dear spiritual master; arhasi anuvarṇayitum-please describe factually; iti-thus.





When the mind is fixed upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His external feature made of the material modes of nature-the gross universal form-it is brought to the platform of pure goodness. In that transcendental position, one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, who in His subtler form is self-effulgent and beyond the modes of nature. O my lord, please describe vividly how that form, which covers the entire universe, is perceived.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit had already been advised by his spiritual master, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, to think of the universal form of the Lord, and therefore, following the advice of his spiritual master, he continuously thought of that form. The universal form is certainly material, but because everything is an expansion of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ultimately nothing is material. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja's mind was saturated with spiritual consciousness. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated:



prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate





Everything, even that which is material, is connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore everything should be engaged in the service of the Lord. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura translates this verse as follows:



hari-sevāya yāhā haya anukūla

viṣaya baliyā tāhāra tyāge haya bhula





"One should not give up anything connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thinking it material or enjoyable for the material senses." Even the senses, when purified, are spiritual. When Mahārāja Parīkṣit was thinking of the universal form of the Lord, his mind was certainly situated on the transcendental platform. Therefore although he might not have had any reason to be concerned with detailed information of the universe, he was thinking of it in relationship with the Supreme Lord, and therefore such geographical knowledge was not material but transcendental. Elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.20) Nārada Muni has said, idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān ivetaraḥ: the entire universe is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although it appears different from Him. Therefore although Parīkṣit Mahārāja had no need for geographical knowledge of this universe, that knowledge was also spiritual and transcendental because he was thinking of the entire universe as an expansion of the energy of the Lord.



In our preaching work also, we deal with so much property and money and so many books bought and sold, but because these dealings all pertain to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they should never be considered material. That one is absorbed in thoughts of such management does not mean that he is outside of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one rigidly observes the regulative principle of chanting sixteen rounds of the mahā-mantra every day, his dealings with the material world for the sake of spreading the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement are not different from the spiritual cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 4



ṛṣir uvāca

na vai mahārāja bhagavato māyā-guṇa-vibhūteḥ kāṣṭhāṁ manasā vacasā vādhigantum alaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi puruṣas tasmāt prādhān-yenaiva bhū-golaka-viśeṣaṁ nāma-rūpa-māna-lakṣaṇato vyākhyāsyāmaḥ.



SYNONYMS



ṛṣiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; na-not; vai-indeed; mahā-rāja-O great King; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; māyā-guṇa-vibhūteḥ-of the transformation of the qualities of the material energy; kāṣṭhām-the end; manasā-by the mind; vacasā-by words; vā-either; adhigantum-to understand fully; alam-capable; vibudha-āyuṣā-with a duration of life like that of Brahmā; api-even; puruṣaḥ-a person; tasmāt-therefore; prādhānyena-by a general description of the chief places; eva-certainly; bhū-golaka-viśeṣam-the particular description of Bhūloka; nāma-rūpa-names and forms; māna-measurements; lakṣaṇataḥ-according to symptoms; vyākhyāsyāmaḥ-I shall try to explain.





The great ṛṣi Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, there is no limit to the expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's material energy. This material world is a transformation of the material qualities [sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa], yet no one could possibly explain it perfectly, even in a lifetime as long as that of Brahmā No one in the material world is perfect, and an imperfect person could not describe this material universe accurately, even after continued speculation. O King, I shall nevertheless try to explain to you the principal regions, such as Bhū-goloka [Bhūloka], with their names, forms, measurements and various symptoms.





The material world is only one fourth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's creation, but it is unlimited and impossible for anyone to know or describe, even with the qualification of a life as long as that of Brahmā, who lives for millions and millions of years. Modern scientists and astronomers try to explain the cosmic situation and the vastness of space, and some of them believe that all the glittering stars are different suns. From Bhagavad-gītā, however, we understand that all these stars (nakṣatras) are like the moon, in that they reflect the sunshine. They are not independent luminaries. Bhūloka is explained to be that portion of outer space through which the heat and light of the sun extend. Therefore it is natural to conclude that this universe extends in space as far as we can see and encompasses the glittering stars. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī admitted that to give full details of this expansive material universe would be impossible, but nevertheless he wanted to give the King as much knowledge as he had received through the paramparā system. We should conclude that if one cannot comprehend the material expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one certainly cannot estimate the expansiveness of the spiritual world. The Brahma-saṁhitā (5.33) confirms this:



advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam

ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca





The limits of the expansions of Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, cannot be estimated by anyone, even a person as perfect as Brahmā, not to speak of tiny scientists whose senses and instruments are all imperfect and who cannot give us information of even this one universe. We should therefore be satisfied with the information obtainable from Vedic sources as spoken by authorities like Śukadeva Gosvāmī.





TEXT 5



yo vāyaṁ dvīpaḥ kuvalaya-kamala-kośābhyantara-kośo niyuta-yojana-viśālaḥ samavartulo yathā puṣkara-patram.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-which; vā-either; ayam-this; dvīpaḥ-island; kuvalaya-the Bhūloka; kamala-kośa-of the whorl of a lotus flower; abhyantara-inner; kośaḥ-whorl; niyuta-yojana-viśālaḥ-one million yojanas (eight million miles) wide; samavartulaḥ-equally round, or having a length and breadth of the same measurement; yathā-like; puṣkara-patram-a lotus leaf.





The planetary system known as Bhū-maṇḍala resembles a lotus flower, and its seven islands resemble the whorl of that flower. The length and breadth of the island known as Jambūdvīpa, which is situated in the middle of the whorl, are one million yojanas [eight million miles]. Jambūdvīpa is round like the leaf of a lotus flower.





TEXT 6



yasmin nava varṣāṇi nava-yojana-sahasrāyāmāny aṣṭabhir maryādā-giribhiḥ suvibhaktāni bhavanti.



SYNONYMS



yasmin-in that Jambūdvīpa; nava-nine; varṣāṇi-divisions of land; nava-yojana-sahasra-72,000 miles in length; āyāmāni-measuring; aṣṭabhiḥ-by eight; maryādā-indicating the boundaries; giribhiḥ-by mountains; suvibhaktāni-nicely divided from one another; bhavanti-are.





In Jambūdvīpa there are nine divisions of land, each with a length of 9,000 yojanas [72,000 miles]. There are eight mountains that mark the boundaries of these divisions and separate them nicely.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives the following quotation from the Vāyu Purāṇa, wherein the locations of the various mountains, beginning with the Himalayas, are described.



dhanurvat saṁsthite jñeye dve varṣe dakṣiṇottare; dīrghāṇi tatra catvāri caturasram ilāvṛtam iti dakṣiṇottare bhāratottara-kuru-varṣe catvāri kiṁpuruṣa-harivarṣa-ramyaka-hiraṇmayāni varṣāṇi nīla-niṣadhayos tiraścinībhūya samudra-praviṣṭayoḥ saṁlagnatvam aṅgīkṛtya bhadrāśva-ketumālayor api dhanur-ākṛtitvam; atas tayor dairghyata eva madhye saṅkucitatvena nava-sahasrāyāmatvam; ilāvṛtasya tu meroḥ sakāśāt catur-dikṣu nava-sahasrāyama-tvaṁ saṁbhavet vastutas tv ilāvṛta-bhadrāśva-ketumālānāṁ catus-triṁśat-sahasrāyāmatvaṁ jñeyam.



TEXT 7



eṣāṁ madhye ilāvṛtaṁ nāmābhyantara-varṣaṁ yasya nābhyām avasthitaḥ sarvataḥ sauvarṇaḥ kula-giri-rājo merur dvīpāyāma-samunnāhaḥ karṇikā-bhūtaḥ kuvalaya-kamalasya mūrdhani dvā-triṁśat sahasra-yojana-vitato mūle ṣoḍaśa-sahasraṁ tāvat āntar-bhūmyāṁ praviṣṭaḥ.



SYNONYMS



eṣām-all these divisions of Jambūdvīpa; madhye-among; ilāvṛtam nāma-named Ilāvṛta-varṣa; abhyantara-varṣam-the inner division; yasya-of which; nābhyām-in the navel; avasthitaḥ-situated; sarvataḥ-entirely; sauvarṇaḥ-made of gold; kula-giri-rājaḥ-the most famous among famous mountains; meruḥ-Mount Meru; dvīpa-āyāma-samunnāhaḥ-whose height is the same measurement as the width of Jambūdvīpa; karṇikā-bhūtaḥ-existing as the pericarp; kuvalaya-of this planetary system; kamalasya-like a lotus flower; mūrdhani-on the top; dvā-triṁśat-thirty-two; sahasra-thousand; yojana-yojanas (eight miles each; vitataḥ-expanded; mūle-at the base; ṣoḍaśa-sahasram-sixteen thousand yojanas; tāvat-so much; āntaḥ-bhūmyām-within the earth; praviṣṭaḥ-entered.





Amidst these divisions, or varṣas, is the varṣa named Ilāvṛta, which is situated in the middle of the whorl of the lotus. Within Ilāvṛta-varṣa is Sumeru Mountain, which is made of gold. Sumeru Mountain is like the pericarp of the lotuslike Bhū-maṇḍala planetary system. The mountain's height is the same as the width of Jambūdvīpa-or, in other words, 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles]. Of that, 16,000 yojanas [128,000 miles] are within the earth, and therefore the mountain's height above the earth is 84,000 yojanas [672,000 miles]. The mountain's width is 32,000 yojanas [256,000 miles] at its summit and 16,000 yojanas at its base.





TEXT 8



uttarottareṇelāvṛtaṁ nīlaḥ śvetaḥ śṛṅgavān iti trayo ramyaka-hiraṇmaya-kurūṇāṁ varṣāṇāṁ maryādā-girayaḥ prāg-āyatā ubhayataḥ kṣārodāvadhayo dvi-sahasra-pṛthava ekaikaśaḥ pūrvasmāt pūrvasmād uttara uttaro daśāṁśādhikāṁśena dairghya eva hrasanti.



SYNONYMS



uttara-uttareṇa ilāvṛtam-further and further north of Ilāvṛta-varṣa; nīlaḥ-Nīla; śvetaḥ-Śveta; śṛṅgavān-Śṛṅgavān; iti-thus; trayaḥ-three mountains; ramyaka-Ramyaka; hiraṇmaya-Hiraṇmaya; kurūṇām-of the Kuru division; varṣāṇām-of the varṣas; maryādā-girayaḥ-the mountains marking the borders; prāk-āyatāḥ-extended on the eastern side; ubhayataḥ-to the east and the west; kṣāroda-the ocean of salt water; avadhayaḥ-extending to; dvi-sahasra-pṛthavaḥ-which are two thousand yojanas wide; eka-ekaśaḥ-one after another; pūrvasmāt-than the former; pūrvasmāt-than the former; uttaraḥ-further north; uttaraḥ-further north; daśa-aṁśa-adhika-aṁśena-by one tenth of the former; dairghyaḥ-in length; eva-indeed; hrasanti-become shorter.





Just north of Ilāvṛta-varṣa-and going further northward, one after another-are three mountains named Nīla, Śveta and Śṛṅgavān. These mark the borders of the three varṣas named Ramyaka, Hiraṇmaya and Kuru and separate them from one another. The width of these mountains is 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles]. Lengthwise, they extend east and west to the beaches of the ocean of salt water. Going from south to north, the length of each mountain is one tenth that of the previous mountain, but the height of them all is the same.





In this regard, Madhvācārya quotes the following verses from the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa:



yathā bhāgavate tūktaṁ

bhauvanaṁ kośa-lakṣaṇam

tasyāvirodhato yojyam

anya-granthāntare sthitam





maṇḍode puraṇaṁ caiva

vyatyāsaṁ kṣīra-sāgare

rāhu-soma-ravīṇāṁ ca

maṇḍalād dvi-guṇoktitām

vinaiva sarvam unneyaṁ

yojanābhedato 'tra tu





It appears from these verses that aside from the sun and moon, there is an invisible planet called Rāhu. The movements of Rāhu cause both solar and lunar eclipses. We suggest that the modern expeditions attempting to reach the moon are mistakenly going to Rāhu.





TEXT 9



evaṁ dakṣiṇenelāvṛtaṁ niṣadho hemakūṭo himālaya iti prāg-āyatā yathā nīlādayo 'yuta-yojanotsedhā hari-varṣa-kimpuruṣa-bhāratānāṁ yathā-saṅkhyam.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; dakṣiṇena-by degrees to the southern side; ilāvṛtam-of Ilāvṛta-varṣa; niṣadhaḥ hema-kūṭaḥ himālayaḥ-three mountains named Niṣadha, Hemakūṭa and Himālaya; iti-thus; prāk-āyatāḥ-extended to the east; yathā-just as; nīla-ādayaḥ-the mountains headed by Nīla; ayuta-yojana-utsedhāḥ-ten thousand yojanas high; hari-varṣa-the division named Hari-varṣa; kimpuruṣa-the division named Kimpuruṣa; bhāratānām-the division named Bhārata-varṣa; yathā-saṅkhyam-according to number.





Similarly, south of Ilāvṛta-varṣa and extending from east to west are three great mountains named (from north to south) Niṣadha, Hemakūṭa and Himālaya. Each of them is 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] high. They mark the boundaries of the three varṣas named Hari-varṣa, Kimpuruṣa-varṣa and Bhārata-varṣa [India].





TEXT 10



tathaivelāvṛtam apareṇa pūrveṇa ca mālyavad-gandhamādanāv ānīla-niṣadhāyatau dvi-sahasraṁ paprathatuḥ ketumāla-bhadrāśvayoḥ sīmānaṁ vidadhāte.



SYNONYMS



tathā eva-exactly like that; ilāvṛtam apareṇa-on the western side of Ilāvṛta-varṣa; pūrveṇa ca-and on the eastern side; mālyavad-gandha-mādanau-the demarcation mountains of Mālyavān on the west and Gandhamādana on the east; ā-nīla-niṣadha-āyatau-on the northern side up to the mountain known as Nīla and on the southern side up to the mountain known as Niṣadha; dvi-sahasram-two thousand yojanas; paprathatuḥ-they extend; ketumāla-bhadrāśvayoḥ-of the two varṣas named Ketumāla and Bhadrāśva; sīmānam-the border; vidadhāte-establish.





In the same way, west and east of Ilāvṛta-varṣa are two great mountains named Mālyavān and Gandhamādana respectively. These two mountains, which are 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles] high, extend as far as Nīla Mountain in the north and Niṣadha in the south. They indicate the borders of Ilāvṛta-varṣa and also the varṣas known as Ketumāla and Bhadrāśva.





There are so many mountains, even on this planet earth. We do not think that the measurements of all of them have actually been calculated. While passing over the mountainous region from Mexico to Caracas, we actually saw so many mountains that we doubt whether their height, length and breadth have been properly measured. Therefore, as indicated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by Śukadeva Gosvāmī, we should not try to comprehend the greater mountainous areas of the universe merely by our calculations. Śukadeva Gosvāmī has already stated that such calculations would be very difficult even if one had a duration of life like that of Brahmā. We should simply be satisfied with the statements of authorities like Śukadeva Gosvāmī and appreciate how the entire cosmic manifestation has been made possible by the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The measurements given herein, such as 10,000 yojanas or 100,000 yojanas, should be considered correct because they have been given by Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Our experimental knowledge can neither verify nor disprove the statements of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. We should simply hear these statements from the authorities. If we can appreciate the extensive energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that will benefit us.





TEXT 11



mandaro merumandaraḥ supārśvaḥ kumuda ity ayuta-yojana-vistāronnāhā meroś catur-diśam avaṣṭambha-giraya upakḷptāḥ.





mandaraḥ-the mountain named Mandara; meru-mandaraḥ-the mountain named Merumandara; supārśvaḥ-the mountain named Supārśva; kumudaḥ-the mountain named Kumuda; iti-thus; ayuta-yojana-vistāra-unnāhāḥ-which measure ten thousand yojanas high and wide; meroḥ-of Sumeru; catuḥ-diśam-the four sides; avaṣṭambha-girayaḥ-mountains that are like the belts of Sumeru; upakḷptāḥ-situated.





On the four sides of the great mountain known as Sumeru are four mountains-Mandara, Merumandara, Supārśva and Kumuda-which are like its belts. The length and height of these mountains are calculated to be 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles].





TEXT 12



caturṣv eteṣu cūta-jambū-kadamba-nyagrodhāś catvāraḥ pādapa-pravarāḥ parvata-ketava ivādhi-sahasra-yojanonnāhās tāvad viṭapa-vitatayaḥ śata-yojana-pariṇāhāḥ.



SYNONYMS



caturṣu-on the four; eteṣu-on these mountains, beginning with Mandara; cūta-jambū-kadamba-of trees such as the mango, rose apple and kadamba; nyagrodhāḥ-and the banyan tree; catvāraḥ-four kinds; pādapa-pravarāḥ-the best of trees; parvata-ketavaḥ-the flagstaffs on the mountains; iva-like; adhi-over; sahasra-yojana-unnāhāḥ-one thousand yojanas high; tāvat-so much also; viṭapa-vitatayaḥ-the length of the branches; śata-yojana-one hundred yojanas; pariṇāhāḥ-wide.





Standing like flagstaffs on the summits of these four mountains are a mango tree, a rose apple tree, a kadamba tree and a banyan tree. Those trees are calculated to have a width of 100 yojanas [800 miles] and a height of 1,100 yojanas [8,800 miles]. Their branches also spread to a radius of 1,100 yojanas.





TEXTS 13–14



hradāś catvāraḥ payo-madhv-ikṣurasa-mṛṣṭa-jalā yad-upasparśina upadeva-gaṇā yogaiśvaryāṇi svābhāvikāni bharatarṣabha dhārayanti; devodyānāni ca bhavanti catvāri nandanaṁ caitrarathaṁ vaibhrājakaṁ sarvatobhadram iti.



SYNONYMS



hradāḥ-lakes; catvāraḥ-four; payaḥ-milk; madhu-honey; ikṣu-rasa-sugarcane juice; mṛṣṭa-jalāḥ-filled with pure water; yat-of which; upasparśinaḥ-those who use the liquids; upadeva-gaṇāḥ-the demigods; yoga-aiśvaryāṇi-all the perfections of mystic yoga; svābhāvikāni-without being tried for; bharata-ṛṣabha-O best of the Bharata dynasty; dhārayanti-possess; deva-udyānāni-celestial gardens; ca-also; bhavanti-there are; catvāri-four; nandanam-of the Nandana garden; caitra-ratham-Caitraratha garden; vaibhrājakam-Vaibhrājaka garden; sarvataḥ-bhadram-Sarvatobhadra garden; iti-thus.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Bharata dynasty, between these four mountains are four huge lakes. The water of the first tastes just like milk; the water of the second, like honey; and that of the third, like sugarcane juice. The fourth lake is filled with pure water. The celestial beings such as the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas, who are also known as demigods, enjoy the facilities of those four lakes. Consequently they have the natural perfections of mystic yoga, such as the power to become smaller than the smallest or greater than the greatest. There are also four celestial gardens named Nandana, Caitraratha, Vaibhrājaka and Sarvatobhadra.





TEXT 15



yeṣv amara-parivṛḍhāḥ saha sura-lalanā-lalāma-yūtha-pataya upadeva-gaṇair upagīyamāna-mahimānaḥ kila viharanti.



SYNONYMS



yeṣu-in which; amara-parivṛḍhāḥ-the best of the demigods; saha-with; sura-lalanā-of the wives of all the demigods and semidemigods; lalāma-of those women who are like ornaments; yūtha-patayaḥ-the husbands; upadeva-gaṇaiḥ-by the semi-demigods (the Gandharvas); upagīyamāna-being chanted; mahimānaḥ-whose glories; kila-indeed; viharanti-they enjoy sports.





The best of the demigods, along with their wives, who are like ornaments of heavenly beauty, meet together and enjoy within those gardens, while their glories are sung by lesser demigods known as Gandharvas.





TEXT 16



mandarotsaṅga ekādaśa-śata-yojanottuṅga-devacūta-śiraso giri-śikhara-sthūlāni phalāny amṛta-kalpāni patanti.



SYNONYMS



mandara-utsaṅge-on the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain; ekādaśa-śata-yojana-uttuṅga-1,100 yojanas high; devacūta-śirasaḥ-from the top of a mango tree named Devacūta; giri-śikhara-sthūlāni-which are as fat as mountain peaks; phalāni-fruit; amṛta-kalpāni-as sweet as nectar; patanti-fall down.





On the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain is a mango tree named Devacūta. It is 1,100 yojanas high. Mangoes as big as mountain peaks and as sweet as nectar fall from the top of this tree for the enjoyment of the denizens of heaven.





In the Vāyu Purāṇa there is also a reference to this tree by great learned sages:



aratnīnāṁ śatāny aṣṭāv

eka-ṣaṣṭy-adhikāni ca

phala-pramāṇam ākhyātam

ṛṣibhis tattva-darśibhiḥ





TEXT 17



teṣāṁ viśīryamāṇānām ati-madhura-surabhi-sugandhi-bahulāruṇa-rasodenāruṇodā nāma nadī mandara-giri-śikharān nipatantī pūr-veṇelāvṛtam upaplāvayati.



SYNONYMS



teṣām-of all the mangoes; viśīryamāṇānām-being broken because of falling from the top; ati-madhura-very sweet; surabhi-fragrant; sugandhi-scented with other aromas; bahula-large quantities; aruṇa-rasa-udena-by reddish juice; aruṇodā-Aruṇodā; nāma-named; nadī-the river; mandara-giri-śikharāt-from the top of Mandara Mountain; nipatantī-falling down; pūrveṇa-on the eastern side; ilāvṛtam-through Ilāvṛta-varṣa; upaplāvayati-flows.





When all those solid fruits fall from such a height, they break, and the sweet, fragrant juice within them flows out and becomes increasingly more fragrant as it mixes with other scents. That juice cascades from the mountain in waterfalls and becomes a river called Aruṇodā, which flows pleasantly through the eastern side of Ilāvṛta.





TEXT 18



yad-upajoṣaṇād bhavānyā anucarīṇāṁ puṇya-jana-vadhūnām avayava-sparśa-sugandha-vāto daśa-yojanaṁ samantād anuvāsayati.



SYNONYMS



yat-of which; upajoṣaṇāt-because of using the fragrant water; bhavānyāḥ-of Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva; anucarīṇām-of attendant maidservants; puṇya-jana-vadhūnām-who are wives of the most pious Yakṣas; avayava-of the bodily limbs; sparśa-from contact; sugandha-vātaḥ-the wind, which becomes fragrant; daśa-yojanam-up to ten yojanas (about eighty miles); samantāt-all around; anuvāsayati-makes fragrant.





The pious wives of the Yakṣas act as personal maidservants to assist Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva. Because they drink the water of the River Aruṇodā, their bodies become fragrant, and as the air carries away that fragrance, it perfumes the entire atmosphere for eighty miles around.





TEXT 19



evaṁ jambū-phalānām atyucca-nipāta-viśīrṇānām anasthi-prāyāṇām ibha-kāya-nibhānāṁ rasena jambū nāma nadī meru-mandara-śikharād ayuta-yojanād avani-tale nipatantī dakṣiṇenātmānaṁ yāvad ilāvṛtam upasyandayati.



SYNONYMS



evam-similarly; jambū-phalānām-of the fruits called jambū (the rose apple); ati-ucca-nipāta-because of falling from a great height; viśīrṇānām-which are broken to pieces; anasthi-prāyāṇām-having very small seeds; ibha-kāya-nibhānām-and which are as large as the bodies of elephants; rasena-by the juice; jambū nāma nadī-a river named Jambū-nadī; meru-mandara-śikharāt-from the top of Merumandara Mountain; ayuta-yojanāt-ten thousand yojanas high; avani-tale-on the ground; nipatantī-falling; dakṣiṇena-on the southern side; ātmānam-itself; yāvat-the whole; ilāvṛtam-Ilāvṛta-varṣa; upasyandayati-flows through.





Similarly, the fruits of the jambū tree, which are full of pulp and have very small seeds, fall from a great height and break to pieces. Those fruits are the size of elephants, and the juice gliding from them becomes a river named Jambū-nadī. This river falls a distance of 10,000 yojanas, from the summit of Merumandara to the southern side of Ilāvṛta, and floods the entire land of Ilāvṛta with juice.





We can only imagine how much juice there might be in a fruit that is the size of an elephant but has a very tiny seed. Naturally the juice from the broken jambū fruits forms waterfalls and floods the entire land of Ilāvṛta. That juice produces an immense quantity of gold, as will be explained in the next verses.





TEXTS 20–21



tāvad ubhayor api rodhasor yā mṛttikā tad-rasenānuvidhyamānā vāyv-arka-saṁyoga-vipākena sadāmara-lokābharaṇaṁ jāmbū-nadaṁ nāma suvarṇaṁ bhavati; yad u ha vāva vibudhādayaḥ saha yuvatibhir mukuṭa-kaṭaka-kaṭi-sūtrādy-ābharaṇa-rūpeṇa khalu dhārayanti.



SYNONYMS



tāvat-entirely; ubhayoḥ api-of both; rodhasoḥ-of the banks; yā-which; mṛttikā-the mud; tat-rasena-with the juice of the jambū fruits that flows in the river; anuvidhyamānā-being saturated; vāyu-arka-saṁyoga-vipākena-because of a chemical reaction with the air and sunshine; sadā-always; amara-loka-ābharaṇam-which is used for the ornaments of the demigods, the denizens of the heavenly planets; jāmbū-nadam nāma-named Jāmbū-nada; suvarṇam-gold; bhavati-becomes; yat-which; u ha vāva-indeed; vibudha-ādayaḥ-the great demigods; saha-with; yuvatibhiḥ-their everlastingly youthful wives; mukuṭa-crowns; kaṭaka-bangles; kaṭi-sūtra-belts; ādi-and so on; ābharaṇa-of all kinds of ornaments; rūpeṇa-in the form; khalu-indeed; dhārayanti-they possess.





The mud on both banks of the River Jambū-nadī, being moistened by the flowing juice and then dried by the air and the sunshine, produces huge quantities of gold called Jāmbū-nada. The denizens of heaven use this gold for various kinds of ornaments. Therefore all the inhabitants of the heavenly planets and their youthful wives are fully decorated with golden helmets, bangles and belts, and thus they enjoy life.





By the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the rivers on some planets produce gold on their banks. The poor inhabitants of this earth, because of their incomplete knowledge, are captivated by a so-called bhagavān who can produce a small quantity of gold. However, it is understood that in a higher planetary system in this material world, the mud on the banks of the Jambū-nadī mixes with jambū juice, reacts with the sunshine in the air, and automatically produces huge quantities of gold. Thus the men and women are decorated there by various golden ornaments, and they look very nice. Unfortunately, on earth there is such a scarcity of gold that the governments of the world try to keep it in reserve and issue paper currency. Because that currency is not backed up by gold, the paper they distribute as money is worthless, but nevertheless the people on earth are very proud of material advancement. In modern times, girls and ladies have ornaments made of plastic instead of gold, and plastic utensils are used instead of golden ones, yet people are very proud of their material wealth. Therefore the people of this age are described as mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ (Bhāg. 1.1.10). In other words, they are extremely bad and slow to understand the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They have been described as sumanda-matayaḥ because their conceptions are so crippled that they accept a bluffer who produces a little gold to be God. Because they have no gold in their possession, they are actually poverty-stricken, and therefore they are considered unfortunate.



Sometimes these unfortunate people want to be promoted to the heavenly planets to achieve fortunate positions, as described in this verse, but pure devotees of the Lord are not at all interested in such opulence. Indeed, devotees sometimes compare the color of gold to that of bright golden stool. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed devotees not to be allured by golden ornaments and beautifully decorated women. Na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīm: a devotee should not be allured by gold. beautiful women or the prestige of having many followers. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, therefore, confidentially prayed, mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi: "My Lord, please bless Me with Your devotional service. I do not want anything else." A devotee may pray to be delivered from this material world. That is his only aspiration.



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





The humble devotee simply prays to the Lord, "Kindly pick me up from the material world, which is full of varieties of material opulence, and keep me under the shelter of Your lotus feet."



Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura prays:



hā hā prabhu nanda-suta, vṛṣabhānu-sutā-yuta,

karuṇā karaha ei-bāra

narottama-dāsa kaya, nā ṭheliha rāṅgā-pāya,

tomā vine ke āche āmāra

"O my Lord, O son of Nanda Mahārāja, now You are standing before me with Your consort, the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Kindly accept me as the dust of Your lotus feet. please do not kick me away, for I have no other shelter."



Similarly, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī indicates that the position of the demigods, who are decorated with golden helmets and other ornaments, is no better than a phantasmagoria (tri-daśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate). A devotee is never allured by such opulences. He simply aspires to become the dust of the lotus feet of the Lord.





TEXT 22



yas tu mahā-kadambaḥ supārśva-nirūḍho yās tasya koṭarebhyo viniḥsṛtāḥ pañcāyāma-pariṇāhāḥ pañca madhu-dhārāḥ supārśva-śikharāt patantyo 'pareṇātmānam ilāvṛtam anumodayanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-which; tu-but; mahā-kadambaḥ-the tree named Mahākadamba; supārśva-nirūḍhaḥ-which stands on the side of the mountain known as Supārśva; yāḥ-which; tasya-of that; koṭarebhyaḥ-from the hollows; viniḥsṛtāḥ-flowing; pañca-five; āyāma-vyāma, a unit of measurement of about eight feet; pariṇāhāḥ-whose measurement; pañca-five; madhu-dhārāḥ-flows of honey; supārśva-śikharāt-from the top of Supārśva Mountain; patantyaḥ-flowing down; apareṇa-on the western side of Sumeru Mountain; ātmānam-the whole of; ilāvṛtam-Ilāvṛta-varṣa; anumodayanti-make fragrant.





On the side of Supārśva Mountain stands a big tree called Mahākadamba, which is very celebrated. From the hollows of this tree flow five rivers of honey, each about five vyāmas wide. This flowing honey falls incessantly from the top of Supārśva Mountain and flows all around Ilāvṛta-varṣa, beginning from the western side. Thus the whole land is saturated with the pleasing fragrance.





The distance between one hand and another when one spreads both his arms is called a vyāma. This comes to about eight feet. Thus each of the rivers was about forty feet wide, making a total of about two hundred feet.





TEXT 23



yā hy upayuñjānānāṁ mukha-nirvāsito vāyuḥ samantāc chata-yojanam anuvāsayati.



SYNONYMS



yāḥ-which (those flows of honey); hi-indeed; upayuñjānānām-of those who drink; mukha-nirvāsitaḥ vāyuḥ-the air emanating from the mouths; samantāt-all around; śata-yojanam-up to one hundred yojanas (eight hundred miles); anuvāsayati-makes sweetly flavored.





The air carrying the scent from the mouths of those who drink that honey perfumes the land for a hundred yojanas around.





TEXT 24



evaṁ kumuda-nirūḍho yaḥ śatavalśo nāma vaṭas tasya skandhebhyo nīcīnāḥ payo-dadhi-madhu-ghṛta-guḍānnādy-ambara-śayyāsanābharaṇādayaḥ sarva eva kāma-dughā nadāḥ kumudāgrāt patantas tam uttareṇelāvṛtam upayojayanti.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; kumuda-nirūḍhaḥ-having grown on Kumuda Mountain; yaḥ-that; śata-valśaḥ nāma-the tree named Śatavalśa (because of having hundreds of trunks); vaṭaḥ-a banyan tree; tasya-of it; skandhebhyaḥ-from the thick branches; nīcīnāḥ-flowing down; payaḥ-milk; dadhi-yogurt; madhu-honey; ghṛta-clarified butter; guḍa-molasses; anna-food grains; ādi-and so on; ambara-clothing; śayyā-bedding; āsana-sitting places; ābharaṇa-ādayaḥ-carrying ornaments and so on; sarve-everything; eva-certainly; kāma-dughāḥ-fulfilling all desires; nadāḥ-big rivers; kumuda-agrāt-from the top of Kumuda Mountain; patantaḥ-flowing; tam-to that; uttareṇa-on the northern side; ilāvṛtam-the land known as Ilāvṛta-varṣa; upayojayanti-give happiness.





Similarly, on Kumuda Mountain there is a great banyan tree, which is called Śatavalśa because it has a hundred main branches. From those branches come many roots, from which many rivers are flowing. These rivers flow down from the top of the mountain to the northern side of Ilāvṛta-varṣa for the benefit of those who live there. Because of these flowing rivers, all the people have ample supplies of milk, yogurt, honey, clarified butter [ghee], molasses, food grains, clothes, bedding, sitting places and ornaments. All the objects they desire are sufficiently supplied for their prosperity, and therefore they are very happy.





The prosperity of humanity does not depend on a demoniac civilization that has no culture and no knowledge but has only gigantic skyscrapers and huge automobiles always rushing down the highways. The products of nature are sufficient. When there is a profuse supply of milk, yogurt, honey, food grains, ghee, molasses, dhotis, saris, bedding, sitting places and ornaments, the residents are actually opulent. When a profuse supply of water from the river inundates the land, all these things can be produced, and there will not be scarcity. This all depends, however, on the performance of sacrifice as described in the Vedic literature.



annād bhavanti bhūtāni

parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ

yajñād bhavati parjanyo

yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ





"All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajña [sacrifice], and yajña is born of prescribed duties." These are the prescriptions given in Bhagavad-gītā (3.14). If people follow these principles in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness, human society will be prosperous, and they will be happy both in this life and in the next.





TEXT 25



yān upajuṣāṇānāṁ na kadācid api prajānāṁ valī-palita-klama-sveda-daurgandhya-jarāmaya-mṛtyu-śītoṣṇa-vaivarṇyopasargādayas tāpa-viśeṣā bhavanti yāvaj jīvaṁ sukhaṁ niratiśayam eva.



SYNONYMS



yān-which (all the products produced because of the flowing rivers mentioned above); upajuṣāṇānām-of persons who are fully utilizing; na-not; kadācit-at any time; api-certainly; prajānām-of the citizens; valī-wrinkles; palita-grey hair; klama-fatigue; sveda-perspiration; daurgandhya-bad odors because of unclean perspiration; jarā-old age; āmaya-disease; mṛtyu-untimely death; śīta-severe cold; uṣṇa-scorching heat; vaivarṇya-fading of the luster of the body; upasarga-troubles; ādayaḥ-and so on; tāpa-of sufferings; viśeṣāḥ-varieties; bhavanti-are; yāvat-as long as; jīvam-life; sukham-happiness; niratiśayam-unlimited; eva-only.





The residents of the material world who enjoy the products of these flowing rivers have no wrinkles on their bodies and no grey hair. They never feel fatigue, and perspiration does not give their bodies a bad odor. They are not afflicted by old age, disease or untimely death, they do not suffer from chilly cold or scorching heat, nor do their bodies lose their luster. They all live very happily, without anxieties, until death.





This verse hints at the perfection of human society even within this material world. The miserable conditions of this material world can be corrected by a sufficient supply of milk, yogurt, honey, ghee, molasses, food grains, ornaments, bedding, sitting places and so on. This is human civilization. Ample food grains can be produced through agricultural enterprises, and profuse supplies of milk, yogurt and ghee can be arranged through cow protection. Abundant honey can be obtained if the forests are protected. Unfortunately, in modern civilization, men are busy killing the cows that are the source of yogurt, milk and ghee, they are cutting down all the trees that supply honey, and they are opening factories to manufacture nuts, bolts, automobiles and wine instead of engaging in agriculture. How can the people be happy? They must suffer from all the misery of materialism. Their bodies become wrinkled and gradually deteriorate until they become almost like dwarves, and a bad odor emanates from their bodies because of unclean perspiration resulting from eating all kinds of nasty things. This is not human civilization. If people actually want happiness in this life and want to prepare for the best in the next life, they must adopt a Vedic civilization. In a Vedic civilization, there is a full supply of all the necessities mentioned above.





TEXT 26



kuraṅga-kurara-kusumbha-vaikaṅka-trikūṭa-śiśira-pataṅga-rucaka-niṣadha-śinīvāsa-kapila-śaṅkha-vaidūrya-jārudhi-haṁsa-ṛṣabha-nāga-kālañjara-nāradādayo viṁśati-girayo meroḥ karṇikāyā iva kesara-bhūtā mūla-deśe parita upakḷptāḥ.



SYNONYMS



kuraṅga-Kuraṅga; kurara-Kurara; kusumbha-vaikaṅka-trikūṭa-śiśira-pataṅga-rucaka-niṣadha-śinīvāsa-kapila-śaṅkha-vaidūrya-jārudhi-haṁsa-ṛṣabha-nāga-kālañjara-nārada-the names of mountains; ādayaḥ-and so on; viṁśati-girayaḥ-twenty mountains; meroḥ-of Sumeru Mountain; karṇikāyāḥ-of the whorl of the lotus; iva-like; kesara-bhūtāḥ-as filaments; mūla-deśe-at the base; paritaḥ-all around; upakḷptāḥ-arranged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





There are other mountains beautifully arranged around the foot of Mount Meru like the filaments around the whorl of a lotus flower. Their names are Kuraṅga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikaṅka, Trikūṭa, Śiśira, Pataṅga, Rucaka, Niṣadha, Sinīvāsa, Kapila, Śaṅkha, Vaidūrya, Jārudhi, Haṁsa, Ṛṣabha, Nāga, Kālañjara and Nārada.





TEXT 27



jaṭhara-devakūṭau meruṁ pūrveṇāṣṭādaśa-yojana-sahasram udagāyatau dvi-sahasraṁ pṛthu-tuṅgau bhavataḥ; evam apareṇa pavana-pāriyātrau dakṣiṇena kailāsa-karavīrau prāg-āyatāv evam uttaratas triśṛṅga-makarāv aṣṭabhir etaiḥ parisṛto 'gnir iva paritaś cakāsti kāñcana-giriḥ.



SYNONYMS



jaṭhara-devakūṭau-two mountains named Jaṭhara and Devakūṭa; merum-Sumeru Mountain; pūrveṇa-on the eastern side; aṣṭādaśa-yojana-sahasram-eighteen thousand yojanas; udagāyatau-stretching from north to south; dvi-sahasram-two thousand yojanas; pṛthu-tuṅgau-in width and height; bhavataḥ-there are; evam-similarly; apareṇa-on the western side; pavana-pāriyātrau-two mountains named Pavana and Pāriyātra; dakṣiṇena-on the southern side; kailāsa-karavīrau-two mountains named Kailāsa and Karavīra; prāk-āyatau-expanding east and west; evam-similarly; uttarataḥ-on the northern side; triśṛṅga-makarau-two mountains named Triśṛṅga and Makara; aṣṭabhiḥ etaiḥ-by these eight mountains; parisṛtaḥ-surrounded; agniḥ iva-like fire; paritaḥ-all over; cakāsti-brilliantly shines; kāñcana-giriḥ-the golden mountain named Sumeru, or Meru.





On the eastern side of Sumeru Mountain are two mountains named Jaṭhara and Devakūṭa, which extend to the north and south for 18,000 yojanas [144,000 miles]. Similarly, on the western side of Sumeru are two mountains named Pavana and Pāriyātra, which also extend north and south for the same distance. On the southern side of Sumeru are two mountains named Kailāsa and Karavīra, which extend east and west for 18,000 yojanas, and on the northern side of Sumeru, extending for the same distance east and west, are two mountains named Triśṛṅga and Makara. The width and height of all these mountains is 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles]. Sumeru, a mountain of solid gold shining as brilliantly as fire, is surrounded by these eight mountains.





TEXT 28



meror mūrdhani bhagavata ātma-yoner madhyata upakḷptāṁ purīm ayuta-yojana-sāhasrīṁ sama-caturasrāṁ śātakaumbhīṁ vadanti.



SYNONYMS



meroḥ-of Sumeru Mountain; mūrdhani-on the head; bhagavataḥ-of the most powerful being; ātma-yoneḥ-of Lord Brahmā; madhyataḥ-in the middle; upakḷptām-situated; purīm-the great township; ayuta-yojana-ten thousand yojanas; sāhasrīm-one thousand; sama-caturasrām-of the same length on all sides; śāta-kaumbhīm-made entirely of gold; vadanti-the great learned sages say.





In the middle of the summit of Meru is the township of Lord Brahmā. Each of its four sides is calculated to extend for ten million yojanas [eighty million miles]. It is made entirely of gold, and therefore learned scholars and sages call it Śātakaumbhī.





TEXT 29



tām anuparito loka-pālānām aṣṭānāṁ yathā-diśaṁ yathā-rūpaṁ turīya-mānena puro 'ṣṭāv upakḷptāḥ.



SYNONYMS



tām-that great township named Brahmapurī; anuparitaḥ-surrounding; loka-pālānām-of the governors of the planets; aṣṭānām-eight; yathā-diśam-according to the directions; yathā-rūpam-in exact conformity with the township of Brahmapurī; turīya-mānena-by measurement only one fourth; puraḥ-townships; aṣṭau-eight; upakḷptāḥ-situated.





Surrounding Brahmapurī in all directions are the residences of the eight principal governors of the planetary systems, beginning with King Indra. These abodes are similar to Brahmapurī but are one fourth the size.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura confirms that the townships of Lord Brahmā and the eight subordinate governors of the planetary systems, beginning with Indra, are mentioned in other Purāṇas.



merau nava-pūrāṇi syur

manovaty amarāvatī

tejovatī saṁyamanī

tathā kṛṣṇāṅganā parā

śraddhāvatī gandhavatī

tathā cānyā mahodayā

yaśovatī ca brahmendra

bahyādīnāṁ yathā-kramam





Brahmā's township is known as Manovatī, and those of his assistants such as Indra and Agni are known as Amarāvatī, Tejovatī, Saṁyamanī, Kṛṣṇāṅganā, Śraddhāvatī, Gandhavatī, Mahodayā and Yaśovatī. Brahmapurī is situated in the middle, and the other eight purīs surround it in all directions.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "A Description of Jambūdvīpa."



Chapter Seventeen



The Descent of the River Ganges





The Seventeenth Chapter describes the origin of the Ganges River and how it flows in and around Ilāvṛta-varṣa. There is also a description of the prayers Lord Śiva offers to Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, part of the quadruple expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Viṣṇu once approached Bali Mahārāja while the King was performing a sacrifice. The Lord appeared before him as Trivikrama, or Vāmana, and begged alms from the King in the form of three steps of land. With two steps, Lord Vāmana covered all three planetary systems and pierced the covering of the universe with the toes of His left foot. A few drops of water from the Causal Ocean leaked through this hole and fell on the head of Lord Śiva, where they remained for one thousand millenniums. These drops of water are the sacred Ganges River. It first flows onto the heavenly planets, which are located on the soles of Lord Viṣṇu's feet. The Ganges River is known by many names, such as the Bhāgīrathī and the Jāhnavī. It purifies Dhruvaloka and the planets of the seven sages because both Dhruva and the sages have no other desire than to serve the Lord's lotus feet.





The Ganges River, emanating from the lotus feet of the Lord, inundates the heavenly planets, especially the moon, and then flows through Brahmapurī atop Mount Meru. Here the river divides into four branches (known as Sītā, Alakanandā, Cakṣu and Bhadrā), which then flow down to the ocean of salt water. The branch known as Sītā flows through Śekhara-parvata and Gandhamādana-parvata and then flows down to Bhadrāśva-varṣa, where it mixes with the ocean of salt water in the West. The Cakṣu branch flows through Mālyavān-giri and, after reaching Ketumāla-varṣa, mixes with the ocean of salt water in the West. The branch known as Bhadrā flows onto Mount Meru, Mount Kumuda, and the Nīla, Śveta and Śṛṅgavān mountains before it reaches Kuru-deśa, where it flows into the ocean of salt water in the north. The Alakanandā branch flows through Brahmālaya, crosses over many mountains, including Hemakūṭa and Himakūṭa, and then reaches Bhārata-varṣa, where it flows into the southern side of the ocean of salt water. Many other rivers and their branches flow through the nine varṣas.





The tract of land known as Bhārata-varṣa is the field of activities, and the other eight varṣas are for persons who are meant to enjoy heavenly comfort. In each of these eight beautiful provinces, the celestial denizens enjoy various standards of material comfort and pleasure. A different incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead distributes His mercy in each of the nine varṣas of Jambūdvīpa.





In the Ilāvṛta-varṣa, Lord Śiva is the only male. There he lives with his wife, Bhavānī, who is attended by many maidservants. If any other male enters that province, Bhavānī curses him to become a woman. Lord Śiva worships Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa by offering various prayers, one of which is as follows: "My dear Lord, please liberate all Your devotees from material life and bind all the nondevotees to the material world. Without Your mercy, no one can be released from the bondage of material existence."





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tatra bhagavataḥ sākṣād yajña-liṅgasya viṣṇor vikramato vāma-pādāṅguṣṭha-nakha-nirbhinnordhvāṇḍa-kaṭāha-vivareṇāntaḥ-praviṣṭā yā bāhya-jala-dhārā tac-caraṇa-paṅkajāvanejanāruṇa-kiñjalkoparañjitākhila-jagad-agha-malāpahopasparśanāmalā sākṣād bhagavat-padīty anupalakṣita-vaco 'bhidhīyamānāti-mahatā kālena yuga-sahasropalakṣaṇena divo mūrdhany avatatāra yat tad viṣṇu-padam āhuḥ.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tatra-at that time; bhagavataḥ-of the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sākṣāt-directly; yajña-liṅgasya-the enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; vikramataḥ-while taking His second step; vāma-pāda-of His left leg; aṅguṣṭha-of the big toe; nakha-by the nail; nirbhinna-pierced; ūrdhva-upper; aṇḍa-kaṭāha-the covering of the universe (consisting of seven layers-earth, water, fire, etc.); vivareṇa-through the bole; antaḥ-praviṣṭā-having entered the universe; yā-which; bāhya-jala-dhārā-the flow of water from the Causal Ocean outside the universe; tat-of Him; caraṇa-paṅkaja-of the lotus feet; avanejana-by the washing; aruṇa-kiñjalka-by reddish powder; uparañjitā-being colored; akhila-jagat-of the whole world; agha-mala-the sinful activities; apahā-destroys; upasparśana-the touching of which; amalā-completely pure; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavat-padī-emanating from the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iti-thus; anupalakṣita-described; vacaḥ-by the name; abhidhīyamānā-being called; ati-mahatā kālena-after a long time; yuga-sahasra-upalakṣaṇena-consisting of one thousand millenniums; divaḥ-of the sky; mūrdhani-on the head (Dhruvaloka); avatatāra-descended; yat-which; tat-that; viṣṇu-padam-the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu; āhuḥ-they call.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, Lord Viṣṇu, the enjoyer of all sacrifices, appeared as Vāmanadeva in the sacrificial arena of Bali Mahārāja. Then He extended His left foot to the end of the universe and pierced a hole in its covering with the nail of His big toe. Through the hole, the pure water of the Causal Ocean entered this universe as the Ganges River. Having washed the lotus feet of the Lord, which are covered with reddish powder, the water of the Ganges acquired a very beautiful pink color. Every living being can immediately purify his mind of material contamination by touching the transcendental water of the Ganges, yet its waters remain ever pure. Because the Ganges directly touches the lotus feet of the Lord before descending within this universe, she is known as Viṣṇupadī. Later she received other names like Jāhnavī and Bhāgīrathī. After one thousand millenniums, the water of the Ganges descended on Dhruvaloka, the topmost planet in this universe. Therefore all learned sages and scholars proclaim Dhruvaloka to be Viṣṇupada ["situated on Lord Viṣṇu's lotus feet"].





In this verse, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes the glories of the Ganges River. The water of the Ganges is called patita-pāvanī, the deliverer of all sinful living beings. It is a proven fact that a person who regularly bathes in the Ganges is purified both externally and internally. Externally his body becomes immune to all kinds of disease, and internally he gradually develops a devotional attitude toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Throughout India, many thousands of people live on the banks of the Ganges, and by regularly bathing in her waters, they are undoubtedly being purified both spiritually and materially. Many sages, including Śaṅkarācārya, have composed prayers in praise of the Ganges, and the land of India itself has become glorious because such rivers as the Ganges, Yamunā, Godāvarī, Kāverī, Kṛṣṇā and Narmadā flow there. Anyone living on the land adjacent to these rivers is naturally advanced in spiritual consciousness. Śrīla Madhvācārya says:



vārāhe vāma-pādaṁ tu

tad-anyeṣu tu dakṣiṇam

pādaṁ kalpeṣu bhagavān

ujjahāra trivikramaḥ





Standing on His right foot and extending His left to the edge of the universe, Lord Vāmana became known as Trivikrama, the incarnation who performed three heroic deeds.





TEXT 2



yatra ha vāva vīra-vrata auttānapādiḥ parama-bhāgavato 'smat-kula-devatā-caraṇāravindodakam iti yām anusavanam utkṛṣyamāṇa-bhagavad-bhakti-yogena dṛḍhaṁ klidyamānāntar-hṛdaya autkaṇṭhya-vivaśāmīlita-locana-yugala-kuḍmala-vigalitāmala-bāṣpa-kalayābhivyajyamāna-roma-pulaka-kulako 'dhunāpi paramādareṇa śirasā bibharti.



SYNONYMS



yatra ha vāva-in Dhruvaloka; vīra-vrataḥ-firmly determined; auttānapādiḥ-the famous son of Mahārāja Uttānapāda; parama-bhāgavataḥ-the most exalted devotee; asmat-our; kula-devatā-of the family Deity; caraṇa-aravinda-of the lotus feet; udakam-in the water; iti-thus; yām-which; anusavanam-constantly; utkṛṣyamāṇa-being increased; bhagavat-bhakti-yogena-by devotional service unto the Lord; dṛḍham-greatly; klidyamāna-antaḥ-hṛdayaḥ-being softened within the core of his heart; autkaṇṭhya-by great anxiety; vivaśa-spontaneously; amīlita-slightly open; locana-of eyes; yugala-pair; kuḍmala-from the flowerlike; vigalita-emanating; amala-uncontaminated; bāṣpa-kalayā-with tears; abhivyajyamāna-being manifested; roma-pulaka-kulakaḥ-whose symptoms of ecstasy on the body; adhunā api-even now; parama-ādareṇa-with great reverence; śirasā-by the head; bibharti-he bears.





Dhruva Mahārāja, the famous son of Mahārāja Uttānapāda, is known as the most exalted devotee of the Supreme Lord because of his firm determination in executing devotional service. Knowing that the sacred Ganges water washes the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu, Dhruva Mahārāja, situated on his own planet, to this very day accepts that water on his head with great devotion. Because he constantly thinks of Kṛṣṇa very devoutly within the core of his heart, he is overcome with ecstatic anxiety. Tears flow from his half-open eyes, and eruptions appear on his entire body.





When a person is firmly fixed in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is described as vīra-vrata, fully determined. Such a devotee increases his ecstasy in devotional service more and more. Thus as soon as he remembers Lord Viṣṇu, his eyes fill with tears. This is a symptom of a mahā-bhāgavata. Dhruva Mahārāja maintained himself in that devotional ecstasy, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu also gave us a practical example of transcendental ecstasy when He lived at Jagannātha Purī. His pastimes there are fully narrated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta.





TEXT 3



tataḥ sapta ṛṣayas tat prabhāvābhijñā yāṁ nanu tapasa ātyantikī siddhir etāvatī bhagavati sarvātmani vāsudeve 'nuparata-bhakti-yoga-lābhenaivopekṣitānyārthātma-gatayo muktim ivāgatāṁ mumukṣava iva sabahu-mānam adyāpi jaṭā-jūṭair udvahanti.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; sapta ṛṣayaḥ-the seven great sages (beginning with Marīci); tat prabhāva-abhijñāḥ-who knew very well the influence of the Ganges River; yām-this Ganges water; nanu-indeed; tapasaḥ-of our austerities; ātyantikī-the ultimate; siddhiḥ-perfection; etāvatī-this much; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-ātmani-in the all-pervading; vāsudeve-Kṛṣṇa; anuparata-continuous; bhakti-yoga-of the mystic process of devotional service; lābhena-simply by achieving this platform; eva-certainly; upekṣita-neglected; anya-other; artha-ātma-gatayaḥ-all other means of perfection (namely religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation); muktim-liberation from material bondage; iva-like; āgatām-obtained; mumukṣavaḥ-persons desiring liberation; iva-like; sa-bahu-mānam-with great honor; adya api-even now; jaṭā-jūṭaiḥ-with matted locks of hair; udvahanti-they carry.





The seven great sages [Marīci, Vasiṣṭha, Atri and so on] reside on planets beneath Dhruvaloka. Well aware of the influence of the water of the Ganges, to this day they keep Ganges water on the tufts of hair on their heads. They have concluded that this is the ultimate wealth, the perfection of all austerities, and the best means of prosecuting transcendental life. Having obtained uninterrupted devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they neglect all other beneficial processes like religion, economic development, sense gratification and even merging into the Supreme. Just as jñānīs think that merging into the existence of the Lord is the highest truth, these seven exalted personalities accept devotional service as the perfection of life.





Transcendentalists are divided into two primary groups: the nirviśeṣa-vādīs, or impersonalists, and the bhaktas, or devotees. The impersonalists do not accept spiritual varieties of life. They want to merge into the existence of the Supreme Lord in His Brahman feature (the brahmajyoti). The devotees, however, desire to take part in the transcendental activities of the Supreme Lord. In the upper planetary system, the topmost planet is Dhruvaloka, and beneath Dhruvaloka are the seven planets occupied by the great sages, beginning with Marīci, Vasiṣṭha and Atri. All these sages regard devotional service as the highest perfection of life. Therefore they all carry the holy water of the Ganges on their heads. This verse proves that for one who has achieved the platform of pure devotional service, nothing else is important, even so-called liberation (kaivalya). Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī states that only by achieving pure devotional service of the Lord can one give up all other engagements as insignificant. Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī confirms his statement as follows:



kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate

durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate

viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate

yat kāruṇya-kaṭākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has perfectly enunciated and broadcast the process of bhakti-yoga. Consequently, for one who has taken shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the highest perfection of the Māyāvādīs, kaivalya, or becoming one with the Supreme, is considered hellish, to say nothing of the karmīs' aspiration to be promoted to the heavenly planets. Devotees consider such goals to be worthless phantasmagoria. There are also yogīs, who try to control their senses, but they can never succeed without coming to the stage of devotional service. The senses are compared to poisonous snakes, but the senses of a bhakta engaged in the service of the Lord are like snakes with their poisonous fangs removed. The yogī tries to suppress his senses, but even great mystics like Viśvāmitra fail in the attempt. Viśvāmitra was conquered by his senses when he was captivated by Menakā during his meditation. She later gave birth to Śakuntalā. The wisest persons in the world, therefore, are the bhakti-yogīs, as Lord Kṛṣṇa confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all."





TEXT 4



tato 'neka-sahasra-koṭi-vimānānīka-saṅkula-deva-yānenāvatar-antīndu maṇḍalam āvārya brahma-sadane nipatati.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-after purifying the seven planets of the seven great sages; aneka-many; sahasra-thousands; koṭi-of millions; vimāna-anīka-with contingents of airplanes; saṅkula-congested; deva-yānena-by the spaceways of the demigods; avatarantī-descending; indu-maṇḍalam-the moon planet; āvārya-inundated; brahma-sadane-to the abode of Lord Brahmā atop Sumeru-parvata; nipatati-falls down.





After purifying the seven planets near Dhruvaloka [the polestar], the Ganges water is carried through the spaceways of the demigods in billions of celestial airplanes. Then it inundates the moon [Candraloka] and finally reaches Lord Brahmā's abode atop Mount Meru.





We should always remember that the Ganges River comes from the Causal Ocean, beyond the covering of the universe. After the water of the Causal Ocean leaks through the hole created by Lord Vāmanadeva, it flows down to Dhruvaloka (the polestar) and then to the seven planets beneath Dhruvaloka. Then it is carried to the moon by innumerable celestial airplanes, and then it falls to the top of Mount Meru, which is known as Sumeru-parvata. In this way, the water of the Ganges finally reaches the lower planets and the peaks of the Himalayas, and from there it flows through Hardwar and throughout the plains of India, purifying the entire land. How the Ganges water reaches the various planets from the top of the universe is explained herein. Celestial airplanes carry the water from the planets of the sages to other planets. So-called advanced scientists of the modern age are trying to go to the higher planets, but at the same time they are experiencing a power shortage on earth. If they were actually capable scientists, they could personally go by airplane to other planets, but this they are unable to do. Having now given up their moon excursions, they are attempting to go to other planets, but without success.





TEXT 5



tatra caturdhā bhidyamānā caturbhir nāmabhiś catur-diśam abhispandantī nada-nadī-patim evābhiniviśati sītālakanandā cakṣur bhadreti.



SYNONYMS



tatra-there (on top of Mount Meru); caturdhā-into four branches; bhidyamānā-being divided; caturbhiḥ-with four; nāmabhiḥ-names; catuḥ-diśam-the four directions (east, west, north and south); abhispandantī-profusely flowing; nada-nadī-patim-the reservoir of all great rivers (the ocean); eva-certainly; abhiniviśati-enters; sītā-alakanandā-Sītā and Alakanandā; cakṣuḥ-Cakṣu; bhadrā-Bhadrā; iti-known by these names.





On top of Mount Meru, the Ganges divides into four branches, each of which gushes in a different direction [east, west, north and south]. These branches, known by the names Sītā, Alakanandā, Cakṣu and Bhadrā, flow down to the ocean.





TEXT 6



sītā tu brahma-sadanāt kesarācalādi-giri-śikharebhyo 'dho 'dhaḥ prasravantī gandhamādana-mūrdhasu patitvāntareṇa bhadrāśva-varṣaṁ prācyāṁ diśi kṣāra-samudram abhipraviśati.



SYNONYMS



sītā-the branch known as Sītā; tu-certainly; brahma-sadanāt-from Brahmapurī; kesarācala-ādi-of Kesarācala and of other great mountains; giri-hills; śikharebhyaḥ-from the tops; adhaḥ adhaḥ-downward; prasravantī-flowing; gandhamādana-of Gandhamādana Mountain; mūrdhasu-on the top; patitvā-falling down; antareṇa-within; bhadrāśva-varṣam-the province known as Bhadrāśva; prācyām-in the western; diśi-direction; kṣāra-samudram-the ocean of salt water; abhipraviśati-enters.





The branch of the Ganges known as the Sītā flows through Brahmapurī atop Mount Meru, and from there it runs down to the nearby peaks of the Kesarācala Mountains, which stand almost as high as Mount Meru itself. These mountains are like a bunch of filaments around Mount Meru. From the Kesarācala Mountains, the Ganges falls to the peak of Gandhamādana Mountain and then flows into the land of Bhadrāśva-varṣa. Finally it reaches the ocean of salt water in the west.





TEXT 7



evaṁ mālyavac-chikharān niṣpatantī tato 'nuparata-vegā ketumālam abhi cakṣuḥ pratīcyāṁ diśi sarit-patiṁ praviśati.



SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; mālyavat-śikharāt-from the top of Mālyavān Mountain; niṣpatantī-falling down; tataḥ-thereafter; anuparata-vegā-whose force is uninterrupted; ketumālam abhi-into the land known as Ketumāla-varṣa; cakṣuḥ-the branch known as Cakṣu; pratīcyām-in the West; diśi-direction; sarit-patim-the ocean; praviśati-enters into.





The branch of the Ganges known as Cakṣu falls onto the summit of Mālyavān Mountain and from there cascades onto the land of Ketumāla-varṣa. The Ganges flows incessantly through Ketumāla-varṣa and in this way also reaches the ocean of salt water in the West.





TEXT 8



bhadrā cottarato meru-śiraso nipatitā giri-śikharād giri-śikharam atihāya śṛṅgavataḥ śṛṅgād avasyandamānā uttarāṁs tu kurūn abhita udīcyāṁ diśi jaladhim abhipraviśati.



SYNONYMS



bhadrā-the branch known as Bhadrā; ca-also; uttarataḥ-to the northern side; meru-śirasaḥ-from the top of Mount Meru; nipatitā-having fallen; giri-śikharāt-from the peak of Kumuda Mountain; giri-śikharam-to the peak of Nīla Mountain; atihāya-passing over as if not touching; śṛṅgavataḥ-of the mountain known as Śṛṅgavān; śṛṅgāt-from the peak; avasyandamānā-flowing; uttarān-the northern; tu-but; kurūn-the land known as Kuru; abhitaḥ-on all sides; udīcyām-in the northern; diśi-direction; jaladhim-the ocean of salt water; abhipraviśati-enters into.





The branch of the Ganges known as Bhadrā flows from the northern side of Mount Meru. Its waters fall onto the peaks of Kumuda Mountain, Mount Nīla, Śveta Mountain and Śṛṅgavān Mountain in succession. Then it runs down into the province of Kuru and, after crossing through that land, flows into the saltwater ocean in the north.





TEXT 9



tathaivālakanandā dakṣiṇena brahma-sadanād bahūni giri-kūṭāny atikramya hemakūṭād dhaimakūṭāny ati-rabhasatara-raṁhasā luṭhayantī bhāratam abhivarṣaṁ dakṣiṇasyāṁ diśi jaladhim abhipraviśati yasyāṁ snānārthaṁ cāgacchataḥ puṁsaḥ pade pade 'śvamedha-rājasūyādīnāṁ phalaṁ na durlabham iti.



SYNONYMS



tathā eva-similarly; alakanandā-the branch known as Alakanandā; dakṣiṇena-by the southern side; brahma-sadanāt-from the city known as Brahmapurī; bahūni-many; giri-kūṭāni-the tops of mountains; atikramya-crossing over; hemakūṭāt-from Hemakūṭa Mountain; haimakūṭāni-and Himakūṭa; ati-rabhasatara-more fiercely; raṁhasā-with great force; luṭhayantī-plundering; bhāratam abhivarṣam-on all sides of Bhārata-varṣa; dakṣiṇasyām-in the southern; diśi-direction; jaladhim-the ocean of salt water; abhipraviśati-enters into; yasyām-in which; snāna-artham-for bathing; ca-and; āgacchataḥ-of one who is coming; puṁsaḥ-a person; pade pade-at every step; aśvamedha-rājasūya-ādīnām-of great sacrifices like the Aśvamedha yajña and Rājasūya yajña; phalam-the result; na-not; durlabham-very difficult to obtain; iti-thus.





Similarly, the branch of the Ganges known as Alakanandā flows from the southern side of Brahmapurī [Brahma-sadana]. Passing over the tops of mountains in various lands, it falls down with fierce force upon the peaks of the mountains Hemakūṭa and Himakūṭa. After inundating the tops of those mountains, the Ganges falls down onto the tract of land known as Bhārata-varṣa, which she also inundates. Then the Ganges flows into the ocean of salt water in the south. Persons who come to bathe in this river are fortunate. It is not very difficult for them to achieve with every step the results of performing great sacrifices like the Rājasūya and Aśvamedha yajñas.





The place where the Ganges flows into the salt water of the Bay of Bengal is still known as Gaṅgā-sāgara, or the meeting place of the Ganges and the Bay of Bengal. On Makara-saṅkrānti, in the month of January–February, thousands of people still go there to bathe, hoping to be liberated. That they can actually be liberated in this way is confirmed herein. For those who bathe in the Ganges at any time, the results of great sacrifices like the Aśvamedha and Rājasūya yajñas are not at all difficult to achieve. Most people in India are still inclined to bathe in the Ganges, and there are many places where they can do so. At Prayāga (Allahabad), many thousands of people gather during the month of January to bathe in the confluence of the Ganges and Yamunā. Afterward, many of them go to the confluence of the Bay of Bengal and the Ganges to take bath there. Thus it is a special facility for all the people of India that they can bathe in the water of the Ganges at so many places of pilgrimage.





TEXT 10



anye ca nadā nadyaś ca varṣe varṣe santi bahuśo merv-ādi-giri-duhitaraḥ śataśaḥ.



SYNONYMS



anye-many others; ca-also; nadāḥ-rivers; nadyaḥ-small rivers; ca-and; varṣe varṣe-in each tract of land; santi-are; bahuśaḥ-of many varieties; meru-ādi-giri-duhitaraḥ-daughters of the mountains beginning with Meru; śataśaḥ-in the hundreds.





Many other rivers, both big and small, flow from the top of Mount Meru. These rivers are like daughters of the mountain, and they flow to the various tracts of land in hundreds of branches.





TEXT 11



tatrāpi bhāratam eva varṣaṁ karma-kṣetram anyāny aṣṭa varṣāṇi svargiṇāṁ puṇya-śeṣopabhoga-sthānāni bhaumāni svarga-padāni vyapadiśanti.



SYNONYMS



tatra api-out of all of them; bhāratam-known as Bhārata-varṣa; eva-certainly; varṣam-the tract of land; karma-kṣetram-the field of activities; anyāni-the others; aṣṭa varṣāṇi-eight tracts of land; svargiṇām-of the living entities elevated to the heavenly planets by extraordinary pious activities; puṇya-of the results of pious activities; śeṣa-of the remainder; upabhoga-sthānāni-the places for material enjoyment; bhaumāni svarga-padāni-as the heavenly places on earth; vyapadiśanti-they designate.





Among the nine varṣas, the tract of land known as Bhārata-varṣa is understood to be the field of fruitive activities. Learned scholars and saintly persons declare the other eight varṣas to be meant for very highly elevated pious persons. After returning from the heavenly planets, they enjoy the remaining results of their pious activities in these eight earthly varṣas.





The heavenly places of enjoyment are divided into three groups: the celestial heavenly planets, the heavenly places on earth, and the bila heavenly places, which are found in the lower regions. Among these three classes of heavenly places (bhauma-svarga-pada-ni), the heavenly places on earth are the eight varṣas other than Bhārata-varṣa. In Bhagavad-gītā (9.21) Kṛṣṇa says, kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti: when the persons living in the heavenly planets exhaust the results of their pious activities, they return to this earth. In this way, they are elevated to the heavenly planets, and then they again fall to the earthly planets. This process is known as brahmāṇḍa bhramaṇa, wandering up and down throughout the universes. Those who are intelligent-in other words, those who have not lost their intelligence-do not involve themselves in this process of wandering up and down. They take to the devotional service of the Lord so that they can ultimately penetrate the covering of this universe and enter the spiritual kingdom. Then they are situated on one of the planets known as Vaikuṇṭhaloka or, still higher. Kṛṣṇaloka (Goloka Vṛndāvana). A devotee is never caught in the process of being promoted to the heavenly planets and again coming down. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says:



ei rūpe brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

[Cc. Madhya 19.151]





Among all the living entities wandering throughout the universe, one who is most fortunate comes in contact with a representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus gets the opportunity to execute devotional service. Those who are sincerely seeking the favor of Kṛṣṇa come in contact with a guru, a bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa. The Māyāvādīs indulging in mental speculation and the karmīs desiring the results of their actions cannot become gurus. A guru must be a direct representative of Kṛṣṇa who distributes the instructions of Kṛṣṇa without any change. Thus only the most fortunate persons come in contact with the guru. As confirmed in the Vedic literatures, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet: [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12] one has to search out a guru to understand the affairs of the spiritual world. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also confirms this point. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] one who is very interested in understanding the activities in the spiritual world must search out a guru-a bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa. From all angles of vision, therefore, the word guru is especially meant for the bona fide representative of Kṛṣṇa and no one else. Padma Purāṇa states, avaiṣṇavo gurur na syāt: one who is not a Vaiṣṇava, or who is not a representative of Kṛṣṇa, cannot be a guru. Even the most qualified brāhmaṇa cannot become a guru if he is not a representative of Kṛṣṇa. Brāhmaṇas are supposed to acquire six kinds of auspicious qualifications: they become very learned scholars (paṭhana) and very qualified teachers (pāṭhana); they become expert in worshiping the Lord or the demigods (yajana), and they teach others how to execute this worship (yājana); they qualify themselves as bona fide persons to receive alms from others (pratigraha), and they distribute the wealth in charity (dāna). Yet even a brāhmaṇa possessing these qualifications cannot become a guru unless he is the representative of Kṛṣṇa (gurur na syāt). Vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ: but a Vaiṣṇava, a bona fide representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, can become a guru, even if he is śva-paca, a member of a family of dog-eaters. Of the three divisions of heavenly planets (svarga-loka), bhauma-svarga is sometimes accepted as the tract of land in Bhārata-varṣa known as Kashmir. In this region there are certainly good facilities for material sense enjoyment, but this is not the business of a pure transcendentalist. Rūpa Gosvāmī describes the engagement of a pure transcendentalist as follows:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." Those who fully engage in devotional service to Kṛṣṇa just to please Him are not interested in the three divisions of heavenly places, namely, divya-svarga, bhauma-svarga and bila-svarga.





TEXT 12



eṣu puruṣāṇām ayuta-puruṣāyur-varṣāṇāṁ deva-kalpānāṁ nāgāyuta-prāṇānāṁ vajra-saṁhanana-bala-vayo-moda-pramudita-mahā-saurata-mithuna-vyavāyāpavarga-varṣa-dhṛtaika-garbha-kalatrāṇāṁ tatra tu tretā-yuga-samaḥ kālo vartate.



SYNONYMS



eṣu-in these (eight) varṣas, or tracts of land; puruṣāṇām-of all the men; ayuta-ten thousand; puruṣa-by the measure of men; āyuḥ-varṣāṇām-of those whose years of life; deva-kalpānām-who are like the demigods; nāga-ayuta-prāṇānām-having the strength of ten thousand elephants; vajra-saṁhanana-by bodies as solid as thunderbolts; bala-by bodily strength; vayaḥ-by youth; moda-by abundant sense enjoyment; pramudita-being excited; mahā-saurata-a great deal of sexual; mithuna-combinations of man and woman; vyavāya-apavarga-at the end of their period of sexual enjoyment; varṣa-in the last year; dhṛta-eka-garbha-who conceive one child; kalatrāṇām-of those who have wives; tatra-there; tu-but; tretā-yuga-samaḥ-exactly like the Tretā-yuga (when there is no tribulation); kālaḥ-time; vartate-exists.





In these eight varṣas, or tracts of land, human beings live ten thousand years according to earthly calculations. All the inhabitants are almost like demigods. They have the bodily strength of ten thousand elephants. Indeed, their bodies are as sturdy as thunderbolts. The youthful duration of their lives is very pleasing, and both men and women enjoy sexual union with great pleasure for a long time. After years of sensual pleasure-when a balance of one year of life remains-the wife conceives a child. Thus the standard of pleasure for the residents of these heavenly regions is exactly like that of the human beings who lived during Tretā-yuga.





There are four yugas: Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga and Kali-yuga. During the first yuga, Satya-yuga, people were very pious. Everyone practiced the mystic yoga system for spiritual understanding and realization of God. Because everyone was always absorbed in samādhi, no one was interested in material sense enjoyment. During Tretā-yuga, people enjoyed sense pleasure without tribulations. Material miseries began in Dvāpara-yuga, but they were not very stringent. Stringent material miseries really began from the advent of Kali-yuga.



Another point in this verse is that in all eight of these heavenly varṣas, although men and women enjoy sex pleasure, there is no pregnancy. Pregnancy takes place only in lower-grade life. For example, animals like dogs and hogs become pregnant twice a year, and each time they beget at least half a dozen offspring. Even lower species of life such as snakes give birth to hundreds of young at one time. This verse informs us that in grades of life higher than ours, pregnancy occurs once in a lifetime. People still have sex life, but there is no pregnancy. In the spiritual world, people are not very attracted to sex life, due to their exalted devotional attitude. Practically speaking, there is no sex life in the spiritual world, but even if sometimes it does occur, there is no pregnancy at all. On the planet earth, however, human beings do become pregnant, although the tendency is to avoid having children. In this sinful age of Kali, people have even taken to the process of killing the child in the womb. This is the most degraded practice; it can only perpetuate the miserable material conditions of those who perform it.





TEXT 13



yatra ha deva-patayaḥ svaiḥ svair gaṇa-nāyakair vihita-mahārhaṇāḥ sarvartu-kusuma-stabaka-phala-kisalaya-śriyānamyamāna-viṭapa-latā-viṭapibhir upaśumbhamāna-rucira-kānanāśramāyatana-varṣa-giri-droṇīṣu tathā cāmala-jalāśayeṣu vikaca-vividha-nava-vanaruhāmoda-mudita-rāja-haṁsa-jala-kukkuṭa-kāraṇḍava-sārasa-cakravākādibhir madhukara-nikarākṛtibhir upakūjiteṣu jala-krīḍādibhir vicitra-vinodaiḥ sulalita-sura-sundarīṇāṁ kāma-kalila-vilāsa-hāsa-līlāvalokākṛṣṭa-mano-dṛṣṭayaḥ svairaṁ viharanti.



SYNONYMS



yatra ha-in those eight tracts of land; deva-patayaḥ-the lords of the demigods, such as Lord Indra; svaiḥ svaiḥ-by their own respective; gaṇa-nāyakaiḥ-leaders of the servants; vihita-furnished with; mahā-arhaṇāḥ-valuable gifts, such as sandalwood pulp and garlands; sarva-ṛtu-in all seasons; kusuma-stabaka-of bunches of flowers; phala-of fruits; kisalaya-śriyā-by the opulences of shoots; ānamyamāna-being bent down; viṭapa-whose branches; latā-and creepers; viṭapibhiḥ-by many trees; upaśumbhamāna-being fully decorated; rucira-beautiful; kānana-gardens; āśrama-āyatana-and many hermitages; varṣa-giri-droṇīṣu-the valleys between the mountains designating the borders of the tracts of land; tathā-as well as; ca-also; amala-jala-āśayeṣu-in lakes with clear water; vikaca-just fructified; vividha-varieties; nava-vanaruha-āmoda-by the fragrance of lotus flowers; mudita-enthused; rāja-haṁsa-great swans; jala-kukkuṭa-water fowl; kāraṇḍava-aquatic birds called kāraṇḍavas; sārasa-cranes; cakravāka-ādibhiḥ-by birds known as cakravākas and so on; madhukara-nikara-ākṛtibhiḥ-by the bumblebees; upakūjiteṣu-which were made to resound; jala-krīḍā-ādibhiḥ-such as water sports; vicitra-various; vinodaiḥ-by pastimes; su-lalita-attractive; sura-sundarīṇām-of the women of the demigods; kāma-from lust; kalila-born; vilāsa-pastimes; hāsa-smiling; līlā-avaloka-by playful glances; ākṛṣṭa-manaḥ-whose minds are attracted; dṛṣṭayaḥ-and whose vision is attracted; svairam-very freely; viharanti-engage in sportive enjoyment.





In each of those tracts of land, there are many gardens filled with flowers and fruits according to the season, and there are beautifully decorated hermitages as well. Between the great mountains demarcating the borders of those lands lie enormous lakes of clear water filled with newly grown lotus flowers. Aquatic birds such as swans, ducks, water chickens, and cranes become greatly excited by the fragrance of lotus flowers, and the charming sound of bumblebees fills the air. The inhabitants of those lands are important leaders among the demigods. Always attended by their respective servants, they enjoy life in gardens alongside the lakes. In this pleasing situation, the wives of the demigods smile playfully at their husbands and look upon them with lusty desires. All the demigods and their wives are constantly supplied with sandalwood pulp and flower garlands by their servants. In this way, all the residents of the eight heavenly varṣas enjoy, attracted by the activities of the opposite sex.





Here is a description of the lower heavenly planets. The inhabitants of those planets enjoy life in a pleasing atmosphere of clear lakes filled with newly grown lotus flowers and gardens filled with fruits, flowers, various kinds of birds and humming bees. In that atmosphere they enjoy life with their very beautiful wives, who are always sexually stimulated. Nonetheless, they are all devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as will be explained in subsequent verses. The inhabitants of this earth also desire such heavenly enjoyment, but when they somehow or other achieve imitation pleasures like sex and intoxication, they completely forget the service of the Supreme Lord. In the heavenly planets, however, although the residents enjoy superior sense gratification, they never forget their positions as eternal servants of the Supreme Being.





TEXT 14



navasv api varṣeṣu bhagavān nārāyaṇo mahā-puruṣaḥ puruṣāṇāṁ tad-anugrahāyātma-tattva-vyūhenātmanādyāpi sannidhīyate.



SYNONYMS



navasu-in the nine; api-certainly; varṣeṣu-tracts of land known as varṣas; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nārāyaṇaḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; mahā-puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Person; puruṣāṇām-unto His various devotees; tat-anugrahāya-to show His mercy; ātma-tattva-vyūhena-by expansions of Himself in the quadruple forms Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; ātmanā-personally; adya api-until now; sannidhīyate-is near the devotees for accepting their services.





To show mercy to His devotees in each of these nine tracts of land, the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Nārāyaṇa expands Himself in His quadruple principles of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. In this way He remains near His devotees to accept their service.





In this connection, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura informs us that the demigods worship the Supreme Lord in His various Deity forms (arcā-vigraha) because except in the spiritual world, the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be directly worshiped in person. In the material world, the Lord is always worshiped as the arcā-vigraha, or Deity in the temple. There is no difference between the arcā-vigraha and the original person, and therefore those who are engaged in worshiping the Deity in the temple in full opulence, even on this planet, should be understood to be directly in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead without a doubt. As enjoined in the śāstras, arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu nara-matiḥ: "No one should treat the Deity in the temple as stone or metal. nor should one think that the spiritual master is an ordinary human being." One should strictly follow this śāstric injunction and worship the Deity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without offenses. The spiritual master is the direct representative of the Lord, and no one should consider him an ordinary human being. By avoiding offenses against the Deity and the spiritual master, one can advance in spiritual life, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



In this regard, the following quotation appears in the Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta:



pādme tu parama-vyomnaḥ

pūrvādye dik-catuṣṭaye

vāsudevādayo vyūhaś

catvāraḥ kathitāḥ kramāt





tathā pāda-vibhūtau ca

nivasanti kramādi me

jalāvṛti-stha-vaikuṇṭha-

sthita vedavatī-pure





satyordhve vaiṣṇave loke

nityākhye dvārakā-pure

śuddhodād uttare śveta-

dvīpe cairāvatī-pure





kṣīrāmbudhi-sthitānte

kroḍa-paryaṅka-dhāmani

sātvatīye kvacit tantre

nava vyūhāḥ prakīrtitāḥ

catvāro vāsudevādyā

nārāyaṇa-nṛsiṁhakau





hayagrīvo mahā-kroḍo

brahmā ceti navoditāḥ

tatra brahmā tu vijñeyaḥ

pūrvokta-vidhayā hariḥ





"In the Padma Purāṇa it is said that in the spiritual world the Lord personally expands in all directions and is worshiped as Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The same God is represented by the Deity in this material world, which is only one quarter of His creation. Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha are also present in the four directions of this material world. There is a Vaikuṇṭhaloka covered with water in this material world, and on that planet is a place called Vedavatī, where Vāsudeva is located. Another planet known as Viṣṇuloka is situated above Satyaloka, and there Saṅkarṣaṇa is present. Similarly, in Dvārakā-purī, Pradyumna is the predominator. On the island known as Śvetadvīpa, there is an ocean of milk, and in the midst of that ocean is a place called Airāvatī-pura, where Aniruddha lies on Ananta. In some of the sātvata-tantras, there is a description of the nine varṣas and the predominating Deity worshiped in each: (1) Vāsudeva, (2) Saṅkarṣaṇa, (3) Pradyumna, (4) Aniruddha, (5) Nārāyaṇa, (6) Nṛsiṁha, (7) Hayagrīva, (8) Mahāvarāha, and (9) Brahmā. "The Lord Brahmā mentioned in this connection is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When there is no fit human being to empower as Lord Brahmā, the Lord Himself takes the position of Lord Brahmā. Tatra brahmā tu vijñeyaḥ pūrvokta-vidhayā hariḥ. That Brahmā mentioned here is Hari Himself.





TEXT 15



ilāvṛte tu bhagavān bhava eka eva pumān na hy anyas tatrāparo nirviśati bhavānyāḥ śāpa-nimitta-jño yat-pravekṣyataḥ strī-bhāvas tat paścād vakṣyāmi.



SYNONYMS



ilāvṛte-in the tract of land known as Ilāvṛta-varṣa; tu-but; bhagavān-the most powerful; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; eka-only; eva-certainly; pumān-male person; na-not; hi-certainly; anyaḥ-any other; tatra-there; aparaḥ-besides; nirviśati-enters; bhavānyāḥ śāpa-nimitta-jñaḥ-who knows the cause of the curse by Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva; yat-pravekṣyataḥ-of one who forcibly enters that tract of land; strī-bhāvaḥ-transformation into a female; tat-that; paścāt-later; vakṣyāmi-I shall explain.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: In the tract of land known as Ilāvṛta-varṣa, the only male person is Lord Śiva, the most powerful demigod. Goddess Durgā, the wife of Lord Śiva, does not like any man to enter that land. If any foolish man dares to do so, she immediately turns him into a woman. I shall explain this later [in the Ninth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam].





TEXT 16



bhavānī-nāthaiḥ strī-gaṇārbuda-sahasrair avarudhyamāno bhagavataś catur-mūrter mahā-puruṣasya turīyāṁ tāmasīṁ mūrtiṁ prakṛtim ātmanaḥ saṅkarṣaṇa-saṁjñām ātma-samādhi-rūpeṇa sannidhāpyaitad abhigṛṇan bhava upadhāvati.



SYNONYMS



bhavānī-nāthaiḥ-by the company of Bhavānī; strī-gaṇa-of females; arbuda-sahasraiḥ-by ten billion; avarudhyamānaḥ-always being served; bhagavataḥ catuḥ-mūrteḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is expanded in four; mahā-puruṣasya-of the Supreme Person; turīyām-the fourth expansion; tāmasīm-related to the mode of ignorance; mūrtim-the form; prakṛtim-as the source; ātmanaḥ-of himself (Lord Śiva); saṅkarṣaṇa-saṁjñām-known as Saṅkarṣaṇa; ātma-samādhi-rūpeṇa-by meditating upon Him in trance; sannidhāpya-bringing Him near; etat-this; abhigṛṇan-clearly chanting; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; upadhāvati-worships.





In Ilāvṛta-varṣa, Lord Śiva is always encircled by ten billion maidservants of goddess Durgā, who minister to him. The quadruple expansion of the Supreme Lord is composed of Vāsudeva, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Saṅkarṣaṇa. Saṅkarṣaṇa, the fourth expansion, is certainly transcendental, but because his activities of destruction in the material world are in the mode of ignorance, He is known as tāmasī, the Lord's form in the mode of ignorance. Lord Śiva knows that Saṅkarṣaṇa is the original cause of his own existence, and thus he always meditates upon Him in trance by chanting the following mantra.





Sometimes we see a picture of Lord Śiva engaged in meditation. This verse explains that Lord Śiva is always meditating upon Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa in trance. Lord Śiva is in charge of the destruction of the material world. Lord Brahmā creates the material world, Lord Viṣṇu maintains it, and Lord Śiva destroys it. Because destruction is in the mode of ignorance, Lord Śiva and his worshipable Deity, Saṅkarṣaṇa, are technically called tāmasī. Lord Śiva is the incarnation of tamo-guṇa. Since both Lord Śiva and Saṅkarṣaṇa are always enlightened and situated in the transcendental position, they have nothing to do with the modes of material nature-goodness, passion and ignorance-but because their activities involve them with the mode of ignorance, they are sometimes called tāmasī.





TEXT 17



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

oṁ namo bhagavate mahā-puruṣāya sarva-guṇa-saṅkhyānāyānantāyāvyaktāya nama iti.



SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the most powerful Lord Śiva says; om namo bhagavate-O Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; mahā-puruṣāya-who are the Supreme person; sarva-guṇa-saṅkhyānāya-the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; anantāya-the unlimited; avyaktāya-not manifested within the material world; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; iti-thus.





The most powerful Lord Śiva says: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You in Your expansion as Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. Although You are unlimited, You remain unmanifest to the nondevotees.





TEXT 18



bhaje bhajanyāraṇa-pāda-paṅkajaṁ

bhagasya kṛtsnasya paraṁ parāyaṇam

bhakteṣv alaṁ bhāvita-bhūta-bhāvanaṁ

bhavāpahaṁ tvā bhava-bhāvam īśvaram

SYNONYMS



bhaje-I worship; bhajanya-O worshipable Lord; araṇa-pāda-paṅkajam-whose lotus feet protect His devotees from all fearful situations; bhagasya-of opulences; kṛtsnasya-of all different varieties (wealth, fame, strength, knowledge, beauty and renunciation); param-the best; parāyaṇam-the ultimate shelter; bhakteṣu-to the devotees; alam-beyond value; bhāvita-bhūta-bhāvanam-who manifests His different forms for the satisfaction of His devotees; bhava-apaham-who stops the devotees' repetition of birth and death; tvā-unto You; bhava-bhāvam-who is the origin of the material creation; īśvaram-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





O my Lord, You are the only worshipable person, for You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all opulences. Your secure lotus feet are the only source of protection for all Your devotees, whom You satisfy by manifesting Yourself in various forms. O my Lord, You deliver Your devotees from the clutches of material existence. Nondevotees, however, remain entangled in material existence by Your will. Kindly accept me as Your eternal servant.





TEXT 19



na yasya māyā-guṇa-citta-vṛttibhir

nirīkṣato hy aṇv api dṛṣṭir ajyate

īśe yathā no 'jita-manyu-raṁhasāṁ

kas taṁ na manyeta jigīṣur ātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-never; yasya-whose; māyā-of the illusory energy; guṇa-in the qualities; citta-of the heart; vṛttibhiḥ-by the activities (thinking. feeling and willing); nirīkṣataḥ-of Him who is glancing; hi-certainly; aṇu-slightly; api-even; dṛṣṭiḥ-vision; ajyate-is affected; īśe-for the purpose of regulating; yathā-as; naḥ-of us; ajita-who have not conquered; manyu-of anger; raṁhasām-the force; kaḥ-who; tam-unto Him (the Supreme Lord); na-not; manyeta-would worship; jigīṣuḥ-aspiring to conquer; ātmanaḥ-the senses.





We cannot control the force of our anger. Therefore when we look at material things, we cannot avoid feeling attraction or repulsion for them. But the Supreme Lord is never affected in this way. Although He glances over the material world for the purpose of creating, maintaining and destroying it, He is not affected, even to the slightest degree. Therefore, one who desires to conquer the force of the senses must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Then he will be victorious.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is always equipped with inconceivable potencies. Although creation takes place by His glancing over the material energy, He is not affected by the modes of material nature. Because of His eternally transcendental position, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in this material world, the modes of material nature cannot affect Him. Therefore the Supreme Lord is called Transcendence, and anyone who wants to be secure from the influence of the modes of material nature must take shelter of Him.





TEXT 20



asad-dṛśo yaḥ pratibhāti māyayā

kṣībeva madhv-āsava-tāmra-locanaḥ

na nāga-vadhvo 'rhaṇa īśire hriyā

yat-pādayoḥ sparśana-dharṣitendriyāḥ

SYNONYMS



asat-dṛśaḥ-for a person with polluted vision; yaḥ-who; pratibhāti-appears; māyayā-the influence of māyā; kṣībaḥ-one who is inebriated or angry; iva-like; madhu-by honey; āsava-and liquor; tāmra-locanaḥ-having eyes reddish like copper; na-not; nāga-vadhvaḥ-the wives of the serpent demon; arhaṇe-in worshiping; īśire-were unable to proceed; hriyā-because of bashfulness; yat-pādayoḥ-of whose lotus feet; sparśana-by the touching; dharṣita-agitated; indriyāḥ-whose senses.





For persons with impure vision, the Supreme Lord's eyes appear like those of someone who indiscriminately drinks intoxicating beverages. Thus bewildered, such unintelligent persons become angry at the Supreme Lord, and due to their angry mood the Lord Himself appears angry and very fearful. However, this is an illusion. When the wives of the serpent demon were agitated by the touch of the Lord's lotus feet, due to shyness they could proceed no further in their worship of Him. Yet the Lord remained unagitated by their touch, for He is equipoised in all circumstances. Therefore who will not worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead ?





Anyone who remains unagitated, even in the presence of cause for agitation, is called dhīra, or equipoised. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being always in a transcendental position, is never agitated by anything. Therefore someone who wants to become dhīra must take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord. In Bhagavad-gītā (2.13) Kṛṣṇa says, dhīras tatra na muhyati: a person who is equipoised in all circumstances is never bewildered. Prahlāda Mahārāja is a perfect example of a dhīra. When the fierce form of Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared in order to kill Hiraṇyakaśipu, Prahlāda was unagitated. He remained calm and quiet, whereas others, including even Lord Brahmā, were frightened by the features of the Lord.





TEXT 21



yam āhur asya sthiti-janma-saṁyamaṁ

tribhir vihīnaṁ yam anantam ṛṣayaḥ

na veda siddhārtham iva kvacit sthitaṁ

bhū-maṇḍalaṁ mūrdha-sahasra-dhāmasu

SYNONYMS



yam-whom; āhuḥ-they said; asya-of the material world; sthiti-the maintenance; janma-creation; saṁyamam-annihilation; tribhiḥ-these three; vihīnam-without; yam-which; anantam-unlimited; ṛṣayaḥ-all the great sages; na-not; veda-feels; siddha-artham-a mustard seed; iva-like; kvacit-where; sthitam-situated; bhū-maṇḍalam-the universe; mūrdha-sahasra-dhāmasu-on the hundreds and thousands of hoods of the Lord.





Lord Śiva continued: All the great sages accept the Lord as the source of creation, maintenance and destruction, although He actually has nothing to do with these activities. Therefore the Lord is called unlimited. Although the Lord in His incarnation as Śeṣa holds all the universes on His hoods, each universe feels no heavier than a mustard seed to Him. Therefore, what person desiring perfection will not worship the Lord?





The incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Śeṣa or Ananta has unlimited strength, fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and renunciation. As described in this verse, Ananta's strength is so great that the innumerable universes rest on His hoods. He has the bodily features of a snake with thousands of hoods, and since His strength is unlimited, all the universes resting on His hoods feel no heavier than mustard seeds. We can just imagine how insignificant a mustard seed is on the hood of a serpent. In this connection, the reader is referred to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter Five, verses 117–125. There it is stated that Lord Viṣṇu's incarnation as the serpentine Ananta Śeṣa Nāga supports all the universes on His hoods. By our calculation, a universe may be very, very heavy, but because the Lord is ananta (unlimited), He feels the weight to be no heavier than a mustard seed.





TEXTS 22–23



yasyādya āsīd guṇa-vigraho mahān

vijñāna-dhiṣṇyo bhagavān ajaḥ kila

yat-sambhavo 'haṁ tri-vṛtā sva-tejasā

vaikārikaṁ tāmasam aindriyaṁ sṛje

ete vayaṁ yasya vaśe mahātmanaḥ



sthitāḥ śakuntā iva sūtra-yantritāḥ

mahān ahaṁ vaikṛta-tāmasendriyāḥ

sṛjāma sarve yad-anugrahād idam

SYNONYMS



yasya-from whom; ādyaḥ-the beginning; āsīt-there was; guṇa-vigrahaḥ-the incarnation of the material qualities; mahān-the total material energy; vijñāna-of full knowledge; dhiṣṇyaḥ-the reservoir; bhagavān-the most powerful; ajaḥ-Lord Brahmā; kila-certainly; yat-from whom; sambhavaḥ-born; aham-I; tri-vṛtā-having three varieties according to the three modes of nature; sva-tejasā-by my material strength; vaikārikam-all the demigods; tāmasam-material elements; aindriyam-the senses; sṛje-I create; ete-all of these; vayam-we; yasya-of whom; vaśe-under the control; mahā-ātmanaḥ-great personalities; sthitāḥ-situated; śakuntāḥ-vultures; iva-like; sūtra-yantritāḥ-bound by rope; mahān-the mahat-tattva; aham-I; vaikṛta-the demigods; tāmasa-the five material elements; indriyāḥ-senses; sṛjāmaḥ-we create; sarve-all of us; yat-of whom; anugrahāt-by the mercy; idam-this material world.





From that Supreme Personality of Godhead appears Lord Brahmā, whose body is made from the total material energy, the reservoir of intelligence predominated by the passionate mode of material nature. From Lord Brahmā, I myself am born as a representation of false ego known as Rudra. By my own power I create all the other demigods, the five elements and the senses. Therefore, I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than any of us and under whose control are situated all the demigods, material elements and senses, and even Lord Brahmā and I myself, like birds bound by a rope. Only by the Lord's grace can we create, maintain and annihilate the material world. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Being.





A summary of creation is given in this verse. From Saṅkarṣaṇa, Mahā-Viṣṇu expands, and from Mahā-Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu expands. Lord Brahmā, who was born of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, fathers Lord Śiva, from whom all the other demigods gradually evolve. Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu are incarnations of the different material qualities. Lord Viṣṇu is actually above all material qualities, but He accepts control of sattva-guṇa (the mode of goodness) to maintain the universe. Lord Brahmā is born from the mahat-tattva. Brahmā creates the entire universe, Lord Viṣṇu maintains it, and Lord Śiva annihilates it. The Supreme Personality of Godhead controls all the most important demigods-especially Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva-exactly as the owner of a bird controls it by binding it with a rope. Sometimes vultures are controlled in this way.





TEXT 24



yan-nirmitāṁ karhy api karma-parvaṇīṁ

māyāṁ jano 'yaṁ guṇa-sarga-mohitaḥ

na veda nistāraṇa-yogam añjasā

tasmai namas te vilayodayātmane

SYNONYMS



yat-by whom; nirmitām-created; karhi api-at any time; karma-parvaṇīm-which ties the knots of fruitive activity; māyām-the illusory energy; janaḥ-a person; ayam-this; guṇa-sarga-mohitaḥ-bewildered by the three modes of material nature; na-not; veda-knows; nistāraṇa-yogam-the process of getting out of material entanglement; añjasā-soon; tasmai-unto Him (the Supreme); namaḥ-respectful obeisances; te-unto You; vilaya-udaya-ātmane-in whom everything is annihilated and from whom everything is again manifested.





The illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead binds all of us conditioned souls to this material world. Therefore, without being favored by Him, persons like us cannot understand how to get out of that illusory energy. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who is the cause of creation and annihilation.





Kṛṣṇa clearly states in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14):



daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te





"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it." All conditioned souls working within the illusory energy of the Lord consider the body to be the self, and thus they continuously wander throughout the universe, taking birth in different species of life and creating more and more problems. Sometimes they become disgusted with the problems and seek out a process by which they can get out of this entanglement. Unfortunately, such so-called research workers are unaware of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His illusory energy, and thus all of them work only in darkness. never finding a way out. So-called scientists and advanced research scholars are ludicrously trying to find the cause of life. They take no notice of the fact that life is already being produced. What will be their credit if they find out the chemical composition of life? All their chemicals are nothing but different transformations of the five elements-earth, water, fire, air and ether. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (2.20), the living entity is never created (na jāyate mriyate vā kadācin). There are five gross material elements and three minor material elements (mind, intelligence and ego), and there are eternal living entities. The living entity desires a certain type of body, and by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that body is created from material nature, which is nothing but a kind of machine handled by the Supreme Lord. The Lord gives the living entity a particular type of mechanical body, and the living entity must work with it according to the law of fruitive activities. Fruitive activities are described in this verse: karma-pamanīṁ māyām. The living entity is seated on a machine (the body), and according to the order of the Supreme Lord, he operates the machine. This is the secret of transmigration of the soul from one body to another. The living entity thus becomes entangled in fruitive activities in this material world. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7), manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati: the living entity is struggling very hard against the six senses, which include the mind.



In all the activities of creation and annihilation, the living entity is entangled in fruitive activities, which are executed by the illusory energy, māyā. He is exactly like a computer handled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The so-called scientists say that nature acts independently, but they cannot explain what nature is. Nature is nothing but a machine operated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one understands the operator, his problems of life are solved. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19):



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ





"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare." A sane man, therefore, surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus gets out of the clutches of the illusory energy, māyā.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Descent of the River Ganges."



Chapter Eighteen



The Prayers Offered to the Lord by the Residents of Jambūdvīpa





In this chapter Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes the different varṣas of Jambūdvīpa and the incarnation of the Supreme Lord worshiped in each. The predominating ruler of Bhadrāśva-varṣa is Bhadraśravā. He and his many servants always worship the incarnation known as Lord Hayagrīva. At the end of each kalpa, when the demon Ajñāna steals the Vedic knowledge, Lord Hayagrīva appears and preserves it. Then He delivers it to Lord Brahmā. In the land known as Hari-varṣa, the exalted devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja worships Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. (The appearance of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is described in the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.) Following in the footsteps of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the inhabitants of Hari-varṣa always worship Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to receive from Him the benediction of being engaged in His loving service. In the tract of land known as Ketumāla-varṣa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Lord Hṛṣīkeśa) appears in the form of Cupid. The goddess of fortune and the demigods living there engage in His service day and night. Manifesting Himself in sixteen parts, Lord Hṛṣīkeśa is the source of all encouragement, strength and influence. The conditioned living entity has the defect of being always fearful, but simply by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can rid himself of this defect of material life. Therefore the Lord alone can be addressed as master. In the tract of land known as Ramyaka-varṣa, Manu and all the inhabitants worship Matsyadeva to this very day. Matsyadeva, whose form is pure goodness, is the ruler and maintainer of the whole universe, and as such He is the director of all the demigods, headed by King Indra. In Hiraṇmaya-varṣa Lord Viṣṇu has assumed the form of a tortoise (Kūrma mūrti) and is worshiped there by Aryamā, along with all the other residents. Similarly, in the tract of land known as Uttarakuru-varṣa, Lord Śrī Hari has assumed the form of a boar, and in that form He accepts service from all the inhabitants living there.





All the information in this chapter can be fully realized by one who associates with devotees of the Lord. Therefore in the śāstras it is recommended that one associate with devotees. This is better than residing on the banks of the Ganges. In the hearts of pure devotees reside all good sentiments as well as all the superior qualities of the demigods. In the hearts of nondevotees, however, there cannot be any good qualities, for such people are simply enchanted by the external, illusory energy of the Lord. Following in the footsteps of devotees, one should know that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only worshipable Deity. Everyone should accept this proposal and worship the Lord. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: the purpose of studying all Vedic literature is to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. If after studying all the Vedic literature, one does not awaken his dormant love for the Supreme Lord, it is to be understood that he has labored for nothing. He has simply wasted his time. Lacking attachment for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he remains attached to family life in this material world. Thus the lesson of this chapter is that one should get out of family life and completely take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tathā ca bhadraśravā nāma dharma-sutas tat-kula-patayaḥ puruṣā bhadrāśva-varṣe sākṣād bhagavato vāsudevasya priyāṁ tanuṁ dharmamayīṁ hayaśīrṣābhidhānāṁ parameṇa samādhinā sannidhāpyedam abhigṛṇanta upadhāvanti.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tathā ca-similarly (just as Lord Śiva worships Saṅkarṣaṇa in Ilāvṛta-varṣa); bhadra-śravā-Bhadraśravā; nāma-known as; dharma-sutaḥ-the son of Dharmarāja; tat-of him; kula-patayaḥ-the chiefs of the dynasty; puruṣāḥ-all the residents; bhadrāśva-varṣe-in the land known as Bhadrāśva-varṣa; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevasya-of Lord Vāsudeva; priyām tanum-very dear form; dharma-mayīm-the director of all religious principles; hayaśīrṣa-abhidhānām-the Lord's incarnation named Hayaśīrṣa (also called Hayagrīva); parameṇa samādhinā-with the highest form of trance; sannidhāpya-coming near; idam-this; abhigṛṇantaḥ-chanting; upadhāvanti-they worship.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Bhadraśravā, the son of Dharmarāja, rules the tract of land known as Bhadrāśva-varṣa. Just as Lord Śiva worships Saṅkarṣaṇa in Ilāvṛta-varṣa, Bhadraśravā, accompanied by his intimate servants and all the residents of the land, worships the plenary expansion of Vāsudeva known as Hayaśīrṣa. Lord Hayaśīrṣa is very dear to the devotees, and He is the director of all religious principles. Fixed in the topmost trance, Bhadraśravā and his associates offer their respectful obeisances to the Lord and chant the following prayers with careful pronunciation.





TEXT 2



bhadraśravasa ūcuḥ

oṁ namo bhagavate dharmāyātma-viśodhanāya nama iti.



SYNONYMS



bhadraśravasaḥ ūcuḥ-the ruler Bhadraśravā and his intimate associates said; om-O Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dharmāya-the source of all religious principles; ātma-viśodhanāya-who purifies us of material contamination; namaḥ-our obeisances; iti-thus.





The ruler Bhadraśravā and his intimate associates utter the following prayer: We offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all religious principles, who cleanses the heart of the conditioned soul in this material world. Again and again we offer our respectful obeisances unto Him.





Foolish materialistic persons do not know how they are being controlled and punished at every step by the laws of nature. They think they are very happy in the conditioned state of material life, not knowing the purpose of repeated birth, death, old age and disease. Therefore in Bhagavad-gītā (7.15) Lord Kṛṣṇa describes such materialistic persons as mūḍhas (rascals): na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ. These mūḍhas do not know that if they want to purify themselves, they must worship Lord Vāsudeva (Kṛṣṇa) by performing penances and austerities. This purification is the aim of human life. This life is not meant for blind indulgence in sense gratification. In the human form, the living being must engage himself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to purify his existence: tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ śuddhyet. This is the instruction of King Ṛṣabhadeva to His sons. In the human form of life, one must undergo all kinds of austerities to purify his existence. Yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam. We are all seeking happiness, but because of our ignorance and foolishness, we cannot know what unobstructed happiness really is. Unobstructed happiness is called brahma-saukhya, spiritual happiness. Although we may get some so-called happiness in this material world, that happiness is temporary. The foolish materialists cannot understand this. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja points out, māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] merely for temporary materialistic happiness, these rascals are making huge arrangements, and thus they are baffled life after life.





TEXT 3



aho vicitraṁ bhagavad-viceṣṭitaṁ

ghnantaṁ jano 'yaṁ hi miṣan na paśyati

dhyāyann asad yarhi vikarma sevituṁ

nirhṛtya putraṁ pitaraṁ jijīviṣati

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; vicitram-wonderful; bhagavat-viceṣṭitam-the pastimes of the Lord; ghnantam-death; janaḥ-a person; ayam-this; hi-certainly; miṣan-although seeing; na paśyati-does not see; dhyāyan-thinking about; asat-material happiness; yarhi-because; vikarma-forbidden activities; sevitum-to enjoy; nirhṛtya-burning; putram-sons; pitaram-the father; jijīviṣati-desires a long life.





Alas! How wonderful it is that the foolish materialist does not heed the great danger of impending death! He knows that death will surely come, yet he is nevertheless callous and neglectful. If his father dies, he wants to enjoy his father's property, and if his son dies, he wants to enjoy his son's possessions as well. In either case, he heedlessly tries to enjoy material happiness with the acquired money.





Material happiness means to have good facilities for eating, sleeping, sexual intercourse and defense. Within this world, the materialistic person lives only for these four principles of sense gratification, not caring for the impending danger of death. After his father's death, a son tries to inherit his money and use it for sense gratification. Similarly, one whose son dies tries to enjoy the possessions of his son. Sometimes the father of a dead son even enjoys his son's widow. Materialistic persons behave in this way. Thus Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, "How wonderful are these pastimes of material happiness transacted by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead!" In other words, materialistic persons want to commit all kinds of sinful activities, but without the sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no one can do anything. Why does the Supreme Personality of Godhead permit sinful activities? The Supreme Lord does not want any living being to act sinfully, and He begs him through his good conscience to refrain from sin. But when someone insists upon acting sinfully, the Supreme Lord gives him the sanction to act at his own risk (mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]). No one can do anything without the sanction of the Lord, but He is so kind that when the conditioned soul persists in doing something, the Lord permits the individual soul to act at his own risk.



According to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, sons always outlive their fathers in other planetary systems and other lands in this universe, especially on Svargaloka. However, on this planet earth a son often dies before his father, and the materialistic father is pleased to enjoy the possessions of his son. Neither the father nor the son can see the reality-that both of them are awaiting death. When death comes, however, all their plans for material enjoyment are finished.





TEXT 4



vadanti viśvaṁ kavayaḥ sma naśvaraṁ

paśyanti cādhyātmavido vipaścitaḥ

tathāpi muhyanti tavāja māyayā

suvismitaṁ kṛtyam ajaṁ nato 'smi tam

SYNONYMS



vadanti-they say authoritatively; viśvam-the entire material creation; kavayaḥ-great learned sages; sma-certainly; naśvaram-perishable; paśyanti-they see in trance; ca-also; adhyātma-vidaḥ-who have realized spiritual knowledge; vipaścitaḥ-very learned scholars; tathā api-still; muhyanti-become illusioned; tava-your; aja-O unborn one; māyayā-by the illusory energy; su-vismitam-most wonderful; kṛtyam-activity; ajam-unto the supreme unborn one; nataḥ asmi-I offer my obeisances; tam-unto Him.





O unborn one, learned Vedic scholars who are advanced in spiritual knowledge certainly know that this material world is perishable, as do other logicians and philosophers. In trance they realize the factual position of this world, and they preach the truth as well. Yet even they are sometimes bewildered by Your illusory energy. This is Your own wonderful pastime. Therefore, I can understand that Your illusory energy is very wonderful, and I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





Not only does the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead act on the conditioned soul within this material world, but sometimes it also acts on the most advanced learned scholars, who factually know the constitutional position of this material world through realization. As soon as someone thinks, "I am this material body (ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]) and everything in relationship with this material body is mine," he is in illusion (moha). This illusion caused by the material energy acts especially on the conditioned souls, but it sometimes also acts on liberated souls as well. A liberated soul is a person who has sufficient knowledge of this material world and is therefore unattached to the bodily conception of life. But because of association with the modes of material nature for a very long time, even liberated souls sometimes become captivated by the illusory energy due to inattentiveness in the transcendental position. Therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14), mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te: "Only those who surrender unto Me can overcome the influence of the material energy." Therefore no one should think of himself as a liberated person immune to the influence of māyā. Everyone should very cautiously execute devotional service by rigidly following regulative principles. Thus he will remain fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. Otherwise, a little inattention will create havoc. We have already seen an example of this in the case of Mahārāja Bharata. Mahārāja Bharata was undoubtedly a great devotee, but because he turned his attention slightly toward a small deer, he had to suffer two more births, one as a deer and another as the brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata. Afterward he was liberated and went back home, back to Godhead.



The Lord is always prepared to excuse His devotee, but if a devotee takes advantage of the Lord's leniency and purposefully commits mistakes again and again, the Lord will certainly punish him by letting him fall down into the clutches of the illusory energy. In other words, theoretical knowledge acquired by studying the Vedas is insufficient to protect one from the clutches of māyā. One must strongly adhere to the lotus feet of the Lord in devotional service. Then one's position is secure.





TEXT 5



viśvodbhava-sthāna-nirodha-karma te

hy akartur aṅgīkṛtam apy apāvṛtaḥ

yuktaṁ na citraṁ tvayi kārya-kāraṇe

sarvātmani vyatirikte ca vastutaḥ

SYNONYMS



viśva-of the whole universe; udbhava-of the creation; sthāna-of the maintenance; nirodha-of the annihilation; karma-these activities; te-of You (O dear Lord); hi-indeed; akartuḥ-aloof; aṅgīkṛtam-still accepted by the Vedic literature; api-although; apāvṛtaḥ-untouched by all these activities; yuktam-befitting; na-not; citram-wonderful; tvayi-in You; kārya-kāraṇe-the original cause of all effects; sarva-ātmani-in all respects; vyatirikte-set apart; ca-also; vastutaḥ-the original substance.





O Lord, although You are completely detached from the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world and are not directly affected by these activities, they are all attributed to You. We do not wonder at this, for Your inconceivable energies perfectly qualify You to be the cause of all causes. You are the active principle in everything, although You are separate from everything. Thus we can realize that everything is happening because of Your inconceivable energy.





TEXT 6



vedān yugānte tamasā tiraskṛtān

rasātalād yo nṛ-turaṅga-vigrahaḥ

pratyādade vai kavaye 'bhiyācate

tasmai namas te 'vitathehitāya iti

SYNONYMS



vedān-the four Vedas; yuga-ante-at the end of the millennium; tamasā-by the demon of ignorance personified; tiraskṛtān-stolen away; rasātalāt-from the lowest planetary system (Rasātala); yaḥ-who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nṛ-turaṅga-vigrahaḥ-assuming the form of half-horse, half-man; pratyādade-returned; vai-indeed; kavaye-to the supreme poet (Lord Brahmā); abhiyā-cate-when he asked for them; tasmai-unto Him (the form of Hayagrīva); namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; te-to You; avitatha-īhitāya-whose resolution never fails; iti-thus.





At the end of the millennium, ignorance personified assumed the form of a demon, stole all the Vedas and took them down to the planet of Rasātala. The Supreme Lord, however, in His form of Hayagrīva retrieved the Vedas and returned them to Lord Brahmā when he begged for them. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, whose determination never fails.





Although Vedic knowledge is imperishable, within this material world it is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. When the people of this material world become too absorbed in ignorance, the Vedic knowledge disappears. Lord Hayagrīva or Lord Matsya, however, always protects the Vedic knowledge, and in due course of time it is again distributed through the medium of Lord Brahmā. Brahmā is the trustworthy representative of the Supreme Lord. Therefore when he again asked for the treasure of Vedic knowledge, the Lord fulfilled his desire.





TEXT 7



hari-varṣe cāpi bhagavān nara-hari-rūpeṇāste; tad-rūpa-grahaṇa-nimittam uttaratrābhidhāsye; tad dayitaṁ rūpaṁ mahā-puruṣa-guṇa-bhājano mahā-bhāgavato daitya-dānava-kula-tīrthīkaraṇa-śīlā-caritaḥ prahlādo 'vyavadhānānanya-bhakti-yogena saha tad-varṣa-puruṣair upāste idaṁ codāharati.



SYNONYMS



hari-varṣe-in the tract of land known as Harivarṣa; ca-also; api-indeed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-hari-rūpeṇa-His form of Nṛsiṁhadeva; āste-is situated; tat-rūpa-grahaṇa-nimittam-the reason why Lord Kṛṣṇa (Keśava) assumed the form of Nṛsiṁha; uttaratra-in later chapters; abhidhāsye-I shall describe; tat-that; dayitam-most pleasing; rūpam-form of the Lord; mahā-puruṣa-guṇa-bhājanaḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja, who is the abode of all the good qualities of great personalities; mahā-bhāgavataḥ-the topmost devotee; daitya-dānava-kula-tīrthī-karaṇa-śīlā-caritaḥ-whose activities and character were so exalted that he delivered all the daityas (demons) born in his family; prahlādaḥ-Mahārāja Prahlāda; avyavadhāna-ananya-bhakti-yogena-by uninterrupted and unflinching devotional service; saha-with; tat-varṣa-puruṣaiḥ-the inhabitants of Hari-varṣa; upāste-offers obeisances to and worships; idam-this; ca-and; udāharati-chants.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva resides in the tract of land known as Hari-varṣa. In the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, I shall describe to you how Prahlāda Mahārāja caused the Lord to assume the form of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Prahlāda Mahārāja, the topmost devotee of the Lord, is a reservoir of all the good qualities of great personalities. His character and activities have delivered all the fallen members of his demoniac family. Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is very dear to this exalted personality. Thus Prahlāda Mahārāja, along with his servants and all the denizens of Hari-varṣa, worships Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva by chanting the following mantra.





Jayadeva Gosvāmī's ten prayers worshiping the incarnations of Lord Kṛṣṇa (Keśava) contain His name in every stanza. For example, keśava dhṛta-nara-hari-rūpa jaya jagad-īśa hare, keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagad-īśa hare, and keśava dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa jaya jagad-īśa hare. The word jagad-īśa refers to the proprietor of all the universes. His original form is the two-handed form of Lord Kṛṣṇa, standing with a flute in His hands and engaged in tending the cows. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā:



cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

[Bs. 5.29]





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the first progenitor, who is tending the cows, yielding all desires, in abodes built with spiritual gems and surrounded by millions of purpose trees. He is always served with great reverence and affection by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune." From this verse we learn that Govinda, or Kṛṣṇa, is the ādi-puruṣa (the original person). The Lord has innumerable incarnations, exactly like the innumerable waves of a flowing river, but the original form is Kṛṣṇa, or Keśava.



Śukadeva Gosvāmī refers to Nṛsiṁhadeva because of Prahlāda Mahārāja. Prahlāda Mahārāja was put into great distress by his powerful father, the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu. Apparently helpless before him, Prahlāda Mahārāja called on the Lord, who immediately assumed the gigantic form of Nṛsiṁhadeva, half-lion and half-man, to kill the gigantic demon. Although Kṛṣṇa is the original person, one without a second, He assumes different forms just to satisfy His devotees or to execute a specific purpose. Therefore Jayadeva Gosvāmī always repeats the name of Keśava, the original Personality of Godhead, in his prayers describing the Lord's different incarnations for different purposes.





TEXT 8



oṁ namo bhagavate narasiṁhāya namas tejas-tejase āvir-āvirbhava vajra-nakha vajra-daṁṣṭra karmāśayān randhaya randhaya tamo grasa grasa oṁ svāhā; abhayam abhayam ātmani bhūyiṣṭhā oṁ kṣraum.



SYNONYMS



om-O Lord; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-siṁhāya-known as Lord Nṛsiṁha; namaḥ-obeisances; tejaḥ-tejase-the power of all power; āviḥ-āvirbhava-please be fully manifest; vajra-nakha-O You who possess nails like thunderbolts; vajra-daṁṣṭra-O You who possess teeth like thunderbolts; karma-āśayān-demoniac desires to be happy by material activities; randhaya randhaya-kindly vanquish; tamaḥ-ignorance in the material world; grasa-kindly drive away; grasa-kindly drive away; om-O my Lord; svāhā-respectful oblations; abhayam-fearlessness; abhayam-fearlessness; ātmani-in my mind; bhūyiṣṭhāḥ-may You appear; om-O Lord; kṣraum-the bīja, or seed, of mantras offering prayers to Lord Nṛsiṁha.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, the source of all power. O my Lord who possesses nails and teeth just like thunderbolts, kindly vanquish our demonlike desires for fruitive activity in this material world. Please appear in our hearts and drive away our ignorance so that by Your mercy we may become fearless in the struggle for existence in this material world.





In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.22.39) Sanat-kumāra speaks the following words to Mahārāja Pṛthu:



yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā

karmāśayaṁ grathitam udgrathayanti santaḥ

tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-

srotogaṇās tam araṇaṁ bhaja vāsudevam





"Devotees always engaged in the service of the toes of the Lord's lotus feet can very easily become free from hard-knotted desires for fruitive activities. Because this is very difficult, the nondevotees-the jñānīs and yogīs-cannot stop the waves of sense gratification, although they try to do so. Therefore you are advised to engage in the devotional service of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva."



Every living being within this material world has a strong desire to enjoy matter to his fullest satisfaction. For this purpose, the conditioned soul must accept one body after another, and thus his strongly fixed fruitive desires continue. One cannot stop the repetition of birth and death without being completely desireless. Therefore Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes pure bhakti (devotional service) as follows:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." Unless one is completely freed of all material desires, which are caused by the dense darkness of ignorance, one cannot fully engage in the devotional service of the Lord. Therefore we should always offer our prayers to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, the personification of material desire. Hiraṇya means "gold," and kaśipu means "a soft cushion or bed." Materialistic persons always desire to make the body comfortable, and for this they require huge amounts of gold. Thus Hiraṇyakaśipu was the perfect representative of materialistic life. He was therefore the cause of great disturbance to the topmost devotee, Prahlāda Mahārāja, until Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva killed him. Any devotee aspiring to be free of material desires should offer his respectful prayers to Nṛsiṁhadeva as Prahlāda Mahārāja did in this verse.





TEXT 9



svasty astu viśvasya khalaḥ prasīdatāṁ

dhyāyantu bhūtāni śivaṁ mitho dhiyā

manaś ca bhadraṁ bhajatād adhokṣaje

āveśyatāṁ no matir apy ahaitukī

SYNONYMS



svasti-auspiciousness; astu-let there be; viśvasya-of the entire universe; khalaḥ-the envious (almost everyone); prasīdatām-let them be pacified; dhyāyantu-let them consider; bhūtāni-all the living entities; śivam-auspiciousness; mithaḥ-mutual; dhiyā-by their intelligence; manaḥ-the mind; ca-and; bhadram-calmness; bhajatāt-let it experience; adhokṣaje-in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the perception of mind. intelligence and senses; āveśyatām-let it be absorbed; naḥ-our; matiḥ-intelligence; api-indeed; ahaitukī-without any motive.





May there be good fortune throughout the universe, and may all envious persons be pacified. May all living entities become calm by practicing bhakti-yoga, for by accepting devotional service they will think of each other's welfare. Therefore let us all engage in the service of the supreme transcendence, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and always remain absorbed in thought of Him.





The following verse describes a Vaiṣṇava:



vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca

kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo

vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ





Just like a desire tree, a Vaiṣṇava can fulfill all the desires of anyone who takes shelter of his lotus feet. Prahlāda Mahārāja is a typical Vaiṣṇava. He prays not for himself, but for all living entities-the gentle, the envious and the mischievous. He always thought of the welfare of mischievous persons like his father, Hiraṇyakaśipu. Prahlāda Mahārāja did not ask for anything for himself; rather, he prayed for the Lord to excuse his demoniac father. This is the attitude of a Vaiṣṇava, who always thinks of the welfare of the entire universe.



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and bhāgavata-dharma are meant for persons who are completely free of envy (parama-nirmatsarāṇām). Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja prays in this verse, khalaḥ prasīdatām: "May all the envious persons be pacified." The material world is full of envious persons, but if one frees himself of envy, he becomes liberal in his social dealings and can think of others' welfare. Anyone who takes up Kṛṣṇa consciousness and engages himself completely in the service of the Lord cleanses his mind of all envy (manaś ca bhadraṁ bhajatād adhokṣaje). Therefore we should pray to Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva to sit in our hearts. We should pray, bahir nṛsiṁho hṛdaye nṛsiṁhaḥ: "Let Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva sit in the core of my heart, killing all my bad propensities. Let my mind become clean so that I may peacefully worship the Lord and bring peace to the entire world."



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given us a very fine purport in this regard. Whenever one offers a prayer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one always requests some benediction from Him. Even pure (niṣkāma) devotees pray for some benediction, as instructed by Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in His Śikṣāṣṭaka:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





"O son of Mahārāja Nanda [Kṛṣṇa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick Me up from the ocean of death and place Me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet." In another prayer Lord Caitanya says, mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi: "Life after life, kindly let Me have unalloyed love and devotion at Your Lordship's lotus feet." When Prahlāda Mahārāja chants oṁ namo bhagavate narasiṁhāya, he prays for a benediction from the Lord, but because he is also an exalted Vaiṣṇava, he wants nothing for his personal sense gratification. The first desire expressed in his prayer is svasty astu viśvasya: "Let there be good fortune throughout the entire universe." Prahlāda Mahārāja thus requested the Lord to be merciful to everyone, including his father, a most envious person. According to Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, there are two kinds of envious living entities: one is a snake, and the other is the man like Hiraṇyakaśipu, who is by nature envious of everyone, even of his father or son. Hiraṇyakaśipu was envious of his little son Prahlāda, but Prahlāda Mahārāja asked a benediction for the benefit of his father. Hiraṇyakaśipu was very envious of devotees, but Prahlāda wished that his father and other demons like him would give up their envious nature by the grace of the Lord and stop harassing the devotees (khalaḥ prasīdatām). The difficulty is that the khala (envious living entity) is rarely pacified. One kind of khala, the snake, can be pacified simply by mantras or by the action of a particular herb (mantrauṣadhi-vaśaḥ sarpaḥ khalakena nivāryate). An envious person, however, cannot be pacified by any means. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja prays that all envious persons may undergo a change of heart and think of the welfare of others.



If the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement spreads all over the world, and if by the grace of Kṛṣṇa everyone accepts it, the thinking of envious people will change. Everyone will think of the welfare of others. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja prays, śivaṁ mitho dhiyā. In material activities, everyone is envious of others, but in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, no one is envious of anyone else; everyone thinks of the welfare of others. Therefore Prahlāda Mahārāja prays that everyone's mind may become gentle by being fixed at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa (bhajatād adhokṣaje). As indicated elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ) and as advised by Lord Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā (18.65), man-manā bhava mad-bhaktaḥ, one should constantly think of the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Then one's mind will certainly be cleansed (ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]). Materialists always think of sense gratification, but Prahlāda Mahārāja prays that the Lord's mercy will change their minds and they will stop thinking of sense gratification. If they think of Kṛṣṇa always, everything will be all right. Some people argue that if everyone thought of Kṛṣṇa in that way, the whole universe would be vacated because everyone would go back home, back to Godhead. However, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that this is impossible because the living entities are innumerable. If one set of living entities is actually delivered by the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, another set will fill the entire universe.





TEXT 10



māgāra-dārātmaja-vitta-bandhuṣu

saṅgo yadi syād bhagavat-priyeṣu naḥ

yaḥ prāṇa-vṛttyā parituṣṭa ātmavān

siddhyaty adūrān na tathendriya-priyaḥ

SYNONYMS



mā-not; agāra-house; dāra-wife; ātma-ja-children; vitta-bank balance; bandhuṣu-among friends and relatives; saṅgaḥ-association or attachment; yadi-if; syāt-there must be; bhagavat-priyeṣu-among persons to whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very dear; naḥ-of us; yaḥ-anyone who; prāṇa-vṛttyā-by the bare necessities of life; parituṣṭaḥ-satisfied; ātma-vān-who has controlled his mind and realized his self; siddhyati-becomes successful; adūrāt-very soon; na-not; tathā-so much; indriya-priyaḥ-a person attached to sense gratification.





My dear Lord, we pray that we may never feel attraction for the prison of family life, consisting of home, wife, children, friends, bank balance, relatives and so on. If we do have some attachment, let it be for devotees, whose only dear friend is Kṛṣṇa. A person who is actually self-realized and who has controlled his mind is perfectly satisfied with the bare necessities of life. He does not try to gratify his senses. Such a person quickly advances in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whereas others, who are too attached to material things, find advancement very difficult.





When Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu was requested to explain the duty of a Vaiṣṇava, a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, He immediately said, asat-saṅga-tyāga-ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra. The first business of a Vaiṣṇava is to give up the association of persons who are not devotees of Kṛṣṇa and who are too attached to material things-wife, children, bank balance and so on. Prahlāda Mahārāja also prays to the Personality of Godhead that he may avoid the association of nondevotees attached to the materialistic way of life. If he must be attached to someone, he prays to be attached only to a devotee.



A devotee is not interested in unnecessarily increasing the demands of the senses for gratification. Of course, as long as one is in this material world, one must have a material body, and it must be maintained for executing devotional service. The body can be maintained very easily by eating kṛṣṇa-prasāda. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.26):



patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ





"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it." Why should the menu be unnecessarily increased for the satisfaction of the tongue? Devotees should eat as simply as possible. Otherwise, attachment for material things will gradually increase, and the senses, being very strong, will soon require more and more material enjoyment. Then the real business of life-to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness-will stop.





TEXT 11



yat-saṅga-labdhaṁ nija-vīrya-vaibhavaṁ

tīrthaṁ muhuḥ saṁspṛśatāṁ hi mānasam

haraty ajo 'ntaḥ śrutibhir gato 'ṅgajaṁ

ko vai na seveta mukunda-vikramam

SYNONYMS



yat-of whom (the devotees); saṅga-labdham-achieved by the association; nija-vīrya-vaibhavam-whose influence is uncommon; tīrtham-holy places like the Ganges; muhuḥ-repeatedly; saṁspṛśatām-of those touching; hi-certainly; mānasam-the dirty things in the mind; harati-vanquishes; ajaḥ-the supreme unborn one; antaḥ-in the core of the heart; śrutibhiḥ-by the ears; gataḥ-entered; aṅga-jam-dirty things or infections of the body; kaḥ-who; vai-indeed; na-not; seveta-would serve; mukunda-vikramam-the glorious activities of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





By associating with persons for whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Mukunda, is the all in all, one can hear of His powerful activities and soon come to understand them. The activities of Mukunda are so potent that simply by hearing of them one immediately associates with the Lord. For a person who constantly and very eagerly hears narrations of the Lord's powerful activities, the Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead in the form of sound vibrations, enters within his heart and cleanses it of all contamination. On the other hand, although bathing in the Ganges diminishes bodily contaminations and infections, this process and the process of visiting holy places can cleanse the heart only after a long time. Therefore who is the sane man who will not associate with devotees to quickly perfect his life?





Bathing in the Ganges can certainly cure one of many infectious diseases, but it cannot cleanse one's materially attached mind, which creates all kinds of contaminations in material existence. However, one who directly associates with the Supreme Lord by hearing of His activities cleanses the dirt from his mind and very soon comes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sūta Gosvāmī confirms this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17):



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām





The Supreme Lord within everyone's heart becomes very pleased when a person hears narrations of His activities, and He personally cleanses the dirt from the mind of the listener. Hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi vidhunoti: He washes off all dirt from the mind. Material existence is caused by dirty things within the mind. If one can cleanse his mind, he immediately comes to his original position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and thus his life becomes successful. Therefore all the great saints in the devotional line very strongly recommend the process of hearing. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu introduced the congregational chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra to give everyone a chance to hear Kṛṣṇa's holy name, for simply by hearing Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, one becomes purified (ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12]). Therefore our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is chiefly engaged in chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra all over the world.



After one's mind becomes cleansed by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, one gradually comes to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and then reads books like Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Caitanya-caritāmṛta and The Nectar of Devotion. In this way, one becomes more and more purified of material contamination. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.18):



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī





"By regularly hearing the Bhāgavatam and rendering service unto the pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practically destroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praised with transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact." In this way, simply by hearing of the powerful activities of the Lord, the devotee's heart becomes almost completely cleansed of material contamination, and thus his original position as an eternal servant who is part and parcel of the Lord becomes manifest. While the devotee engages in devotional service, the passionate and ignorant modes of material nature are gradually vanquished, and then he acts only in the mode of goodness. At that time he becomes happy and gradually advances in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



All the great ācāryas strongly recommend that people be given a chance to hear about the Supreme Lord. Then success is assured. The more we cleanse the dirt of material attachment from our hearts, the more we will be attracted by Kṛṣṇa's name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and activities. This is the sum and substance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.





TEXT 12



yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; asti-there is; bhaktiḥ-devotional service; bhagavati-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akiñcanā-without any motive; sarvaiḥ-with all; guṇaiḥ-good qualities; tatra-there (in that person); samāsate-reside; surāḥ-all the demigods; harau-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhaktasya-of a person who is not devoted; kutaḥ-where; mahat-guṇāḥ-good qualities; manorathena-by mental speculation; asati-in the temporary material world; dhāvataḥ-who is running; bahiḥ-outside.





All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as religion, knowledge and renunciation, become manifest in the body of one who has developed unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. On the other hand, a person devoid of devotional service and engaged in material activities has no good qualities. Even if he is adept at the practice of mystic yoga or the honest endeavor of maintaining his family and relatives, he must be driven by his own mental speculations and must engage in the service of the Lord's external energy. How can there be any good qualities in such a man?





As explained in the next verse, Kṛṣṇa is the original source of all living entities. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7), wherein Kṛṣṇa says:



mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati





"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind." All living entities are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore when they revive their original Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they possess all the good qualities of Kṛṣṇa in a small quantity. When one engages himself in the nine processes of devotional service (śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam/ arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam [SB 7.5.23]), one's heart becomes purified, and he immediately understands his relationship with Kṛṣṇa. He then revives his original quality of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



In the Ādi-līlā of Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Chapter Eight, there is a description of some of the qualities of devotees. For example, Śrī Paṇḍita Haridāsa is described as being very well-behaved, tolerant, peaceful, magnanimous and grave. In addition, he spoke very sweetly, his endeavors were very pleasing, he was always patient, he respected everyone, he always worked for everyone's benefit, his mind was free of duplicity, and he was completely devoid of all malicious activities. These are all originally qualities of Kṛṣṇa, and when one becomes a devotee they automatically become manifest. Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, the author of Caitanya-caritāmṛta, says that all good qualities become manifest in the body of a Vaiṣṇava and that only by the presence of these good qualities can one distinguish a Vaiṣṇava from a non-Vaiṣṇava. Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja lists the following twenty-six good qualities of a Vaiṣṇava: (1) He is very kind to everyone. (2) He does not make anyone his enemy. (3) He is truthful. (4) He is equal to everyone. (5) No one can find any fault in him. (6) He is magnanimous. (7) He is mild. (8) He is always clean. (9) He is without possessions. (10) He works for everyone's benefit. (11) He is very peaceful. (12) He is always surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. (13) He has no material desires. (14) He is very meek. (15) He is steady. (16) He controls his senses. (17) He does not eat more than required. (18) He is not influenced by the Lord's illusory energy. (19) He offers respect to everyone. (20) He does not desire any respect for himself. (21) He is very grave. (22) He is merciful. (23) He is friendly. (24) He is poetic. (25) He is expert. (26) He is silent.





TEXT 13



harir hi sākṣād bhagavān śarīriṇām

ātmā jhaṣāṇām iva toyam īpsitam

hitvā mahāṁs taṁ yadi sajjate gṛhe

tadā mahattvaṁ vayasā dampatīnām

SYNONYMS



hariḥ-the Lord; hi-certainly; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śarīriṇām-of all living entities who have accepted material bodies; ātmā-the life and soul; jhaṣāṇām-of the aquatics; iva-like; toyam-the vast water; īpsitam-is desired; hitvā-giving up; mahān-a great personality; tam-Him; yadi-if; sajjate-becomes attached; gṛhe-to household life; tadā-at that time; mahattvam-greatness; vayasā-by age; dam-patīnām-of the husband and wife.





Just as aquatics always desire to remain in the vast mass of water, all conditioned living entities naturally desire to remain in the vast existence of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if someone very great by material calculations fails to take shelter of the Supreme Soul but instead becomes attached to material household life, his greatness is like that of a young, low-class couple. One who is too attached to material life loses all good spiritual qualities.





Although crocodiles are very fierce animals, they are powerless when they venture out of the water onto land. When they are out of the water, they cannot exhibit their original power. Similarly, the all-pervading Supersoul, Paramātmā, is the source of all living entities, and all living entities are part and parcel of Him. When the living entity remains in contact with the all-pervading Vāsudeva, the Personality of Godhead, he manifests his spiritual power, exactly as the crocodile exhibits its strength in the water. In other words, the greatness of the living entity can be perceived when he is in the spiritual world, engaged in spiritual activities. Many householders, although well-educated in the knowledge of the Vedas, become attached to family life. They are compared herein to crocodiles out of water, for they are devoid of all spiritual strength. Their greatness is like that of a young husband and wife who, though uneducated, praise one another and become attracted to their own temporary beauty. This kind of greatness is appreciated only by low-class men with no qualifications.



Everyone should therefore seek the shelter of the Supreme Soul, the source of all living entities. No one should waste his time in the so-called happiness of materialistic household life. In the Vedic civilization, this type of crippled life is allowed only until one's fiftieth year, when one must give up family life and enter either the order of vānaprastha (independent retired life for cultivation of spiritual knowledge) or sannyāsa (the renounced order, in which one completely takes shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead).





TEXT 14



tasmād rajo-rāga-viṣāda-manyu-

māna-spṛhā-bhayadainyādhimūlam

hitvā gṛhaṁ saṁsṛti-cakravālaṁ

nṛsiṁha-pādaṁ bhajatākutobhayam iti

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; rajaḥ-of passion or material desires; rāga-attachment for material things; viṣāda-then disappointment; manyu-anger; māna-spṛhā-the desire to be respectable in society; bhaya-fear; dainya-of poverty; adhimūlam-the root cause; hitvā-giving up; gṛham-household life; saṁsṛti-cakravālam-the cycle of repeated birth and death; nṛsiṁha-pādam-the lotus feet of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva; bhajata-worship; akutaḥ-bhayam-the shelter of fearlessness; iti-thus.





Therefore, O demons, give up the so-called happiness of family life and simply take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, which are the actual shelter of fearlessness. Entanglement in family life is the root cause of material attachment, indefatigable desires, moroseness, anger, despair, fear and the desire for false prestige, all of which result in the repetition of birth and death.





TEXT 15



ketumāle 'pi bhagavān kāmadeva-svarūpeṇa lakṣmyāḥ priya-cikīrṣayā prajāpater duhitṝṇāṁ putrāṇāṁ tad-varṣa-patīnāṁ puruṣāyuṣāho-rātra-parisaṅkhyānānāṁ yāsāṁ garbhā mahā-puruṣa-mahāstra-tejasodvejita-manasāṁ vidhvastā vyasavaḥ saṁvatsarānte vinipatanti.



SYNONYMS



ketumāle-in the tract of land known as Ketumāla-varṣa; api-also; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu; kāmadeva-svarūpeṇa-in the form of Kāmadeva (Cupid or Pradyumna); lakṣmyāḥ-of the goddess of fortune; priya-cikīrṣayā-with a desire to bring about the satisfaction; prajāpateḥ-of Prajāpati; duhitṝṇām-of the daughters; putrāṇām-of the sons; tat-varṣa-patīnām-the ruler of that land; puruṣa-āyuṣā-in a human lifetime (about one hundred years); ahaḥ-rātra-the days and nights; parisaṅkhyānānām-which equal in number; yāsām-of whom (the daughters); garbhāḥ-fetuses; mahā-puruṣa-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-astra-of the great weapon (the disc); tejasā-by the effulgence; udvejita-manasām-whose minds are agitated; vidhvastāḥ-ruined; vyasavaḥ-dead; saṁvatsara-ante-at the end of the year; vinipatanti-fall down.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In the tract of land called Ketumāla-varṣa, Lord Viṣṇu lives in the form of Kāmadeva, only for the satisfaction of His devotees. These include Lakṣmījī [the goddess of fortune], the Prajāpati Saṁvatsara and all of Saṁvatsara's sons and daughters. The daughters of Prajāpati are considered the controlling deities of the nights, and his sons are considered the controllers of the days. The Prajāpati's offspring number 36,000, one for each day and each night in the lifetime of a human being. At the end of each year, the Prajāpati's daughters become very agitated upon seeing the extremely effulgent disc of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they all suffer miscarriages.





This Kāmadeva, who appears as Kṛṣṇa's son named Pradyumna, is viṣṇu-tattva. How this is so is explained by Madhvācārya, who quotes from the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa: kāmadeva-sthitaṁ viṣṇum upāste. Although this Kāmadeva is viṣṇu-tattva, His body is not spiritual but material. Lord Viṣṇu as Pradyumna or Kāmadeva accepts a material body, but He still acts spiritually. It does not make any difference whether He accepts a spiritual or a material body; He can act spiritually in any condition of existence. Māyāvādī philosophers regard even Lord Kṛṣṇa's body as material, but their opinions cannot impede the spiritual activity of the Lord.





TEXT 16



atīva sulalita-gati-vilāsa-vilasita-rucira-hāsa-leśāvaloka-līlayā kiñcid-uttambhita-sundara-bhrū-maṇḍala-subhaga-vadanāravinda-śriyā ramāṁ ramayann indriyāṇi ramayate.



SYNONYMS



atīva-very much; su-lalita-beautiful; gati-with movements; vilāsa-by pastimes; vilasita-manifested; rucira-pleasing; hāsa-leśa-mild smiling; avaloka-līlayā-by playful glancing; kiñcit-uttambhita-slightly raised; sundara-beautiful; bhrū-maṇḍala-by the eyebrows; subhaga-auspicious; vadana-aravinda-śriyā-with His beautiful lotuslike face; ramām-the goddess of fortune; ramayan-pleasing; indriyāṇi-all the senses; ramayate-He pleases.





In Ketumāla-varṣa, Lord Kāmadeva [Pradyumna] moves very graciously. His mild smile is very beautiful, and when He increases the beauty of His face by slightly raising His eyebrows and glancing playfully, He pleases the goddess of fortune. Thus He enjoys His transcendental senses.





TEXT 17



tad bhagavato māyāmayaṁ rūpaṁ parama-samādhi-yogena ramā devī saṁvatsarasya rātriṣu prajāpater duhitṛbhir upetāhaḥsu ca tad-bhartṛbhir upāste idaṁ codāharati.



SYNONYMS



tat-that; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; māyā-mayam-full of affection for the devotees; rūpam-form; parama-highest; samādhi-yogena-by absorption of the mind in the service of the Lord; ramā-the goddess of fortune; devī-divine woman; saṁvatsarasya-known as Saṁvatsara; rātriṣu-during the nights; prajāpateḥ-of Prajāpati; duhitṛbhiḥ-with the daughters; upeta-combined; ahaḥsu-during the days; ca-also; tat-bhartṛbhiḥ-with the husbands; upāste-worships; idam-this; ca-also; udāharati-chants.





Accompanied during the daytime by the sons of the Prajāpati [the predominating deities of the days] and accompanied at night by his daughters [the deities of the nights], Lakṣmīdevī worships the Lord during the period known as the Saṁvatsara in His most merciful form as Kāmadeva. Fully absorbed in devotional service, she chants the following mantras.





The word māyāmayam used in this verse should not be understood according to the interpretations of the Māyāvādīs. Māyā means affection as well as illusion. When a mother deals with her child affectionately, she is called māyāmaya. In whatever form the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu appears, He is always affectionate toward His devotees. Thus the word māyāmayam is used here to mean "very affectionate toward the devotees." Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī writes in this regard that māyāmayam can also mean kṛpā-pracuram, deeply merciful. Similarly, Śrīla Vīrarāghava says, māyā-pracuranātmīya-saṅkalpena parigṛhītam ity arthaḥ jñāna-paryāyo'tra māyā-śabdaḥ: when one is very affectionate due to an intimate relationship, one is described as māyāmaya. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains māyāmayam by dividing it into the words māyā and āmayam. He explains these words to indicate that because the living entity is covered by the disease of illusion, the Lord is always eager to deliver His devotee from the clutches of māyā and cure him of the disease caused by the illusory energy.





TEXT 18



oṁ hrāṁ hrīṁ hrūṁ oṁ namo bhagavate hṛṣīkeśāya sarva-guṇa-viśeṣair vilakṣitātmane ākūtīnāṁ cittīnāṁ cetasāṁ viśeṣāṇāṁ cādhipataye ṣoḍaśa-kalāya cchando-mayāyānna-mayāyāmṛta-mayāya sarva-mayāya sahase ojase balāya kāntāya kāmāya namas te ubhayatra bhūyāt.



SYNONYMS



om-O Lord; hrām hrīm hrūm-the seeds of the mantra, chanted for a successful result; om-O Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hṛṣīkeśāya-unto Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the senses; sarva-guṇa-with all transcendental qualities; viśeṣaiḥ-with all varieties; vilakṣita-particularly observed; ātmane-unto the soul of all living entities; ākūtīnām-of all kinds of activity; cittīnām-of all kinds of knowledge; cetasām-of the functions of the mind, such as determination and mental effort; viśeṣāṇām-of their respective objects; ca-and; adhipataye-unto the master; ṣoḍaśa-kalāya-whose parts are the sixteen original ingredients of creation (namely the five objects of the senses and the eleven senses, including the mind); chandaḥ-mayāya-unto the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; anna-mayāya-who maintains all living entities by supplying the necessities of life; amṛta-mayāya-who awards eternal life; sarva-mayāya-who is all-pervading; sahase-the powerful; ojase-who supplies strength to the senses; balāya-who supplies strength to the body; kāntāya-the supreme husband or master of all living entities; kāmāya-who supplies all necessities for the devotees; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; te-unto You; ubhayatra-always (during both day and night, or both in this life and the next); bhūyāt-may there be all good fortune.





Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hṛṣīkeśa, the controller of all my senses and the origin of everything. As the supreme master of all bodily, mental and intellectual activities, He is the only enjoyer of their results. The five sense objects and eleven senses, including the mind, are His partial manifestations. He supplies all the necessities of life, which are His energy and thus nondifferent from Him, and He is the cause of everyone's bodily and mental prowess, which is also nondifferent from Him. Indeed, He is the husband and provider of necessities for all living entities. The purpose of all the Vedas is to worship Him. Therefore let us all offer Him our respectful obeisances. May He always be favorable toward us in this life and the next.





In this verse the word māyāmaya is further explained in regard to how the Lord expands His mercy in different ways. parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate: the energies of the Supreme Lord are understood in different ways. In this verse He is described as the original source of everything, even our body, senses, mind, activities, prowess, bodily strength, mental strength and determination for securing the necessities of life. Indeed, the Lord's energies can be perceived in everything. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.8), raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: the taste of water is also Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is the active principle of everything we need for our maintenance.



This verse offering respectful obeisances unto the Lord was composed by Ramā, the goddess of fortune, and is full of spiritual power. Under the guidance of a spiritual master, everyone should chant this mantra and thus become a complete and perfect devotee of the Lord. One may chant this mantra for complete liberation from material bondage, and after liberation one may continue to chant it while worshiping the Supreme Lord in Vaikuṇṭhaloka. All mantras, of course, are meant for this life and the next life, as Kṛṣṇa Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (9.14):



satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ

yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā

nitya-yuktā upāsate





"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion." A devotee who both in this life and the next chants the mahā-mantra, or any mantra, is called nitya-yuktopāsaka.





TEXT 19



striyo vratais tvā hṛṣīkeśvaraṁ svato

hy ārādhya loke patim āśāsate 'nyam

tāsāṁ na te vai paripānty apatyaṁ

priyaṁ dhanāyūṁṣi yato 'sva-tantrāḥ

SYNONYMS



striyaḥ-all women; vrataiḥ-by observing fasting and other vows; tvā-you; hṛṣīkeśvaram-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the senses; svataḥ-of your own accord; hi-certainly; ārādhya-worshiping; loke-in the world; patim-a husband; āśāsate-ask for; anyam-another; tāsām-of all those women; na-not; te-the husbands; vai-indeed; paripānti-able to protect; apatyam-the children; priyam-very dear; dhana-the wealth; āyūṁṣi-or the duration of life; yataḥ-because; asva-tantrāḥ-dependent.





My dear Lord, You are certainly the fully independent master of all the senses. Therefore all women who worship You by strictly observing vows because they wish to acquire a husband to satisfy their senses are surely under illusion. They do not know that such a husband cannot actually give protection to them or their children. Nor can he protect their wealth or duration of life, for he himself is dependent on time, fruitive results and the modes of nature, which are all subordinate to You.





In this verse, Lakṣmīdevī (Ramā) shows compassion toward women who worship the Lord for the benediction of possessing a good husband. Although such women desire to be happy with children, wealth, a long duration of life and everything dear to them, they cannot possibly do so. In the material world, a so-called husband is dependent on the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are many examples of a woman whose husband, being dependent on the result of his own fruitive actions, cannot maintain his wife, her children, her wealth or her duration of life. Therefore, factually the only real husband of all women is Kṛṣṇa, the supreme husband. Because the gopīs were liberated souls, they understood this fact. Therefore they rejected their material husbands and accepted Kṛṣṇa as their real husband. Kṛṣṇa is the real husband not only of the gopīs, but of every living entity. Everyone should perfectly understand that Kṛṣṇa is the real husband of all living entities, who are described in the Bhagavad-gītā as prakṛti (female), not puruṣa (male). In Bhagavad-gītā (10.12), only Kṛṣṇa is addressed as puruṣa:



paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum





"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty."



Kṛṣṇa is the original puruṣa, and the living entities are prakṛti. Thus Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer, and all living entities are meant to be enjoyed by Him. Therefore any woman who seeks a material husband for her protection, or any man who desires to become the husband of a woman, is under illusion. To become a husband means to maintain a wife and children nicely by supplying wealth and security. However, a material husband cannot possibly do this, for he is dependent on his karma. Karmaṇā-daiva-netreṇa: his circumstances are determined by his past fruitive activities. Therefore if one proudly thinks he can protect his wife, he is under illusion. Kṛṣṇa is the only husband, and therefore the relationship between a husband and wife in this material world cannot be absolute. Because we have the desire to marry, Kṛṣṇa mercifully allows the so-called husband to possess a wife, and the wife to possess a so-called husband, for mutual satisfaction. In the Īśopaniṣad it is said, tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā: the Lord provides everyone with his quota. Actually, however, every living entity is prakṛti, or female, and Kṛṣṇa is the only husband.



ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya

yāre yaiche nācāya, se taiche kare nṛtya





(Cc. Ādi 5.142)



Kṛṣṇa is the original master or husband of everyone, and all other living entities, having taken the form of so-called husbands, or wives, are dancing according to His desire. A so-called husband may unite with his wife for sense gratification, but his senses are conducted by Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses, who is therefore the actual husband.





TEXT 20



sa vai patiḥ syād akutobhayaḥ svayaṁ

samantataḥ pāti bhayāturaṁ janam

sa eka evetarathā mitho bhayaṁ

naivātmalābhād adhi manyate param

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he; vai-indeed; patiḥ-a husband; syāt-would be; akutaḥ-bhayaḥ-who is not fearful of anyone; svayam-self-sufficient; samantataḥ-entirely; pāti-maintains; bhaya-āturam-who is very afraid; janam-a person; saḥ-therefore he; ekaḥ-one; eva-only; itarathā-otherwise; mithaḥ-from one another; bhayam-fear; na-not; eva-indeed; ātma-lābhāt-than the attainment of You; adhi-greater; manyate-is accepted; param-other thing.





He alone who is never afraid but who, on the contrary, gives complete shelter to all fearful persons can actually become a husband and protector. Therefore, my Lord, you are the only husband, and no one else can claim this position. If you were not the only husband, You would be afraid of others. Therefore persons learned in all Vedic literature accept only Your Lordship as everyone's master, and they think no one else a better husband and protector than You.





Here the meaning of husband or guardian is clearly explained. people want to become a husband, a guardian, a governor or a political leader without knowing the actual meaning of such a superior position. There are many people all over the world-indeed, throughout the universe-who claim for some time that they are husbands, political leaders or guardians, but in due course of time the Supreme Lord desires their removal from their posts, and their careers are immediately finished. Therefore those who are actually learned and advanced in spiritual life do not accept any leader, husband or maintainer other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



Lord Kṛṣṇa personally states in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66), ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi: "I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions." Kṛṣṇa is not afraid of anyone. On the contrary, everyone is afraid of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore He can actually give protection to a subordinate living entity. Since so-called leaders or dictators are completely under the control of material nature, they can never give complete protection to others, although they claim this ability due to false prestige. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum: [SB 7.5.31] people do not know that real advancement in life consists of accepting the Supreme Personality of Godhead as one's master. Instead of deceiving themselves and others by pretending to be all-powerful, all political leaders, husbands and guardians should spread the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement so that everyone can learn how to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, the supreme husband.





TEXT 21



yā tasya te pāda-saroruhārhaṇaṁ

nikāmayet sākhila-kāma-lampaṭā

tad eva rāsīpsitam īpsito 'rcito

yad-bhagna-yācñā bhagavan pratapyate

SYNONYMS



yā-a woman who; tasya-of Him; te-of You; pāda-saroruha-of the lotus feet; arhaṇam-the worship; nikāmayet-fully desires; sā-such a woman; akhila-kāma-lampaṭā-although maintaining all kinds of material desire; tat-that; eva-only; rāsi-You award; īpsitam-some other desired benediction; īpsitaḥ-being looked to for; arcitaḥ-worshiped; yat-from which; bhagna-yācñā-one who desires objects other than Your lotus feet and who thus becomes broken; bhagavan-O my Lord; pratapyate-is pained.





My dear Lord, You automatically fulfill all the desires of a woman who worships Your lotus feet in pure love. However, if a woman worships Your lotus feet for a particular purpose, You also quickly fulfill her desires, but in the end she becomes broken-hearted and laments. Therefore one need not worship Your lotus feet for some material benefit.





Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes pure devotional service as anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Madhya 19.167]. One should not worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead to fulfill some material desire for success in fruitive activities or mental speculation. To serve the lotus feet of the Lord means to serve Him exactly as He desires. The neophyte devotee is therefore ordered to worship the Lord strictly according to the regulative principles given by the spiritual master and the śāstras. By executing devotional service in that way, he gradually becomes attached to Kṛṣṇa, and when his original dormant love for the Lord becomes manifest, he spontaneously serves the Lord without any motive. This condition is the perfect stage of one's relationship with the Lord. The Lord then looks after the comfort and security of His devotee without being asked. Kṛṣṇa promises in Bhagavad-gītā (9.22):



ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham





The Supreme Lord personally takes care of anyone who is completely engaged in His devotional service. Whatever he has, the Lord protects, and whatever he needs, the Lord supplies. Therefore why should one bother the Lord for something material? Such prayers are unnecessary.



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that even if a devotee wishes the Lord to fulfill a particular desire, the devotee should not be considered a sakāma-bhakta (a devotee with some motive). In the Bhagavad-gītā (7.16) Kṛṣṇa says:



catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha





"O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me-the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute." The ārta and the arthārthī, who approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead for relief from misery or for some money, are not sakāma-bhaktas, although they appear to be. Being neophyte devotees, they are simply ignorant. Later in Bhagavad-gītā the Lord says, udārāḥ sarva evaite: they are all magnanimous (udārāḥ). Although in the beginning a devotee may harbor some desire, in due course of time it will vanish. Therefore the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam enjoins:



akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param





"A person who has broader intelligence, whether he is full of all material desire, is free from material desire, or has a desire for liberation, must by all means worship the supreme whole, the Personality of Godhead." (Bhāg. 2.3.10)



Even if one wants something material, he should pray to no one but the Lord to fulfill his desire. If one approaches a demigod for the fulfillment of his desires, he is to be considered naṣṭa-buddhi, bereft of all good sense. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.20):



kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ

prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ

taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya

prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā





"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures."



Lakṣmīdevī advises all devotees who approach the Lord with material desires that according to her practical experience, the Lord is Kāmadeva, and thus there is no need to ask Him for anything material. She says that everyone should simply serve the Lord without any motive. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is sitting in everyone's heart, He knows everyone's thoughts, and in due course of time He will fulfill all desires. Therefore let us completely depend on the service of the Lord without bothering Him with our material requests.





TEXT 22



mat-prāptaye 'jeśa-surāsurādayas

tapyanta ugraṁ tapa aindriye dhiyaḥ

ṛte bhavat-pāda-parāyaṇān na māṁ

vindanty ahaṁ tvad-dhṛdayā yato 'jita

SYNONYMS



mat-prāptaye-to obtain my mercy; aja-Lord Brahmā; īśa-Lord Śiva; sura-the other demigods, headed by King Indra, Candra and Varuṇa; asura-ādayaḥ-as well as the demons; tapyante-undergo; ugram-severe; tapaḥ-austerity; aindriye dhiyaḥ-whose minds are absorbed in thoughts of superior sense gratification; ṛte-unless; bhavat-pāda-parāyaṇāt-one who is wholly and solely engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord's lotus feet; na-not; mām-me; vindanti-obtain; aham-I; tvat-in You; hṛdayāḥ-whose hearts; yataḥ-therefore; ajita-O unconquerable one.





O supreme unconquerable Lord, when they become absorbed in thoughts of material enjoyment, Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, as well as other demigods and demons, undergo severe penances and austerities to receive my benedictions. But I do not favor anyone, however great he may be; unless he is always engaged in the service of Your lotus feet. Because I always keep You within my heart, I cannot favor anyone but a devotee.





In this verse the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmīdevī, clearly states that she does not bestow her favor on any materialistic person. Although sometimes a materialist becomes very opulent in the eyes of another materialist, such opulence is bestowed upon him by the goddess Durgādevī, a material expansion of the goddess of fortune, not by Lakṣmīdevī herself. Those who desire material wealth worship Durgādevī with the following mantra: dhanaṁ dehi rūpaṁ dehi rūpa-pati-bhājaṁ dehi. "O worshipable mother Durgādevī, please give me wealth, strength, fame, a good wife and so on." By pleasing goddess Durgā one can obtain such benefits, but since they are temporary, they result only in māyā-sukha (illusory happiness). As stated by Prahlāda Mahārāja, māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] those who work very hard for material benefits are vimūḍhas, foolish rascals, because such happiness will not endure. On the other hand, devotees like Prahlāda and Dhruva Mahārāja achieved extraordinary material opulences, but such opulences were not māyā-sukha. When a devotee acquires unparalleled opulences, they are the direct gifts of the goddess of fortune, who resides in the heart of Nārāyaṇa.



The material opulences a person obtains by offering prayers to the goddess Durgā are temporary. As described in Bhagavad-gītā (7.23), antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām: men of meager intelligence desire temporary happiness. We have actually seen that one of the disciples of Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura wanted to enjoy the property of his spiritual master, and the spiritual master, being merciful toward him, gave him the temporary property, but not the power to preach the cult of Caitanya Mahāprabhu all over the world. That special mercy of the power to preach is given to a devotee who does not want anything material from his spiritual master but wants only to serve him. The story of the demon Rāvaṇa illustrates this point. Although Rāvaṇa tried to abduct the goddess of fortune Sītādevī from the custody of Lord Rāmacandra, he could not possibly do so. The Sītādevī he forcibly took with him was not the original Sītādevī, but an expansion of māyā, or Durgādevī. As a result, instead of winning the favor of the real goddess of fortune, Rāvaṇa and his whole family were vanquished by the power of Durgādevī (sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā [Bs. 5.44]).





TEXT 23



sa tvaṁ mamāpy acyuta śīrṣṇi vanditaṁ

karāmbujaṁ yat tvad-adhāyi sātvatām

bibharṣi māṁ lakṣma vareṇya māyayā

ka īśvarasyehitam ūhituṁ vibhur iti

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that; tvam-You; mama-of me; api-also; acyuta-O infallible one; śīrṣṇi-on the head; vanditam-worshiped; kara-ambujam-Your lotus hand; yat-which; tvat-by You; adhāyi-placed; sātvatām-on the head of the devotees; bibharṣi-You maintain; mām-me; lakṣma-as an insignia on Your chest; vareṇya-O worshipable one; māyayā-with deceit; kaḥ-who; īśvarasya-of the supremely powerful controller; īhitam-the desires; ūhitum-to understand by reason and argument; vibhuḥ-is able; iti-thus.





O infallible one, Your lotus palm is the source of all benediction. Therefore Your pure devotees worship it, and You very mercifully place Your hand on their heads. I wish that You may also place Your hand on My head, for although You already bear my insignia of golden streaks on Your chest, I regard this honor as merely a kind of false prestige for me. You show Your real mercy to Your devotees, not to me. Of course, You are the supreme absolute controller, and no one can understand Your motives.





In many places, the śāstras describe the Supreme Personality of Godhead as being more inclined toward His devotees than toward His wife, who always remains on His chest. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.15) it is stated:



na tathā me priyatama

ātma-yonir na śaṅkaraḥ

na ca saṅkarṣaṇo na śrīr

naivātmā ca yathā bhavān





Here Kṛṣṇa plainly says that His devotees are more dear to Him than Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa (the original cause of creation), the goddess of fortune or even His own Self. Elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.20) Śukadeva Gosvāmī says,



nemam viriñco na bhavo

na śrīr apy aṅga saṁśrayā

prasādaṁ lebhire gopī

yat tat prāpa vimuktidāt





The Supreme Lord, who can award liberation to anyone, showed more mercy toward the gopīs than to Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva or even the goddess of fortune, who is His own wife and is associated with His body. Similarly, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.60) also states:



nāyaṁ śriyo 'ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ

svar-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto 'nyāḥ

rāsotsave 'sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-

labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-sundarīṇām





"The gopīs received benedictions from the Lord that neither Lakṣmīdevī nor the most beautiful dancers in the heavenly planets could attain. In the rāsa dance, the Lord showed His favor to the most fortunate gopīs by placing His arms on their shoulders and dancing with each of them individually. No one can compare with the gopīs, who received the causeless mercy of the Lord."



In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that no one can receive the real favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead without following in the footsteps of the gopīs. Even the goddess of fortune could not receive the same favor as the gopīs, although she underwent severe austerities and penances for many years. Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu discusses this point with Vyeṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 9.111–131): "The Lord inquired from Vyeṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa, 'Your worshipable goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, always remains on the chest of Nārāyaṇa, and she is certainly the most chaste woman in the creation. However, My Lord is Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, a cowherd boy engaged in tending cows. Why is it that Lakṣmī, being such a chaste wife, wants to associate with My Lord? Just to associate with Kṛṣṇa, Lakṣmī abandoned all transcendental happiness in Vaikuṇṭha and for a long time accepted vows and regulative principles and performed unlimited austerities.'



"Vyeṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa replied, 'Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Nārāyaṇa are one and the same, but the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are more relishable due to their sportive nature. They are very pleasing for Kṛṣṇa's śaktis. Since Kṛṣṇa and Nārāyaṇa are both the same personality, Lakṣmī's association with Kṛṣṇa did not break her vow of chastity. Rather, it was in great fun that the goddess of fortune wanted to associate with Lord Kṛṣṇa. The goddess of fortune considered that her vow of chastity would not be damaged by her relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Rather, by associating with Kṛṣṇa she could enjoy the benefit of the rāsa dance. If she wanted to enjoy herself with Kṛṣṇa what fault is there? Why are you joking so about this?'



"Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied, 'I know that there is no fault in the goddess of fortune, but still she could not enter into the rāsa dance. We hear this from revealed scriptures. The authorities of Vedic knowledge met Lord Rāmacandra in Daṇḍakāraṇya, and by their penances and austerities, they were allowed to enter into the rāsa dance. But can you tell me why the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, could not get that opportunity? '



"To this Vyeṅkaṭa Bhaṭṭa replied, 'I cannot enter into the mystery of this incident. I am an ordinary living being. My intelligence is limited, and I am always disturbed. How can I understand the pastimes of the Supreme Lord? They are deeper than millions of oceans.'



"Lord Caitanya replied, 'Lord Kṛṣṇa has a specific characteristic. He attracts everyone's heart by the mellow of His personal conjugal love. By following in the footsteps of the inhabitants of the planet known as Vrajaloka or Goloka Vṛndāvana, one can attain the shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. However, the inhabitants of that planet do not know that Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unaware that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, the residents of Vṛndāvana like Nanda Mahārāja, Yaśodādevī and the gopīs treat Kṛṣṇa as their beloved son or lover. Mother Yaśodā accepts Him as her son and sometimes binds Him to a grinding mortar. Kṛṣṇa's cowherd boy friends think He is an ordinary boy and get up on His shoulders. In Goloka Vṛndāvana no one has any desire other than to love Kṛṣṇa.' "



The conclusion is that one cannot associate with Kṛṣṇa unless he has fully received the favor of the inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi. Therefore if one wants to be delivered by Kṛṣṇa directly, he must take to the service of the residents of Vṛndāvana, who are unalloyed devotees of the Lord.





TEXT 24



ramyake ca bhagavataḥ priyatamaṁ mātsyam avatāra-rūpaṁ tad-varṣa-puruṣasya manoḥ prāk-pradarśitaṁ sa idānīm api mahatā bhakti-yogenārādhayatīdaṁ codāharati.



SYNONYMS



ramyake ca-also in Ramyaka-varṣa; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; priya-tamam-the foremost; mātsyam-fish; avatāra-rūpam-the form of the incarnation; tat-varṣa-puruṣasya-of the ruler of that land; manoḥ-Manu; prāk-previously (at the end of the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara); pradarśitam-exhibited; saḥ-that Manu; idānīm api-even until now; mahatā bhakti-yogena-by dint of advanced devotional service; ārādhayati-worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead; idam-this; ca-and; udāharati-chants.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In Ramyaka-varṣa, where Vaivasvata Manu rules, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Lord Matsya at the end of the last era [the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara]. Vaivasvata Manu now worships Lord Matsya in pure devotional service and chants the following mantra.





TEXT 25



oṁ namo bhagavate mukhyatamāya namaḥ sattvāya prāṇāyaujase sahase balāya mahā-matsyāya nama iti.



SYNONYMS



om-O my Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukhya-tamāya-the first incarnation to appear; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; sattvāya-unto the pure transcendence; prāṇāya-the origin of life; ojase-the source of the potency of the senses; sahase-the origin of all mental power; balāya-the origin of bodily strength; mahā-matsyāya-unto the gigantic fish incarnation; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; iti-thus.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is pure transcendence. He is the origin of all life, bodily strength, mental power and sensory ability. Known as Matsyāvatāra, the gigantic fish incarnation, He appears first among all the incarnations. Again I offer my obeisances unto Him.





Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī sings:



pralayo payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedaṁ

vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam

keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagad-īśa hare





Soon after the cosmic creation, the entire universe was inundated with water. At that time Lord Kṛṣṇa (Keśava) incarnated as a gigantic fish to protect the Vedas. Therefore Manu addresses Lord Matsya as mukhyatama, the first incarnation to appear. Fish are generally considered a mixture of the modes of ignorance and passion, but we must understand that every incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely transcendental. There is never any deterioration of the Supreme Lord's original transcendental quality. Therefore the word sattvāya is used here, meaning pure goodness on the transcendental platform. There are many incarnations of the Supreme Lord: Varāha mūrti (the boar form), Kūrma mūrti (the tortoise form), Hayagrīva mūrti (the form of a horse) and so on. Yet we should never think any of Them material. They are always situated on the platform of śuddha-sattva, pure transcendence.





TEXT 26



antar bahiś cākhila-loka-pālakair

adṛṣṭa-rūpo vicarasy uru-svanaḥ

sa īśvaras tvaṁ ya idaṁ vaśe 'nayan

nāmnā yathā dārumayīṁ naraḥ striyam

SYNONYMS



antaḥ-within; bahiḥ-without; ca-also; akhila-loka-pālakaiḥ-by the leaders of the different planets, societies, kingdoms and so on; adṛṣṭa-rūpaḥ-not seen; vicarasi-You wander; uru-very great; svanaḥ-whose sounds (Vedic mantras); saḥ-He; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller; tvam-You; yaḥ-who; idam-this; vaśe-under control; anayat-has brought; nāmnā-by different names like brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra; yathā-exactly like; dārumayīm-made of wood; naraḥ-a man; striyam-a doll.





My dear Lord, just as a puppeteer controls his dancing dolls and a husband controls his wife, Your Lordship controls all the living entities in the universe, such as the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras. Although You are in everyone's heart as the supreme witness and commander and are outside everyone as well, the so-called leaders of societies, communities and countries cannot realize You. Only those who hear the vibration of the Vedic mantras can appreciate You.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is antarbahiḥ, present within and without everything. One must overcome the delusion caused by the Lord's external energy and realize His presence both externally and internally. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.8.19) Śrīmatī Kuntīdevī has explained that Kṛṣṇa appears in this world naṭo nāṭyadharo yathā, "exactly like an actor dressed as a player." In Bhagavad-gītā (18.61) Kṛṣṇa says, īśvaraḥ sama-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: "The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna." The Lord is situated within everyone's heart, and outside as well. Within the heart He is the Supersoul, the incarnation who acts as the adviser and witness. Yet although God is residing within their hearts, foolish people say, "I cannot see God. Please show Him to me."



Everyone is under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, exactly like dancing dolls controlled by a puppeteer or a woman controlled by her husband. A woman is compared to a doll (dārumayī) because she has no independence. She should always be controlled by a man. Still, due to false prestige, a class of women wants to remain independent. What to speak of women, all living entities are prakṛti (female) and therefore dependent on the Supreme Lord, as Kṛṣṇa Himself explains in Bhagavad-gītā (apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām). The living entity is never independent. Under all circumstances, he is dependent on the mercy of the Lord. The Lord creates the social divisions of human society-brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras-and ordains that they follow rules and regulations suited to their particular position. In this way, all members of society remain always under the Supreme Lord's control. Still, some people foolishly deny the existence of God.



Self-realization means to understand one's subordinate position in relation to the Lord. When one is thus enlightened, he surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is liberated from the clutches of the material energy. In other words, unless one surrenders to the lotus feet of the Lord, the material energy in its many varieties will continue to control him. No one in the material world can deny that he is under control. The Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa, who is beyond this material existence, controls everyone. The following Vedic mantra confirms this point: eko ha vai nārāyaṇa āsīt. Foolish persons think Nārāyaṇa to be on the platform of ordinary material existence. Because they do not realize the natural constitutional position of the living entity, they concoct names like daridra-nārāyaṇa, svāmi-nārāyaṇa or mithyā-nārāyaṇa. However, Nārāyaṇa is actually the supreme controller of everyone. This understanding is self-realization.





TEXT 27



yaṁ loka-pālāḥ kila matsara-jvarā

hitvā yatanto 'pi pṛthak sametya ca

pātuṁ na śekur dvi-padaś catuṣ-padaḥ

sarīsṛpaṁ sthāṇu yad atra dṛśyate

SYNONYMS



yam-whom (You); loka-pālāḥ-the great leaders of the universe, beginning with Lord Brahmā; kila-what to speak of others; matsara-jvarāḥ-who are suffering from the fever of envy; hitvā-leaving aside; yatantaḥ-endeavoring; api-although; pṛthak-separately; sametya-combined; ca-also; pātum-to protect; na-not; śekuḥ-able; dvi-padaḥ-two-legged; catuḥ-padaḥ-four-legged; sarīsṛpam-reptiles; sthāṇu-not moving; yat-whatever; atra-within this material world; dṛśyate-is visible.





My Lord, from the great leaders of the universe, such as Lord Brahmā and other demigods, down to the political leaders of this world, all are envious of Your authority. Without Your help, however, they could neither separately nor concertedly maintain the innumerable living entities within the universe. You are actually the only maintainer of all human beings, of animals like cows and asses, and of plants, reptiles, birds, mountains and whatever else is visible within this material world.





It is fashionable for materialistic persons to compete with the power of God. When so-called scientists try to manufacture living entities in their laboratories, their only purpose is to defy the talent and ability of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called illusion. It exists even in the higher planetary systems, where great demigods like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and others reside. In this world everyone is puffed up with false prestige despite the failure of all his endeavors. When so-called philanthropists, who supposedly want to help the poor, are approached by members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, they say, "You are simply wasting your time, while I am feeding vast masses of starving people." Unfortunately, their meager efforts, either singly or together, do not solve anyone's problems.



Sometimes so-called svāmīs are very eager to feed poor people, thinking them to be daridra-nārāyaṇa, the Lord's incarnations as beggars. They prefer to serve the manufactured daridra-nārāyaṇa than the original, supreme Nārāyaṇa. They say, "Don't encourage service to Lord Nārāyaṇa. It is better to serve the starving people of the world." Unfortunately such materialists, either singly or combined in the form of the United Nations, cannot fulfill their plans. The truth is that the many millions of human beings, animals, birds and trees-indeed, all living entities-are maintained solely by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān: one person, the Supreme Lord, is supplying the necessities of life for all other living entities. To challenge the authority of Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the business of asuras (demons). Yet sometimes suras, or devotees, are also bewildered by the illusory energy and falsely claim to be the maintainer of the entire universe. Such incidents are described in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, where Śukadeva Gosvāmī tells how Lord Brahmā and King Indra became puffed up and were eventually chastised by Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 28



bhavān yugāntārṇava ūrmi-mālini

kṣoṇīm imām oṣadhi-vīrudhāṁ nidhim

mayā sahoru kramate 'ja ojasā

tasmai jagat-prāṇa-gaṇātmane nama iti

SYNONYMS



bhavān-Your Lordship; yuga-anta-arṇave-in the water of devastation at the end of the millennium; ūrmi-mālini-possessing rows of big waves; kṣoṇīm-the planet earth; imām-this; oṣadhi-vīrudhām-of all kinds of herbs and drugs; nidhim-the storehouse; mayā-me; saha-with; uru-great; kramate-You roamed; aja-O unborn one; ojasā-with speed; tasmai-unto Him; jagat-of the entire universe; prāṇa-gaṇa-ātmane-the ultimate source of life; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; iti-thus.





O almighty Lord, at the end of the millennium this planet earth, which is the source of all kinds of herbs, drugs and trees, was inundated by water and drowned beneath the devastating waves. At that time, You protected me along with the earth and roamed the sea with great speed. O unborn one, You are the actual maintainer of the entire universal creation, and therefore You are the cause of all living entities. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





Envious persons cannot appreciate how wonderfully the Lord creates, maintains and annihilates the universe, but devotees of the Lord can understand this perfectly well. Devotees can see how the Lord is acting behind the wonderful workings of the material nature. In Bhagavad-gītā (9.10) the Lord says:



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again." All the wonderful transformations of nature are happening under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Envious persons cannot see this, but a devotee, even though very humble and even if uneducated, knows that behind all the activities of nature is the supreme hand of the Supreme Being.





TEXT 29



hiraṇmaye 'pi bhagavān nivasati kūrma-tanuṁ bibhrāṇas tasya tat priyatamāṁ tanum aryamā saha varṣa-puruṣaiḥ pitṛ-gaṇādhipatir upadhāvati mantram imaṁ cānujapati.



SYNONYMS



hiraṇmaye-in Hiraṇmaya-varṣa; api-indeed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nivasati-resides; kūrma-tanum-the body of a tortoise; bibhrāṇaḥ-manifesting; tasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-that; priya-tamām-dearmost; tanum-body; aryamā-Aryamā, the chief resident of Hiraṇmaya-varṣa; saha-with; varṣa-puruṣaiḥ-the people of that tract of land; pitṛ-gaṇa-adhipatiḥ-who is the chief of the pitās; upadhāvati-worships in devotional service; mantram-hymn; imam-this; ca-also; anujapati-chants.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In Hiraṇmaya-varṣa, the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, lives in the form of a tortoise [kūrma-śarīra]. This most dear and beautiful form is always worshiped there in devotional service by Aryamā, the chief resident of Hiraṇmaya-varṣa, along with the other inhabitants of that land. They chant the following hymns.





The word priyatama (dearmost) is very significant in this verse. Each devotee regards a particular form of the Lord as most dear. Because of an atheistic mentality, some people think that the tortoise, boar and fish incarnations of the Lord are not very beautiful. They do not know that any form of the Lord is always the fully opulent Personality of Godhead. Since one of His opulences is infinite beauty, all the Lord's incarnations are very beautiful and are appreciated as such by devotees. Nondevotees, however, think that Lord Kṛṣṇa's incarnations are ordinary material creatures, and therefore they distinguish between the beautiful and the not beautiful. A certain form of the Lord is worshiped by a particular devotee because he loves to see that form of the Lord. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.33): advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca. The very beautiful form of the Lord is always youthful. Sincere servants of a particular form of the Lord always see that form as very beautiful, and thus they engage in constant devotional service to Him.





TEXT 30



oṁ namo bhagavate akūpārāya sarva-sattva-guṇa-viśeṣaṇāyānu-palakṣita-sthānāya namo varṣmaṇe namo bhūmne namo namo 'vasthānāya namas te.



SYNONYMS



om-O my Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akūpārāya-in the form of a tortoise; sarva-sattva-guṇa-viśeṣaṇāya-whose form consists of śuddha-sattva, transcendental goodness; anupalakṣita-sthānāya-unto You, whose position is not discernible; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; varṣmaṇe-unto You who, although the oldest, are unaffected by time; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; bhūmne-to the great one who can go everywhere; namaḥ namaḥ-repeated obeisances; avasthānāya-the shelter of everything; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; te-unto You.





O my Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who have assumed the form of a tortoise. You are the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and being entirely untinged by matter, You are perfectly situated in pure goodness. You move here and there in the water, but no one can discern Your position. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Because of Your transcendental position, You are not limited by past, present and future. You are present everywhere as the shelter of all things, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.





In the Brahma-saṁhitā it is said, goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ: [Bs. 5.37] the Lord always remains in Goloka, the topmost planet in the spiritual world. At the same time, He is all-pervading. This paradox is only possible for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full of all opulences. The Lord's all-pervasiveness is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61) where Kṛṣṇa states, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: "The Supreme Lord is seated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15) the Lord says, sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Therefore, although the Lord is present everywhere, He cannot be seen with ordinary eyes. As Aryamā says, the Lord is anupalakṣita-sthāna: no one can locate Him. This is the greatness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 31



yad-rūpam etan nija-māyayārpitam

artha-svarūpaṁ bahu-rūpa-rūpitam

saṅkhyā na yasyāsty ayathopalambhanāt

tasmai namas te 'vyapadeśa-rūpiṇe

SYNONYMS



yat-of whom; rūpam-the form; etat-this; nija-māyayā arpitam-manifested by Your personal potency; artha-svarūpam-this entire visible cosmic manifestation; bahu-rūpa-rūpitam-manifested in various forms; saṅkhyā-the measurement; na-not; yasya-of which; asti-there is; ayathā-falsely; upalambhanāt-from perceiving; tasmai-unto Him (the Supreme Lord); namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; te-unto You; avyapadeśa-cannot be ascertained by mental speculation; rūpiṇe-whose real form.





My dear Lord, this visible cosmic manifestation is a demonstration of Your own creative energy. Since the countless varieties of forms within this cosmic manifestation are simply a display of Your external energy, this virāṭ-rūpa [universal body] is not Your real form. Except for a devotee in transcendental consciousness, no one can perceive Your actual form. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





Māyāvādī philosophers think the universal form of the Lord to be real and His personal form illusory. We can understand their mistake by a simple example. A fire consists of three elements: heat and light, which are the energy of the fire, and the fire itself. Anyone can understand that the original fire is the reality and that the heat and light are simply the fire's energy. Heat and light are the formless energies of fire, and in that sense they are unreal. Only the fire has form, and therefore it is the real form of the heat and light. As Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gītā (9.4), mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ jagad avyakta-mūrtinā: "By Me, in My unmanifested form. this entire universe is pervaded." Thus the impersonal conception of the Lord is like the expansion of heat and light from a fire. In Bhagavad-gītā the Lord also says, mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ: the entire material creation is resting on Kṛṣṇa's energy, either material, spiritual or marginal, but because His form is absent from the expansion of His energy, He is not personally present. This inconceivable expansion of the Supreme Lord's energy is called acintya-śakti. Therefore no one can understand the real form of the Lord without becoming His devotee.





TEXT 32



jarāyujaṁ svedajam aṇḍajodbhidaṁ

carācaraṁ devarṣi-pitṛ-bhūtam aindriyam

dyauḥ khaṁ kṣitiḥ śaila-sarit-samudra-

dvīpa-graharkṣety abhidheya ekaḥ

SYNONYMS



jarāyu-jam-one born from a womb; sveda-jam-one born from perspiration; aṇḍa-ja-one born from an egg; udbhidam-one born of the earth; cara-acaram-the moving and the stationary; deva-the demigods; ṛṣi-the great sages; pitṛ-the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; bhūtam-the material elements air, fire, water and earth; aindriyam-all the senses; dyauḥ-the higher planetary systems; kham-the sky; kṣitiḥ-the earthly planets; śaila-the hills and mountains; sarit-the rivers; samudra-the oceans; dvīpa-the islands; graha-ṛkṣa-the stars and planets; iti-thus; abhidheyaḥ-to be variously named; ekaḥ-one.





My dear Lord, You manifest Your different energies in countless forms: as living entities born from wombs, from eggs and from perspiration; as plants and trees that grow out of the earth; as all living entities, both moving and standing, including the demigods, the learned sages and the pitās; as outer space, as the higher planetary system containing the heavenly planets, and as the planet earth with its hills, rivers, seas, oceans and islands. Indeed, all the stars and planets are simply manifestations of Your different energies, but originally You are one without a second. Therefore there is nothing beyond You. This entire cosmic manifestation is therefore not false but is simply a temporary manifestation of Your inconceivable energy.





This verse completely rejects the theory of brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā, which states that spirit, or Brahman, is real, whereas the manifested material world, with its great variety of things, is false. Nothing is false. One thing may be permanent and another temporary, but both the permanent and the temporary are facts. For example, if someone becomes angry for a certain period, no one can say that his anger is false. It is simply temporary. Everything we experience in our daily lives is of this same character; it is temporary but real.



The different kinds of living entities coming from various sources are very clearly described in this verse. Some are born from a womb and some (like certain insects) from human perspiration. Others hatch from eggs, and still others sprout from the earth. A living entity takes birth under different circumstances according to his past activities (karma). Although the body of the living entity is material, it is never false. No one will accept the argument that since a person's material body is false, murder has no repercussions. Our temporary bodies are given to us according to our karma, and we must remain in our given bodies to enjoy the pains and pleasures of life. Our bodies cannot be called false; they are only temporary. In other words, the energy of the Supreme Lord is as permanent as the Lord Himself, although His energy is sometimes manifest and sometimes not. As summarized in the Vedas, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma: "Everything is Brahman."





TEXT 33



yasminn asaṅkhyeya-viśeṣa-nāma-

rūpākṛtau kavibhiḥ kalpiteyam

saṅkhyā yayā tattva-dṛśāpanīyate

tasmai namaḥ sāṅkhya-nidarśanāya te iti

SYNONYMS



yasmin-in You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); asaṅkhyeya-innumerable; viśeṣa-particular; nāma-names; rūpa-forms; ākṛtau-possessing bodily features; kavibhiḥ-by great learned persons; kalpitā-imagined; iyam-this; saṅkhyā-number; yayā-by whom; tattva-of the truth; dṛśā-by knowledge; apanīyate-is extracted; tasmai-unto Him; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; sāṅkhya-nidarśanāya-who is the revealer of this numerical knowledge; te-unto You; iti-thus.





O my Lord, Your name, form and bodily features are expanded in countless forms. No one can determine exactly how many forms exist, yet You Yourself, in Your incarnation as the learned scholar Kapiladeva, have analyzed the cosmic manifestation as containing twenty-four elements. Therefore if one is interested in Sāṅkhya philosophy, by which one can enumerate the different truths, he must hear it from You. Unfortunately, nondevotees simply count the different elements and remain ignorant of Your actual form. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





Philosophers and scientists have been trying to study the entire cosmic situation and have been theorizing and calculating in different ways for millions and millions of years. However, the speculative research work of a so-called scientist or philosopher is always interrupted when he dies, and the laws of nature go on without regard for his work.



For billions of years changes take place in the material creation, until at last the whole universe is dissolved and remains in an unmanifested state. Constant change and destruction (bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate) is perpetually going on in nature, yet the material scientists want to study natural laws without knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the background of nature. As Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10):



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again."



Now the material creation is manifest, eventually it will be annihilated and remain for many millions of years in a dormant state, and finally it will again be created. This is the law of nature.





TEXT 34



uttareṣu ca kuruṣu bhagavān yajña-puruṣaḥ kṛta-varāha-rūpa āste taṁ tu devī haiṣā bhūḥ saha kurubhir askhalita-bhakti-yogenopadhāvati imāṁ ca paramām upaniṣadam āvartayati.



SYNONYMS



uttareṣu-on the northern side; ca-also; kuruṣu-in the tract of land known as Kuru; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-puruṣaḥ-who accepts all results of sacrifices; kṛta-varāha-rūpaḥ-having accepted the form of a boar; āste-exists eternally; tam-Him; tu-certainly; devī-the goddess; ha-certainly; eṣā-this; bhūḥ-planet earth; saha-along with; kurubhiḥ-the inhabitants of the land known as Kuru; askhalita-unfailing; bhakti-yogena-by devotional service; upadhāvati-worship; imām-this; ca-also; paramām upaniṣadam-the supreme Upaniṣad (the process by which one can approach the Lord); āvartayati-chants again and again for the purpose of practice.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Dear King, the Supreme Lord in His boar incarnation, who accepts all sacrificial offerings, lives in the northern part of Jambūdvīpa. There, in the tract of land known as Uttarakuru-varṣa, mother earth and all the other inhabitants worship Him with unfailing devotional service by repeatedly chanting the following Upaniṣad mantra.





TEXT 35



oṁ namo bhagavate mantra-tattva-liṅgāya yajña-kratave mahā-dhvarāvayavāya mahā-puruṣāya namaḥ karma-śuklāya tri-yugāya namas te.



SYNONYMS



om-O Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mantra-tattva-liṅgāya-who is understood in truth by different mantras; yajña-in the form of animal sacrifices; kratave-and animal sacrifice; mahā-dhvara-great sacrifices; avayavāya-whose limbs and bodily parts; mahā-puruṣāya-unto the Supreme Person; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; karma-śuklāya-who purifies the fruitive activities of the living entities; tri-yugāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full with six opulences and who appears in three yugas (remaining concealed in the fourth yuga); namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; te-unto You.





O Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You as the gigantic person. Simply by chanting mantras, we shall be able to understand You fully. You are yajña [sacrifice], and You are the kratu [ritual]. Therefore all the ritualistic ceremonies of sacrifice are part of Your transcendental body, and You are the only enjoyer of all sacrifices. Your form is composed of transcendental goodness. You are known as tri-yuga because in Kali-yuga You appeared as a concealed incarnation and because You always fully possess the three pairs of opulences.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the incarnation for this age of Kali, as confirmed in many places throughout the purāṇas, the Mahābhārata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the Upaniṣads. The summary of His appearance is given in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 6.99) as follows:



kali-yuge līlāvatāra nā kare bhagavān

ataeva 'tri-yuga' kari' kahi tāra nāma





In this age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Bhagavān) does not appear as a līlāvatāra, an incarnation to display pastimes. Therefore He is known as tri-yuga. Unlike other incarnations, Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appears in this age of Kali as a devotee of the Lord. Therefore He is called a concealed incarnation (channāvatāra).





TEXT 36



yasya svarūpaṁ kavayo vipaścito

guṇeṣu dāruṣv iva jāta-vedasam

mathnanti mathnā manasā didṛkṣavo

gūḍhaṁ kriyārthair nama īritātmane

SYNONYMS



yasya-whose; sva-rūpam-form; kavayaḥ-the greatly learned sages; vipaścitaḥ-expert in ascertaining the Absolute Truth; guṇeṣu-in the material manifestation, consisting of the three modes of nature; dāruṣu-in wood; iva-like; jāta-manifested; vedasam-fire; mathnanti-stir; mathnā-with a piece of wood used for producing fire; manasā-by the mind; didṛkṣavaḥ-who are inquisitive; gūḍham-hidden; kriyā-arthaiḥ-by fruitive activities and their results; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; īrita-ātmane-unto the Lord, who is manifested.





By manipulating a fire-generating stick, great saints and sages can bring forth the fire lying dormant within wood. In the same way, O Lord, those expert in understanding the Absolute Truth try to see You in everything-even in their own bodies. Yet you remain concealed. You are not to be understood by indirect processes involving mental or physical activities. Because You are self-manifested, only when You see that a person is wholeheartedly engaged in searching for You do You reveal Yourself. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





The word kriyārthaiḥ means "by performing ritualistic ceremonies to satisfy the demigods." The word vipaścitaḥ is explained in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad as follows: satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahma. yo veda nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ parame vyoman. so 'śnute sarvān kāmān saha brahmaṇā vipaściteti. As Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19), bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate: "After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me." When one understands that the Lord is situated in everyone's heart and actually sees the Lord present everywhere, he has perfect knowledge. The word jāta-vedaḥ means "fire which is produced by rubbing wood." In Vedic times, learned sages could bring forth fire from wood. Jāta-vedaḥ also indicates the fire in the stomach, which digests everything we eat and which produces an appetite. The word gūḍha is explained in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad. Eko devaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is understood by chanting the Vedic mantras. Sarva-vyāpī sarva-bhūtāntar-ātmā: He is all-pervading, and He is within the heart of living entities. Karmādhyakṣaḥ sarva-bhūtādhivāsaḥ: He witnesses all activities of the living entity. Sākṣī cetā kevalo nirguṇaś ca: The Supreme Lord is the witness as well as the living force, yet He is transcendental to all material qualities.





TEXT 37



dravya-kriyā-hetv-ayaneśa-kartṛbhir

māyā-guṇair vastu-nirīkṣitātmane

anvīkṣayāṅgātiśayātma-buddhibhir

nirasta-māyākṛtaye namo namaḥ

SYNONYMS



dravya-by the objects of sense enjoyment; kriyā-the activities of the senses; hetu-the predominating deities of sensory activities; ayana-the body; īśa-the predominating time; kartṛbhiḥ-by false egotism; māyā-guṇaiḥ-by the modes of material nature; vastu-as a fact; nirīkṣita-being observed; ātmane-unto the Supreme Soul; anvīkṣayā-by careful consideration; aṅga-by the limbs of yogic practice; atiśaya-ātma-buddhibhiḥ-by those whose intelligence has become fixed; nirasta-completely freed from; māyā-the illusory energy; ākṛtaye-whose form; namaḥ-all respectful obeisances; namaḥ-respectful obeisances.





The objects of material enjoyment [sound, form, taste, touch and smell], the activities of the senses, the controllers of sensory activities [the demigods], the body, eternal time and egotism are all creations of Your material energy. Those whose intelligence has become fixed by perfect execution of mystic yoga can see that all these elements result from the actions of Your external energy. They can also see Your transcendental form as Supersoul in the background of everything. Therefore I repeatedly offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





The objects of material enjoyment, the sensory activities, attachment to sensual pleasure, the body, false egotism and so on are produced by the Lord's external energy, māyā. The background of all these activities is the living being, and the director of the living beings is the Supersoul. The living being is not the all in all. He is directed by the Supersoul. In Bhagavad-gītā (15.15) Kṛṣṇa confirms this:



sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca





"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." The living entity depends on the Supersoul for directions. A person advanced in spiritual knowledge, or a person expert in the practice of mystic yoga (yama, niyama, āsana and so on) can understand transcendence either as Paramātmā or as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is the original cause of all natural events. Therefore He is described as sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1], the cause of all causes. Behind everything visible to our material eyes is some cause, and one who can see the original cause of all causes, Lord Kṛṣṇa, can actually see. Kṛṣṇa, the sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], is the background of everything, as He Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10):



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again."





TEXT 38



karoti viśva-sthiti-saṁyamodayaṁ

yasyepsitaṁ nepsitam īkṣitur guṇaiḥ

māyā yathāyo bhramate tad-āśrayaṁ

grāvṇo namas te guṇa-karma-sākṣiṇe

SYNONYMS



karoti-performing; viśva-of the universe; sthiti-the maintenance; saṁyama-winding up; udayam-creation; yasya-of whom; īpsitam-desired; na-not; īpsitam-desired; īkṣituḥ-of the one glancing over; guṇaiḥ-with the modes of material nature; māyā-the material energy; yathā-as much as; ayaḥ-iron; bhramate-moves; tat-āśrayam-placed near that; grāvṇaḥ-a magnetic stone; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; te-unto You; guṇa-karma-sākṣiṇe-the witness of the actions and reactions of material nature.





O Lord, You do not desire the creation, maintenance or annihilation of this material world, but You perform these activities for the conditioned souls by Your creative energy. Exactly as a piece of iron moves under the influence of a lodestone, inert matter moves when You glance over the total material energy.





Sometimes the question arises why the Supreme Lord has created this material world, which is so full of suffering for the living entities entrapped in it. The answer given herein is that the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not wish to create this material world just to inflict suffering on the living entities. The Supreme Lord creates this world only because the conditioned souls want to enjoy it.



The workings of nature are not going on automatically. It is only because the Lord glances over the material energy that it acts in wonderful ways, just as a lodestone causes a piece of iron to move here and there. Because materialistic scientists and so-called Sāṅkhya philosophers do not believe in God, they think that material nature is working without supervision. But that is not the fact. In Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 6.18–19) the creation of the material world is explained as follows:



yadyapi sāṅkhya māne 'pradhāna'--kāraṇa

jaḍa ha-ite kabhu nahe jagat-sṛjana





nija-sṛṣṭi-śakti prabhu sañcāre pradhāne

īśvarera śaktye tabe haye ta' nirmāṇe





"Atheistic Sāṅkhya philosophers think that the total material energy causes the cosmic manifestation, but they are wrong. Dead matter has no moving power, and therefore it cannot act independently. The Lord infuses the material ingredients with His own creative potency. Then, by the power of the Lord, matter moves and interacts." Sea waves are moved by the air, the air is created from ether, the-ether is produced by the agitation of the three modes of material nature, and the three modes of material nature interact due to the Supreme Lord's glance over the total material energy. Therefore the background of all natural occurrences is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]). This is also further explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 5.59–61):



jagat-kāraṇa nahe prakṛti jaḍa-rūpā

śakti sañcāriyā tāre kṛṣṇa kare kṛpā





kṛṣṇa-śaktye prakṛti haya gauṇa kāraṇa

agni-śaktye lauha yaiche karaye jāraṇa





ataeva kṛṣṇa mūla-jagat-kāraṇa

prakṛti--kāraṇa yaiche ajā-gala-stana





"Because prakṛti [material nature] is dull and inert, it cannot actually be the cause of the material world. Lord Kṛṣṇa shows His mercy by infusing His energy into the dull, inert material nature. Thus prakṛti, by the energy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, becomes the secondary cause, just as iron becomes red-hot by the energy of fire. Therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of the cosmic manifestation. prakṛti is like the nipples on the neck of a goat, for they cannot give any milk." Thus it is a great mistake on the part of the material scientists and philosophers to think that matter moves independently.





TEXT 39



pramathya daityaṁ prativāraṇaṁ mṛdhe

yo māṁ rasāyā jagad-ādi-sūkaraḥ

kṛtvāgra-daṁṣṭre niragād udanvataḥ

krīḍann ivebhaḥ praṇatāsmi taṁ vibhum iti

SYNONYMS



pramathya-after killing; daityam-the demon; prativāraṇam-most formidable opponent; mṛdhe-in the fight; yaḥ-He who; mām-me (the earth); rasāyāḥ-fallen to the bottom of the universe; jagat-in this material world; ādi-sūkaraḥ-the original form of a boar; kṛtvā-keeping it; agra-daṁṣṭre-on the end of the tusk; niragāt-came out of the water; udanvataḥ-from the Garbhodaka Ocean; krīḍan-playing; iva-like; ibhaḥ-elephant; praṇatā asmi-I bow down; tam-to Him; vibhum-the Supreme Lord; iti-thus.





My Lord, as the original boar within this universe, You fought and killed the great demon Hiraṇyakṣa. Then You lifted me [the earth] from the Garbhodaka Ocean on the end of Your tusk, exactly as a sporting elephant plucks a lotus flower from the water. I bow down before You.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "The prayers Offered to the Lord by the Residents of Jambūdvīpa."



Chapter Nineteen



A Description of the Island of Jambūdvīpa





This chapter describes the glories of Bhārata-varṣa, and it also describes how Lord Rāmacandra is being worshiped in the tract of land known as Kimpuruṣa-varṣa. The inhabitants of Kimpuruṣa-varṣa are fortunate because they worship Lord Rāmacandra with His faithful servant Hanumān. Lord Rāmacandra exemplifies an incarnation of Godhead who descends for the mission of paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]-protecting the devotees and destroying the miscreants. Lord Rāmacandra exhibits the actual purpose of an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the devotees take the opportunity to offer loving transcendental service to Him. One should surrender fully to the Lord, forgetting one's so-called material happiness, opulence and education, which are not at all useful for pleasing the Lord. The Lord is pleased only by the process of surrender unto Him.





When Devarṣi Nārada descended to instruct Sārvaṇi Manu, he described the opulence of Bhārata-varṣa, India. Sārvaṇi Manu and the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa engage in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the origin of creation, maintenance and annihilation and who is always worshiped by self-realized souls. In the planet known as Bhārata-varṣa there are many rivers and mountains, as there are in other tracts of land, yet Bhārata-varṣa has special significance because in this tract of land there exists the Vedic principle of varṇāśrama-dharma, which divides society into four varṇas and four āśramas. Furthermore, Nārada Muni's opinion is that even if there is some temporary disturbance in the execution of the varṇāśrama-dharma principles, they can be revived at any moment. The effect of adhering to the institution of varṇāśrama is gradual elevation to the spiritual platform and liberation from material bondage. By following the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma, one gets the opportunity to associate with devotees. Such association gradually awakens one's dormant propensity to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead and frees one from all the basic principles of sinful life. One then gets the opportunity to offer unalloyed devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva. Because of this opportunity, the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa are praised even in the heavenly planets. Even in the topmost planet of this universe, Brahmaloka, the position of Bhārata-varṣa is discussed with great relish.





All the conditioned living entities are evolving within the universe in different planets and different species of life. Thus one may be elevated to Brahmaloka, but then one must again descend to earth, as confirmed in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]). If those who live in Bhārata-varṣa rigidly follow the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma and develop their dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they need not return to this material world after death. Any place where one cannot hear about the Supreme Personality of Godhead from realized souls, even if it be Brahmaloka, is not very congenial to the living entity. If one who has taken birth in the land of Bhārata-varṣa as a human being does not take advantage of the opportunity for spiritual elevation, his position is certainly the most miserable. In the land known as Bhāratavarṣa, even if one is a sarva-kāma-bhakta, a devotee seeking the fulfillment of some material desire, he is freed from all material desires by his association with devotees, and ultimately he becomes a pure devotee and returns home, back to Godhead, without difficulty.





At the end of this chapter, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes to Mahārāja Parīkṣit the eight sub-islands within the island of Jambūdvīpa.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

kimpuruṣe varṣe bhagavantam ādi-puruṣaṁ lakṣmaṇāgrajaṁ sītābhirāmaṁ rāmaṁ tac-caraṇa-sannikarṣābhirataḥ parama-bhāgavato hanumān saha kimpuruṣair avirata-bhaktir upāste.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; kimpuruṣe varṣe-the tract of land known as Kimpuruṣa; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-puruṣam-the original cause of all causes; lakṣmaṇa-agra-jam-the elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa; sītā-abhirāmam-who is very pleasing to mother Sītā, or who is the husband of Sītādevī; rāmam-Lord Rāmacandra; tat-caraṇa-sannikarṣa-abhirataḥ-one always engaged in service at the lotus feet of Lord Rāmacandra; parama-bhāgavataḥ-the great devotee celebrated throughout the universe; hanumān-His Grace Hanumānjī; saha-with; kimpuruṣaiḥ-the inhabitants of the tract of land known as Kimpuruṣa; avirata-continuous; bhaktiḥ-who possesses devotional service; upāste-worships.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, in Kimpuruṣa-varṣa the great devotee Hanumān is always engaged with the inhabitants of that land in devotional service to Lord Rāmacandra, the elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa and dear husband of Sītādevī.





TEXT 2



ārṣṭiṣeṇena saha gandharvair anugīyamānāṁ parama-kalyāṇīṁ bhartṛ-bhagavat-kathāṁ samupaśṛṇoti svayaṁ cedaṁ gāyati.



SYNONYMS



ārṣṭi-ṣeṇena-Ārṣṭiṣeṇa, the chief personality of Kimpuruṣa-varṣa; saha-with; gandharvaiḥ-by a company of Gandharvas; anugīyamānām-being chanted; parama-kalyāṇīm-most auspicious; bhartṛ-bhagavat-kathām-the glories of his master, who is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samupaśṛṇoti-he hears with great attention; svayam ca-and personally; idam-this; gāyati-chants.





A host of Gandharvas is always engaged in chanting the glories of Lord Rāmacandra. That chanting is always extremely auspicious. Hanumānjī and Arṣṭiṣeṇa, the chief person in Kimpuruṣa-varṣa, constantly hear those glories with complete attention. Hanumān chants the following mantras.





In the Purāṇas there are two different opinions concerning Lord Rāmacandra. In the Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta (5.34–36) this is confirmed in the description of the incarnation of Manu.



vāsudevādi-rūpāṇām

avatārāḥ prakīrtitāḥ

viṣṇu-dharmottare rāma-

lakṣmaṇādyāḥ kramādamī





pādme tu rāmo bhagavān

nārāyaṇa itīritaḥ

śeṣaś cakraṁ ca śaṅkhaś ca

kramāt syur lakṣmaṇādayaḥ





madhya-deśa-sthitāyodhyā-

pure 'sya vasatiḥ smṛtā

mahā-vaikuṇṭhaloke ca

rāghavedrasya kīrtitā





The Viṣṇu-dharmottara describes that Lord Rāmacandra and His brothers-Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna-are incarnations of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha respectively. The Padma Purāṇa, however, says that Lord Rāmacandra is an incarnation of Nārāyaṇa and that the other three brothers are incarnations of Śeṣa, Cakra and Śaṅkha. Therefore Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has concluded, tad idaṁ kalpa-bhedenaiva sambhāvyam. In other words, these opinions are not contradictory. In some millenniums Lord Rāmacandra and His brothers appear as incarnations of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, and in other millenniums They appear as incarnations of Nārāyaṇa, Śeṣa, Cakra and Śaṅkha. The residence of Lord Rāmacandra on this planet is Ayodhyā. Ayodhyā City is still existing in the district of Hyderabad, which is situated on the northern side of Uttar Pradesh.





TEXT 3



oṁ namo bhagavate uttamaślokāya nama ārya-lakṣaṇa-śīla-vratāya nama upaśikṣitātmana upāsita-lokāya namaḥ sādhu-vāda-nikaṣaṇāya namo brahmaṇya-devāya mahā-puruṣāya mahā-rājāya nama iti.



SYNONYMS



om-O my Lord; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-ślokāya-who is always worshiped with selected verses; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; ārya-lakṣaṇa-śīla-vratāya-who possesses all the good qualities of advanced personalities; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; upaśikṣita-ātmane-unto You whose senses are under control; upāsita-lokāya-who is always remembered and worshiped by all the different classes of living entities; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; sādhu-vāda-nikaṣaṇāya-to the Lord, who is like a stone for examining all the good qualities of a sādhu; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; brahmaṇya-devāya-who is worshiped by the most qualified brāhmaṇas; mahā-puruṣāya-unto the Supreme Lord, who is worshiped by the puruṣa-sūkta because of being the cause of this material creation; mahā-rājāya-unto the supreme king, or the king of all kings; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; iti-thus.





Let me please Your Lordship by chanting the bīja-mantra oṁkāra. I wish to offer my respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, who is the best among the most highly elevated personalities. Your Lordship is the reservoir of all the good qualities of Āryans, people who are advanced. Your character and behavior are always consistent, and You always control Your senses and mind. Acting just like an ordinary human being, You exhibit exemplary character to teach others how to behave. There is a touchstone that can be used to examine the quality of gold, but You are like a touchstone that can verify all good qualities. You are worshiped by brāhmaṇas who are the foremost of all devotees. You, the Supreme Person, are the King of kings, and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 4



yat tad viśuddhānubhava-mātram ekaṁ

sva-tejasā dhvasta-guṇa-vyavastham

pratyak praśāntaṁ sudhiyopalambhanaṁ

hy anāma-rūpaṁ nirahaṁ prapadye

SYNONYMS



yat-which; tat-to that supreme truth; viśuddha-transcendentally pure, without contamination by material nature; anubhava-experience; mātram-that sac-cid-ānanda transcendental body; ekam-the one; sva-tejasā-by His own spiritual potency; dhvasta-vanquished; guṇa-vyavastham-the influence of the modes of material nature; pratyak-transcendental, not to be seen with material eyes; praśāntam-undisturbed by material agitation; sudhiyā-by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or purified consciousness, uncontaminated by material desires, fruitive activities and speculative philosophy; upalambhanam-who can be achieved; hi-indeed; anāma-rūpam-without a material name and form; niraham-without a material ego; prapadye-let me offer my respectful obeisances.





The Lord, whose pure form [sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] is uncontaminated by the modes of material nature, can be perceived by pure consciousness. In the Vedānta He is described as being one without a second. Because of His spiritual potency, He is untouched by the contamination of material nature, and because He is not subjected to material vision, He is known as transcendental. He has no material activities, nor has He a material form or name. Only in pure consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, can one perceive the transcendental form of the Lord. Let us be firmly fixed at the lotus feet of Lord Rāmacandra, and let us offer our respectful obeisances unto those transcendental lotus feet.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, appears in various expansions, as stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.39):



rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is always situated in various incarnations such as Rāma, Nṛsiṁha and many subincarnations as well, but who is the original personality of Godhead known as Kṛṣṇa and who incarnates personally also." Kṛṣṇa, who is viṣṇu-tattva, has expanded Himself in many Viṣṇu forms, of which Lord Rāmacandra is one. We know that the viṣṇu-tattva is carried by the transcendental bird Garuḍa and is equipped with different types of weapons in four hands. Therefore we may doubt whether Lord Rāmacandra could be in the same category, since He was carried by Hanumān, not by Garuḍa, and had neither four hands nor the śaṅkha, cakra, gadā and padma. Consequently this verse clarifies that Rāmacandra is as good as Kṛṣṇa (rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā). Although Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, Rāmacandra is not different from Him. Rāmacandra is unaffected by the modes of material nature, and therefore He is praśānta, never disturbed by those modes.



Unless one is saturated with love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot appreciate the transcendental value of Lord Rāmacandra; one cannot see Him with material eyes. Because demons like Rāvaṇa have no spiritual vision, they consider Lord Rāmacandra an ordinary kṣatriya king. Rāvaṇa therefore attempted to kidnap Lord Rāmacandra's eternal consort, Sītādevī. Actually, however, Rāvaṇa could not carry off Sītādevī in her original form. As soon as she was touched by Rāvaṇa's hands, she gave him a material form, but she maintained her original form beyond his vision. Therefore in this verse the words pratyak praśāntam indicate that Lord Rāmacandra and His potency, the goddess Sītā, keep themselves aloof from the influence of the material energy.



In the Upaniṣads it is said: yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyaḥ. The Supreme Lord, Paramātmā, the Personality of Godhead, can be seen or perceived only by persons who are saturated with devotional service. As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.38):



premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form of Śyāmasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee." Similarly, in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad it is stated, etās tisro devatā anena jīvena. In this verse of the Chāndogya Upaniṣad the word anena is used to distinguish the ātmā and Paramātmā as two separate identities. The words tisro devatā indicate that the body of the living entity is made of three material elements-fire, earth and water. Although the Paramātmā enters the heart of the jīvātmā, who is influenced and designated by a material body, the Paramātmā has nothing to do with the jīvātmā's body. Because the Paramātmā has no material connections, He is described here as anāma-rūpaṁ niraham. The Paramātmā has no material identity, whereas the jīvātmā does. The jīvātmā may introduce himself as an Indian, American, German and so on, but the Paramātmā has no such material designations, and therefore He has no material name. The jīvātmā is different from his name, but the Paramātmā is not; His name and He Himself are one and the same. This is the meaning of niraham, which means "without material designations." This word cannot possibly be twisted to mean that the Paramātmā has no ahaṅkāra, no "I-ness" or identity. He has His transcendental identity as the Supreme. This is the explanation given by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. According to another interpretation, given by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, niraham means nirniścayena aham. Niraham does not mean that the Supreme Lord has no identity. Rather, the stress given by the word aham proves strongly that He does have His personal identity because nir not only means "negative" but also means "strong ascertainment."





TEXT 5



martyāvatāras tv iha martya-śikṣaṇaṁ

rakṣo-vadhāyaiva na kevalaṁ vibhoḥ

kuto 'nyathā syād ramataḥ sva ātmanaḥ

sītā-kṛtāni vyasanānīśvarasya

SYNONYMS



martya-as a human being; avatāraḥ-whose incarnation; tu-however; iha-in the material world; martya-śikṣaṇam-for teaching all the living entities, especially human beings; rakṣaḥ-vadhāya-to kill the demon Rāvaṇa; eva-certainly; na-not; kevalam-only; vibhoḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kutaḥ-from where; anyathā-otherwise; syāt-there would be; ramataḥ-of one enjoying; sve-in Himself; ātmanaḥ-the spiritual identity of the universe; sītā-of the wife of Lord Rāmacandra; kṛtāni-appearing due to the separation; vyasanāni-all the miseries; īśvarasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





It was ordained that Rāvaṇa, chief of the Rākṣasas, could not be killed by anyone but a man, and for this reason Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appeared in the form of a human being. Lord Rāmacandra's mission, however, was not only to kill Rāvaṇa but also to teach mortal beings that material happiness centered around sex life or centered around one's wife is the cause of many miseries. He is the self-sufficient Supreme Personality of Godhead, and nothing is lamentable for Him. Therefore why else could He be subjected to tribulations by the kidnapping of mother Sītā?





When the Lord appears in this universe in the form of a human being, He has two purposes, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā [Bg. 4.8]-paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: to destroy the demons and protect the devotees. To protect the devotees, the Lord not only satisfies them by His personal presence but also teaches them so that they will not fall down from devotional service. By His personal example, Lord Rāmacandra taught the devotees that it is better not to enter married life, which is certainly followed by many tribulations. As confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.45):



yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tucchaṁ

kaṇḍūyanena karayor iva duḥkha-duḥkham

tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇā bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ

kaṇḍūtivan manasijaṁ viṣaheta-dhīraḥ





Kṛpaṇas, those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledge and who are therefore just the opposite of brāhmaṇas, generally take to family life, which is a concession for sex. Thus they enjoy sex again and again, although that sex is followed by many tribulations. This is a warning to devotees. To teach this lesson to devotees and to human society in general, Lord Śrī Rāmacandra, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, underwent a series of tribulations because He accepted a wife, mother Sītā. Lord Rāmacandra underwent these austerities, of course, only to instruct us; actually He never has any reason to lament for anything.



Another aspect of the Lord's instructions is that one who accepts a wife must be a faithful husband and give her full protection. Human society is divided into two classes of men-those who strictly follow the religious principles and those who are devotees. By His personal example, Lord Rāmacandra wanted to instruct both of them how to fully adopt the discipline of the religious system and how to be a beloved and dutiful husband. Otherwise He had no reason to undergo apparent tribulations. One who strictly follows religious principles must not neglect to provide all facilities for the complete protection of his wife. There may be some suffering because of this, but one must nevertheless endure it. That is the duty of a faithful husband. By His personal example, Lord Rāmacandra demonstrated this duty. Lord Rāmacandra could have produced hundreds and thousands of Sītās from His pleasure energy, but just to show the duty of a faithful husband, He not only rescued Sītā from the hands of Rāvaṇa but also killed Rāvaṇa and all the members of his family.



Another aspect of the teachings of Lord Rāmacandra is that although Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His devotees may apparently suffer from material tribulations, they have nothing to do with such tribulations. They are mukta-puruṣas, liberated persons, under all circumstances. It is therefore said in the Caitanya-bhāgavata:



yata dekha vaiṣṇavera vyavahāra duḥkha

niścaya jāniha tāhā paramānanda-sukha





A Vaiṣṇava is always firmly situated in transcendental bliss because of engagement in devotional service. Although he may appear to suffer material pains, his position is called transcendental bliss in separation (viraha). The emotions a lover and beloved feel when separated from one another are actually very blissful, although apparently painful. Therefore the separation of Lord Rāmacandra from Sītādevī, as well as the consequent tribulation they suffered, is but another display of transcendental bliss. That is the opinion of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.





TEXT 6



na vai sa ātmātmavatāṁ suhṛttamaḥ

saktas tri-lokyāṁ bhagavān vāsudevaḥ

na strī-kṛtaṁ kaśmalam aśnuvīta

na lakṣmaṇaṁ cāpi vihātum arhati

SYNONYMS



na-not; vai-indeed; saḥ-He; ātmā-the Supreme Soul; ātmavatām-of the self-realized souls; suhṛt-tamaḥ-the best friend; saktaḥ-attached; tri-lokyām-to anything within the three worlds; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevaḥ-the all-pervading Lord; na-not; strī-kṛtam-obtained because of His wife; kaśmalam-sufferings of separation; aśnuvīta-would obtain; na-not; lakṣmaṇam-His younger brother Lakṣmaṇa; ca-also; api-certainly; vihātum-to give up; arhati-be able.





Since Lord Śrī Rāmacandra is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, He is not attached to anything in this material world. He is the most beloved Supersoul of all self-realized souls, and He is their very intimate friend. He is full of all opulences. Therefore He could not possibly have suffered because of separation from His wife, nor could He have given up His wife and Lakṣmaṇa, His younger brother. To give up either would have been absolutely impossible.





In defining the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we say that He is full in all six opulences-wealth, fame, strength, influence, beauty and renunciation. He is called renounced because He is not attached to anything in this material world; He is specifically attached to the spiritual world and the living entities there. The affairs of the material world take place under the superintendence of Durgādevī (sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā/ chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]). Everything is going on under the strict rules and regulations of the material energy, represented by Durgā. Therefore the Lord is completely detached and need not give attention to the material world. Sītādevī belongs to the spiritual world. Similarly, Lord Lakṣmaṇa, Rāmacandra's younger brother, is a manifestation of Saṅkarṣaṇa, and Lord Rāmacandra Himself is Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



Since the Lord is always spiritually qualified, He is attached to servants who always render transcendental loving service unto Him. He is attached to the truth in life, not to brahminical qualities. Indeed, He is never attached to any material qualities. Although He is the Supersoul of all living entities, He is specifically manifest to those who are self-realized, and He is especially dear to the hearts of His transcendental devotees. Because Lord Rāmacandra descended to teach human society how dutiful a king should be, He apparently gave up the company of mother Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa. Factually, however, He could not have given them up. One should therefore learn about the activities of Lord Rāmacandra from a self-realized soul. Then one can understand the transcendental activities of the Lord.





TEXT 7



na janma nūnaṁ mahato na saubhagaṁ

na vāṅ na buddhir nākṛtis toṣa-hetuḥ

tair yad visṛṣṭān api no vanaukasaś

cakāra sakhye bata lakṣmaṇāgrajaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; janma-birth in a very polished, aristocratic family; nūnam-indeed; mahataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na-nor; saubhagam-great fortune; na-nor; vāk-an elegant manner of speaking; na-nor; buddhiḥ-sharpness of intelligence; na-not; ākṛtiḥ-features of the body; toṣa-hetuḥ-the cause of pleasure to the Lord; taiḥ-by all those above-mentioned qualities; yat-because; visṛṣṭān-rejected; api-although; naḥ-us; vana-okasaḥ-the inhabitants of the forest; cakāra-accepted; sakhye-in friendship; bata-alas; lakṣmaṇa-agra-jaḥ-Lord Śrī Rāmacandra, the elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa.





One cannot establish a friendship with the Supreme Lord Rāmacandra on the basis of material qualities such as one's birth in an aristocratic family, one's personal beauty, one's eloquence, one's sharp intelligence or one's superior race or nation. None of these qualifications is actually a prerequisite for friendship with Lord Śrī Rāmacandra. Otherwise how is it possible that although we uncivilized inhabitants of the forest have not taken noble births, although we have no physical beauty and although we cannot speak like gentlemen, Lord Rāmacandra has nevertheless accepted us as friends?





In a prayer to Kṛṣṇa expressing her feelings, Śrīmatī Kuntīdevī called Him akiñcana-gocara. The prefix a means "not," and kiñcana "something of this material world." One may be very proud of his prestigious position, material wealth, beauty, education and so on, but although these are certainly good qualifications in material dealings, they are not necessary for achieving friendship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who possesses all these material qualities is expected to become a devotee, and when he actually does, the qualities are properly utilized. Those who are puffed up by a high birth, wealth, education and personal beauty (janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī) unfortunately do not care for developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, nor does the Supreme Personality of Godhead care about all these material qualifications. The Supreme Lord is achieved by devotion (bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]). One's devotion and sincere desire to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead are the only qualifications. Rūpa Gosvāmī has also said that the price for achieving God's favor is simply one's sincere eagerness to have it (laulyam ekaṁ mūlyam). In the Caitanya-bhāgavata it is said:



kholāvecā sevakera dekha bhāgya-sīmā

brahmā śiva kāṅde yāra dekhiyā mahimā





dhane jane pāṇḍitye kṛṣṇa nāhi pāi

kevala bhaktira vaśa caitanya-gosāñi





"Behold the great fortune of the devotee Kholāvecā. Lord Brahmā and Śiva shed tears upon seeing his greatness. One cannot attain Lord Kṛṣṇa by any amount of wealth, followers, or learning. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is controlled only by pure devotion. "Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had a very sincere devotee whose name was Kholāvecā Śrīdhara and whose only business was to sell pots made of the skin of banana trees. Whatever income he had, he used fifty percent for the worship of mother Ganges, and with the other fifty percent he provided for his necessities. On the whole, he was so very poor that he lived in a cottage that had a broken roof with many holes in it. He could not afford brass utensils, and therefore he drank water from an iron pot. Nevertheless, he was a great devotee of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is a typical example of how a poor man with no material possessions can become a most exalted devotee of the Lord. The conclusion is that one cannot attain shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa or Śrī Caitanya Gosāñi through material opulence; that shelter is attainable only by pure devotional service.



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."





TEXT 8



suro 'suro vāpy atha vānaro naraḥ

sarvātmanā yaḥ sukṛtajñam uttamam

bhajeta rāmaṁ manujākṛtiṁ hariṁ

ya uttarān anayat kosalān divam iti

SYNONYMS



suraḥ-demigod; asuraḥ-demon; vā api-or; atha-therefore; vā-or; anaraḥ-other than a human being (bird, beast, animal and so on); naraḥ-a human being; sarva-ātmanā-wholeheartedly; yaḥ-who; su-kṛtajñam-easily made grateful; uttamam-most highly elevated; bhajeta-should worship; rāmam-Lord Rāmacandra; manuja-ākṛtim-appearing as a human being; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaḥ-who; uttarān-of northern India; anayat-brought back; kosalān-the inhabitants of Kosala-deśa, Ayodhyā; divam-to the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭha; iti-thus.





Therefore, whether one is a demigod or a demon, a man or a creature other than man, such as a beast or bird, everyone should worship Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appears on this earth just like a human being. There is no need of great austerities or penances to worship the Lord, for Me accepts even a small service offered by His devotee. Thus He is satisfied, and as soon as He is satisfied, the devotee is successful. Indeed, Lord Śrī Rāmacandra brought all the devotees of Ayodhyā back home, back to Godhead [Vaikuṇṭha].





Lord Śrī Rāmacandra is so kind and merciful to His devotees that He is very easily satisfied by a little service rendered by anyone, human or not. This is the special advantage of worshiping Lord Rāmacandra, and there is the same advantage in worshiping Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāmacandra, in the manner of kṣatriyas, sometimes showed Their mercy by killing asuras, but Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu awarded love of God without difficulty even to the asuras. All the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead-but especially Lord Rāmacandra, Lord Kṛṣṇa and, later, Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu-delivered many of the living entities present before Them, indeed almost all of them. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is therefore represented in the six-armed form of ṣaḍ-bhūja-mūrti, which is a combination of Lord Rāmacandra, Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The best purpose of human life can be fulfilled by worshiping the ṣaḍ-bhūja-mūrti, the form of the Lord with six arms-two arms of Rāmacandra, two arms of Kṛṣṇa and two arms of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.





TEXT 9



bhārate 'pi varṣe bhagavān nara-nārāyaṇākhya ākalpāntam upacita-dharma-jñāna-vairāgyaiśvaryopaśamoparamātmopalambhanam anugrahāyātmavatām anukampayā tapo 'vyakta-gatiś carati.



SYNONYMS



bhārate-in Bhārata; api-also; varṣe-the tract of land; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-nārāyaṇa-ākhyaḥ-known as Nara-Nārāyaṇa; ā-kalpa-antam-up to the end of the millennium; upacita-increasing; dharma-religion; jñāna-knowledge; vairāgya-renunciation or nonattachment; aiśvarya-mystic opulences; upaśama-control of the senses; uparama-freedom from false ego; ātma-upalambhanam-self-realization; anugrahāya-to show favor; ātma-vatām-unto persons interested in self-realization; anukampayā-by causeless mercy; tapaḥ-austerities; avyakta-gatiḥ-whose glories are inconceivable; carati-executes.





[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] The glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are inconceivable. He has appeared in the form of Nara-Nārāyaṇa in the land of Bhārata-varṣa, at the place known as Badarikāśrama, to favor His devotees by teaching them religion, knowledge, renunciation, spiritual power, sense control and freedom from false ego. He is advanced in the opulence of spiritual assets, and He engages in executing austerity until the end of this millennium. This is the process of self-realization.





People in India may visit the temple of Nara-Nārāyaṇa at Badarikāśrama just to learn how the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His incarnation as Nara-Nārāyaṇa engages in austerities to teach the people of the world how to achieve self-realization. It is impossible to realize oneself simply by absorbing oneself in speculation and material activities. One must be very serious about self-realization and the practice of austerity. Unfortunately, the people of this age of Kali do not even know the meaning of austerity. Under these circumstances, the Lord has appeared as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to bestow upon the fallen souls the easiest method of self-realization, technically called ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam [Cc. Antya 20.12], cleansing of the dirt from the core of one's heart. This method is extremely simple. Anyone can chant the glorious kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. In this age there are different forms of so-called advanced scientific knowledge, such as anthropology, Marxism, Freudianism, nationalism and industrialism, but if we work very hard under their guidance instead of adopting the process practiced by Nara-Nārāyaṇa, we shall waste our valuable human form of life. Thus we shall certainly be cheated and misled.





TEXT 10



taṁ bhagavān nārado varṇāśramavatībhir bhāratībhiḥ prajābhir bhagavat-proktābhyāṁ sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ bhagavad-anubhāvopavarṇanaṁ sāvarṇer upadekṣyamāṇaḥ parama-bhakti-bhāvenopasarati idaṁ cābhigṛṇāti.



SYNONYMS



tam-Him (Nara-Nārāyaṇa); bhagavān-the most powerful saintly person; nāradaḥ-the great sage Nārada; varṇa-āśrama-vatībhiḥ-by followers of the institution of the four varṇas and four āśramas; bhāratībhiḥ-of the land known as Bhārata-varṣa (India); prajābhiḥ-who are the inhabitants; bhagavat-proktābhyām-which was stated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sāṅkhya-by the sāṅkhya-yoga system (the analytical study of material conditions); yogābhyām-by practice of the yoga system; bhagavat-anubhāva-upavarṇanam-which describes the process of God realization; sāvarṇeḥ-unto Sāvarṇi Manu; upadekṣyamāṇaḥ-instructing; parama-bhakti-bhāvena-in greatly ecstatic loving service to the Lord; upasarati-serves the Lord; idam-this; ca-and; abhigṛṇāti-chants.





In his own book, known as Nārada Pañcarātra, Bhagavān Nārada has very vividly described how to work to achieve the ultimate goal of life-devotion-through knowledge and through execution of the mystic yoga system. He has also described the glories of the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The great sage Nārada instructed the tenets of this transcendental literature to Sāvarṇi Manu in order to teach those inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa who strictly follow the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma how to achieve the devotional service of the Lord. Thus Nārada Muni, along with the other inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa, always engages in the service of Nara-Nārāyaṇa, and he chants as follows.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has clearly declared:



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]





The real success or fulfillment of the mission of human life can be achieved in India, Bhārata-varṣa, because in Bhārata-varṣa the purpose of life and the method for achieving success are evident. People should take advantage of the opportunity afforded by Bhārata-varṣa, and this is especially so for those who are following the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma. If we do not take to the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma by accepting the four social orders (brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra) and the four orders of spiritual life (brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa), there can be no question of success in life. Unfortunately, because of the influence of Kali-yuga, everything is now being lost. The inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa are gradually becoming degraded mlecchas and yavanas. How then will they teach others? Therefore, this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has been started not only for the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa but for all the people of the world, as announced by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There is still time, and if the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa take this movement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness seriously, the entire world will be saved from gliding down to a hellish condition. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement follows the process of pañcarātrika-vidhi and that of bhāgavata-vidhi simultaneously, so that people can take advantage of the movement and make their lives successful.





TEXT 11



oṁ namo bhagavate upaśama-śīlāyoparatānātmyāya namo 'kiñcana-vittāya ṛṣi-ṛṣabhāya nara-nārāyaṇāya paramahaṁsa-parama-gurave ātmārāmādhipataye namo nama iti.



SYNONYMS



om-O Supreme Lord; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upaśama-śīlāya-who has mastered the senses; uparata-anātmyāya-having no attachment for this material world; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; akiñcana-vittāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the only asset of persons who have no material possessions; ṛṣi-ṛṣabhāya-the most exalted of saintly persons; nara-nārāyaṇāya-Nara-Nārāyaṇa; paramahaṁsa-parama-gurave-the most exalted spiritual master of all paramahaṁsas, liberated persons; ātmārāma-adhipataye-the best of self-realized persons; namaḥ namaḥ-my respectful obeisances again and again; iti-thus.





Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Nara-Nārāyaṇa, the best of all saintly persons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the most self-controlled and self-realized, He is free from false prestige, and He is the asset of persons who have no material possessions. He is the spiritual master of all paramahaṁsas, who are the most exalted human beings, and He is the master of the self-realized. Let me offer my repeated obeisances at His lotus feet.





TEXT 12



gāyati cedam--

kartāsya sargādiṣu yo na badhyate

na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiḥ

draṣṭur na dṛg yasya guṇair vidūṣyate

tasmai namo 'sakta-vivikta-sākṣiṇe

SYNONYMS



gāyati-he sings; ca-and; idam-this; kartā-the executor; asya-of this cosmic manifestation; sarga-ādiṣu-of the creation, maintenance and destruction; yaḥ-one who; na badhyate-is not attached as the creator, master or proprietor; na-not; hanyate-is victimized; deha-gataḥ api-although appearing as a human being; daihikaiḥ-by bodily tribulations such as hunger, thirst and fatigue; draṣṭuḥ-of Him who is the seer of everything; na-not; dṛk-the power of vision; yasya-of whom; guṇaiḥ-by the material qualities; vidūṣyate-is polluted; tasmai-unto Him; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; asakta-unto the Supreme person, who is unattached; vivikta-without affection; sākṣiṇe-the witness of everything.





Nārada, the most powerful saintly sage, also worships Nara-Nārāyaṇa by chanting the following mantra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this visible cosmic manifestation, yet He is completely free from false prestige. Although to the foolish He appears to have accepted a material body like us, He is unaffected by bodily tribulations like hunger, thirst and fatigue. Although He is the witness who sees everything, His senses are unpolluted by the objects He sees. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that unattached, pure witness of the world, the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is described as sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the body of eternity, transcendental bliss and full knowledge. Now in this verse He is more fully described. Kṛṣṇa is the creator of the entire cosmic manifestation, yet He is unattached to it. If we were to construct a very tall skyscraper, we would be very attached to it, but Kṛṣṇa is so renounced that although He has created everything, He is not attached to anything (na badhyate). Furthermore, although Kṛṣṇa has His transcendental form, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], He is not disturbed by the bodily necessities of life, which are called daihika; for example, He is never hungry, thirsty or fatigued (na hanyate deha-gato 'pi daihikaiḥ). Then again, since everything is Kṛṣṇa's property, He sees everything and is present everywhere, but because His body is transcendental, He is above vision, the objects of vision and the process of vision. When we see someone beautiful, we are attracted. The sight of a beautiful woman immediately attracts a man, and the sight of a man naturally attracts a woman. Kṛṣṇa, however, is transcendental to all these faults. Although He is the seer of everything, He is not afflicted with faulty vision (na dṛg yasya guṇair vidūṣyate). Therefore, although He is the witness and seer, He is aloof from all affection for the activities He sees. He is always unattached and separate; He is only a witness.





TEXT 13



idaṁ hi yogeśvara yoga-naipuṇaṁ

hiraṇyagarbho bhagavāñ jagāda yat

yad anta-kāle tvayi nirguṇe mano

bhaktyā dadhītojjhita-duṣkalevaraḥ

SYNONYMS



idam-this; hi-certainly; yoga-īśvara-O my Lord, master of all mystic power; yoga-naipuṇam-the expert process of executing yogic principles; hiraṇya-garbhaḥ-Lord Brahmā; bhagavān-the most powerful; jagāda-spoke; yat-which; yat-which; anta-kāle-at the time of death; tvayi-in You; nirguṇe-the transcendence; manaḥ-the mind; bhaktyā-with a devotional attitude; dadhīta-one should place; ujjhita-duṣkalevaraḥ-having given up his identification with the material body.





O my Lord, master of all mystic yoga, this is the explanation of the yogic process spoken of by Lord Brahmā [Hiraṇyagarbha], who is self-realized. At the time of death, all yogīs give up the material body with full detachment simply by placing their minds at Your lotus feet. That is the perfection of yoga.





Śrīla Madhvācārya says:



yasya samyag bhagavati

jñānaṁ bhaktis tathaiva ca

niścintas tasya mokṣaḥ syāt

sarva-pāpa-kṛto 'pi tu





"For one who very seriously practices devotional service during his lifetime in order to understand the constitutional position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, liberation from this material world is guaranteed, even if he has previously been addicted to sinful habits." This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā:



api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ





"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated." (Bg. 9.30) The only purpose of life is to be fully absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa and His form, pastimes, activities and qualities. If one is able to think of Kṛṣṇa in this way, twenty-four hours a day, he is already liberated (svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ). Whereas materialists are absorbed in material thoughts and activities, devotees, on the contrary, are always absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa's activities. Therefore they are already on the platform of liberation. One has to think of Kṛṣṇa with full absorption at the time of death. Then he will certainly return home, back to Godhead, without a doubt.





TEXT 14



yathaihikāmuṣmika-kāma-lampaṭaḥ

suteṣu dāreṣu dhaneṣu cintayan

śaṅketa vidvān kukalevarātyayād

yas tasya yatnaḥ śrama eva kevalam

SYNONYMS



yathā-as; aihika-in the present life; amuṣmika-in the expected future life; kāma-lampaṭaḥ-a person who is very attached to lusty desires for bodily enjoyment; suteṣu-children; dāreṣu-wife; dhaneṣu-wealth; cintayan-thinking about; śaṅketa-is afraid; vidvān-a person advanced in spiritual knowledge; ku-kalevara-of this body, which is full of stool and urine; atyayāt-because of loss; yaḥ-anyone; tasya-his; yatnaḥ-endeavors; śramaḥ-a waste of time and energy; eva-certainly; kevalam-only.





Materialists are generally very attached to their present bodily comforts and to the bodily comforts they expect in the future. Therefore they are always absorbed in thoughts of their wives, children and wealth and are afraid of giving up their bodies, which are full of stool and urine. If a person engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, is also afraid of giving up his body, what is the use of his having labored to study the śāstras? It was simply a waste of time.





At the time of death a materialist thinks of his wife and children. He is absorbed in thinking of how they will live and who will take care of them after he leaves. Consequently he is never prepared to give up his body; rather, he wants to continue to live in his body to serve his society, family, friends and so on. Therefore by practicing the mystic yoga system one must become detached from bodily relationships. If despite practicing bhakti-yoga and studying all the Vedic literature, one is afraid of giving up his bad body, which is the cause of all his suffering, what is the use of his attempts to advance in spiritual life? The secret of success in practicing yoga is to become free from bodily attachments. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, deha-smṛti nāhi yāra, saṁsāra-bandhana kāhāṅ tāra: one whose practice has freed him from the anxieties of bodily needs is no longer in conditional life. Such a person is freed from conditional bondage. A person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness must fully discharge his devotional duties without material attachment. Then his liberation is guaranteed.





TEXT 15



tan naḥ prabho tvaṁ kukalevarārpitāṁ

tvan-māyayāhaṁ-mamatām adhokṣaja

bhindyāma yenāśu vayaṁ sudurbhidāṁ

vidhehi yogaṁ tvayi naḥ svabhāvam iti

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; naḥ-our; prabho-O my Lord; tvam-You; ku-kalevara-arpitām-invested in this bad body full of stool and urine; tvat-māyayā-by Your illusory energy; aham-mamatām-the conception of "I and my"; adhokṣaja-O Transcendence; bhindyāma-may give up; yena-by which; āśu-very soon; vayam-we; sudurbhidām-which is very difficult to give up; vidhehi-please give; yogam-the mystic process; tvayi-unto You; naḥ-our; svabhāvam-which is symptomized by a steady mind; iti-thus.





Therefore, O Lord, O Transcendence, kindly help us by giving us the power to execute bhakti-yoga so that we can control our restless minds and fix them upon You. We are all infected by Your illusory energy; therefore we are very attached to the body, which is full of stool and urine, and to anything related with the body. Except for devotional service, there is no way to give up this attachment. Therefore kindly bestow upon us this benediction.





The Lord advises in Bhagavad-gītā: man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. The perfect yoga system consists of always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, always engaging in devotional service, always worshiping Kṛṣṇa and always offering obeisances unto Him. Unless we practice this yoga system, our illusory attachment for this bad body, which is full of stool and urine, is impossible to give up. The perfection of yoga consists of giving up attachment for this body and bodily relationships and transferring that attachment to Kṛṣṇa. We are very attached to material enjoyment, but when we transfer that same attachment to Kṛṣṇa, we traverse the path of liberation. One has to practice this yoga system and none other.





TEXT 16



bhārate 'py asmin varṣe saric-chailāḥ santi bahavo malayo maṅgala-prastho mainākas trikūṭa ṛṣabhaḥ kūṭakaḥ kollakaḥ sahyo devagirir ṛṣyamūkaḥ śrī-śailo veṅkaṭo mahendro vāridhāro vindhyaḥ śuktimān ṛkṣagiriḥ pāriyātro droṇaś citrakūṭo govardhano raivatakaḥ kakubho nīlo gokāmukha indrakīlaḥ kāmagirir iti cānye ca śata-sahasraśaḥ śailās teṣāṁ nitamba-prabhavā nadā nadyaś ca santy asaṅkhyātāḥ.



SYNONYMS



bhārate-in the land of Bhārata-varṣa; api-also; asmin-in this; varṣe-tract of land; sarit-rivers; śailāḥ-mountains; santi-there are; bahavaḥ-many; malayaḥ-Malaya; maṅgala-prasthaḥ-Maṅgala-prastha; mainākaḥ-Maināka; tri-kūṭaḥ-Trikūṭa; ṛṣabhaḥ-Ṛṣabha; kūṭakaḥ-Kūṭaka; kollakaḥ-Kollaka; sahyaḥ-Sahya; devagiriḥ-Devagiri; ṛṣya-mūkaḥ-Ṛṣyamūka; śrī-śailaḥ-Śrī-śaila; veṅkaṭaḥ-Veṅkaṭa; mahendraḥ-Mahendra; vāri-dhāraḥ-Vāridhāra; vindhyaḥ-Vindhya; śuktimān-Śuktimān; ṛkṣa-giriḥ-Ṛkṣagiri; pāriyātraḥ-Pāriyātra; droṇaḥ-Droṇa; citra-kūṭaḥ-Citrakūṭa; govardhanaḥ-Govardhana; raivatakaḥ-Raivataka; kakubhaḥ-Kakubha; nīlaḥ-Nīla; gokāmukhaḥ-Gokāmukha; indrakīlaḥ-Indrakīla; kāma-giriḥ-Kāmagiri; iti-thus; ca-and; anye-others; ca-also; śata-sahasraśaḥ-many hundreds and thousands; śailāḥ-mountains; teṣām-of them; nitamba-prabhavāḥ-born of the slopes; nadāḥ-big rivers; nadyaḥ-small rivers; ca-and; santi-there are; asaṅkhyātāḥ-innumerable.





In the tract of land known as Bhārata-varṣa, as in Ilāvṛta-varṣa, there are many mountains and rivers. Some of the mountains are known as Malaya, Maṅgala-prastha, Maināka, Trikūṭa, Ṛṣabha, Kūṭaka, Kollaka, Sahya, Devagiri, Ṛṣyamūka, Śrī-śaila, Veṅkaṭa, Mahendra, Vāridhāra, Vindhya, Śuktimān, Ṛkṣagiri, Pāriyātra, Droṇa, Citrakūṭa, Govardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Nīla, Gokāmukha, Indrakīla and Kāmagiri. Besides these, there are many other hills, with many large and small rivers flowing from their slopes.





TEXTS 17–18



etāsām apo bhāratyaḥ prajā nāmabhir eva punantīnām ātmanā copaspṛśanti; candravasā tāmraparṇī avaṭodā kṛtamālā vaihāyasī kāverī veṇī payasvinī śarkarāvartā tuṅgabhadrā kṛṣṇāveṇyā bhīmarathī godāvarī nirvindhyā payoṣṇī tāpī revā surasā narmadā carmaṇvatī sindhur andhaḥ śoṇaś ca nadau mahānadī vedasmṛtir ṛṣikulyā trisāmā kauśikī mandākinī yamunā sarasvatī dṛṣadvatī gomatī sarayū rodhasvatī saptavatī suṣomā śatadrūś candrabhāgā marudvṛdhā vitastā asiknī viśveti mahā-nadyaḥ.



SYNONYMS



etāsām-of all these; apaḥ-water; bhāratyaḥ-of Bhārata-varṣa (India); prajāḥ-the residents; nāmabhiḥ-by the names; eva-only; punantīnām-are purifying; ātmanā-by the mind; ca-also; upaspṛśanti-touch; candra-vasā-Candravasā; tāmra-parṇī-Tāmraparṇī; avaṭodā-Avaṭodā; kṛta-mālā-Kṛtamālā; vaihāyasī-Vaihāyasī; kāverī-Kāverī; veṇī-Veṇī; payasvinī-Payasvinī; śarkarāvartā-Śarkarāvartā; tuṅga-bhadrā-Tuṅgabhadrā; kṛṣṇā-veṇyā-Kṛṣṇāveṇyā; bhīma-rathī-Bhīmarathī; godāvarī-Godāvarī; nirvindhyā-Nirvindhyā; payoṣṇī-Payoṣṇī; tāpī-Tāpī; revā-Revā; surasā-Surasā; narmadā-Narmadā; carmaṇvatī-Carmaṇvatī; sindhuḥ-Sindhu; andhaḥ-Andha; śoṇaḥ-Śoṇa; ca-and; nadau-two rivers; mahā-nadī-Mahānadī; veda-smṛtiḥ-Vedasmṛti; ṛṣi-kulyā-Ṛṣikulyā; tri-sāmā-Trisāmā; kauśikī-Kauśikī; mandākinī-Mandākinī; yamunā-Yamunā; sarasvatī-Sarasvatī; dṛṣadvatī-Dṛṣadvatī; gomatī-Gomatī; sarayū-Sarayū; rodhasvatī-Rodhasvatī; saptavatī-Saptavatī; suṣomā-Suṣomā; śata-drūḥ-Śatadrū; candrabhāgā-Candrabhāgā; marudvṛdhā-Marudvṛdhā; vitastā-Vitastā; asiknī-Asiknī; viśvā-Viśvā; iti-thus; mahā-nadyaḥ-big rivers.





Two of the rivers-the Brahmaputra and the Śoṇa-are called nadas, or main rivers. These are other great rivers that are very prominent: Candravasā, Tāmraparṇī, Avaṭodā, Kṛtamālā, Vaihāyasī, Kāverī, Veṇī, Payasvinī, Śarkarāvartā, Tuṅgabhadrā, Kṛṣṇāveṇyā, Bhīmarathī, Godāvarī, Nirvindhyā, Payoṣṇī, Tāpī, Revā, Surasā, Narmadā, Carmaṇvatī, Mahānadī, Vedasmṛti, Ṛṣikulyā, Trisāmā, Kauśikī, Mandākinī, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Dṛṣadvatī, Gomatī, Sarayū, Rodhasvatī, Saptavatī, Suṣomā, Śatadrū, Candrabhāgā, Marudvṛdhā, Vitastā, Asiknī and Viśvā. The inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa are purified because they always remember these rivers. Sometimes they chant the names of these rivers as mantras, and sometimes they go directly to the rivers to touch them and bathe in them. Thus the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa become purified.





All these rivers are transcendental. Therefore one can be purified by remembering them, touching them or bathing in them. This practice is still going on.





TEXT 19



asminn eva varṣe puruṣair labdha-janmabhiḥ śukla-lohita-kṛṣṇa-varṇena svārabdhena karmaṇā divya-mānuṣa-nāraka-gatayo bahvya ātmana ānupūrvyeṇa sarvā hy eva sarveṣāṁ vidhīyante yathā-varṇa-vidhānam apavargaś cāpi bhavati.



SYNONYMS



asmin eva varṣe-in this tract of land (Bhārata-varṣa); puruṣaiḥ-by the people; labdha-janmabhiḥ-who have taken birth; śukla-of the mode of goodness; lohita-of the mode of passion; kṛṣṇa-of the mode of ignorance; varṇena-according to the division; sva-by himself; ārabdhena-begun; karmaṇā-by activities; divya-divine; mānuṣa-human; nāraka-hellish; gatayaḥ-goals; bahvyaḥ-many; ātmanaḥ-of his own; ānupūrvyeṇa-according to acts performed previously; sarvāḥ-all; hi-certainly; eva-indeed; sarveṣām-of all of them; vidhīyante-are allotted; yathā-varṇa-vidhānam-in terms of different castes; apavargaḥ-the path of liberation; ca-and; api-also; bhavati-is possible.





The people who take birth in this tract of land are divided according to the qualities of material nature-the modes of goodness [sattva-guṇa], passion [rajo-guṇa], and ignorance [tamo-guṇa]. Some of them are born as exalted personalities, some are ordinary human beings, and some are extremely abominable, for in Bhārata-varṣa one takes birth exactly according to one's past karma. If one's position is ascertained by a bona fide spiritual master and one is properly trained to engage in the service of Lord Viṣṇu according to the four social divisions [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra] and the four spiritual divisions [brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa], one's life becomes perfect.





For further information, one should refer to Bhagavad-gītā (14.18 and 18.42–45). Śrīla Rāmānujācārya writes in his book Vedānta-saṅgraha:



evaṁ-vidha-parābhakti-svarūpa-jñāna-viśeṣasyotpādakaḥ pūrvoktāharahar upacīyamāna-jñāna-pūrvaka-karmānugṛhīta-bhakti-yoga eva; yathoktaṁ bhagavatā parāśareṇa--varṇāśrameti. nikhila-jagad-uddhāraṇāyāvanitale 'vatīrṇaṁ para-brahma-bhūtaḥ puruṣottamaḥ svayam etad uktavān--"svakarma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ yathā vindati tac chṛṇu" "yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ yena sarvam idaṁ tatam / svakarmaṇā tam abhyarcya siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ"

Quoting from the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (389), the great sage Parāśara Muni has recommended:



varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, is worshiped by the proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varṇa and āśrama. There is no other way to satisfy the Lord." In the land of Bhārata-varṣa, the institution of varṇāśrama-dharma may be easily adopted. At the present moment, certain demoniac sections of the population of Bhāratavarṣa are disregarding the system of varṇāśrama-dharma. Because there is no institution to teach people how to become brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras or brahmacārīs, gṛhasthas, vānaprasthas and sannyāsīs, these demons want a classless society. This is resulting in chaotic conditions. In the name of secular government, unqualified people are taking the supreme governmental posts. No one is being trained to act according to the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma, and thus people are becoming increasingly degraded and are heading in the direction of animal life. The real aim of life is liberation, but unfortunately the opportunity for liberation is being denied to people in general, and therefore their human lives are being spoiled. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, however, is being propagated all over the world to reestablish the varṇāśrama-dharma system and thus save human society from gliding down to hellish life.





TEXT 20



yo 'sau bhagavati sarva-bhūtātmany anātmye 'nirukte 'nilayane paramātmani vāsudeve 'nanya-nimitta-bhakti-yoga-lakṣaṇo nānā-gati-nimittāvidyā-granthi-randhana-dvāreṇa yadā hi mahā-puruṣa-puruṣa-prasaṅgaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; asau-that; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-bhūta-ātmani-the Supersoul of all living entities; anātmye-having no attachment; anirukte-who is beyond the mind and speech; anilayane-not dependent on anything else; parama-ātmani-unto the Supreme Soul; vāsudeve-Lord Vāsudeva, the son of Vasudeva; ananya-without any other; nimitta-cause; bhakti-yoga-lakṣaṇaḥ-having symptoms of pure devotional service; nānā-gati-of varied destinations; nimitta-the cause; avidyā-granthi-the bondage of ignorance; randhana-of cutting; dvāreṇa-by means; yadā-when; hi-indeed; mahā-puruṣa-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣa-with the devotee; prasaṅgaḥ-an intimate relationship.





After many, many births, when the results of one's pious activities mature, one gets an opportunity to associate with pure devotees. Then one is able to cut the knot of bondage to ignorance, which bound him because of varied fruitive activities. As a result of associating with devotees, one gradually renders service to Lord Vāsudeva, who is transcendental, free from attachment to the material world, beyond the mind and words, and independent of everything else. That bhakti-yoga, devotional service to Lord Vāsudeva, is the real path of liberation.





Brahman realization is the beginning of liberation, and Paramātmā realization is still further advancement toward the realm of liberation, but one achieves real liberation when he understands his position as an eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ). In the material world, in the bodily concept of life, everyone is working in the wrong direction. When one becomes brahma-bhūta, spiritually realized, one understands that he is not the body and that working in the bodily concept of life is useless and misdirected. Then his devotional service begins. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.54):



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām





"One who is thus transcendentally situated realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me." Devotional service is actual liberation. When one is attracted by the beauty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and his mind is always engaged at the Lord's lotus feet, he is no longer interested in subjects that do not help him in self-realization. In other words, he loses all attraction for material activities. In the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.7) it is said: eṣa hy evānandayati. yadā hy evaiṣa etasmin na dṛśye 'nātmye anirukte 'nilayane 'bhayaṁ pratiṣṭhāṁ vindate 'tha so 'bhayaṁ gato bhavati. A living entity becomes established in spiritual, blissful life when he fully understands that his happiness depends on spiritual self-realization, which is the basic principle of ānanda (bliss), and when he is eternally situated in the service of the Lord, who has no other lord above Him.





TEXT 21



etad eva hi devā gāyanti--

aho amīṣāṁ kim akāri śobhanaṁ

prasanna eṣāṁ svid uta svayaṁ hariḥ

yair janma labdhaṁ nṛṣu bhāratājire

mukunda-sevaupayikaṁ spṛhā hi naḥ

SYNONYMS



etat-this; eva-indeed; hi-certainly; devāḥ-all the demigods; gāyanti-chant; aho-oh; amīṣām-of these inhabitants of Bhāratavarṣa; kim-what; akāri-was done; śobhanam-pious, beautiful activities; prasannaḥ-pleased; eṣām-upon them; svit-or; uta-it is said; svayam-personally; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaiḥ-by whom; janma-birth; labdham-obtained; nṛṣu-in human society; bhārata-ajire-in the courtyard of Bhārata-varṣa; mukunda-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can offer liberation; sevā-aupayikam-which is the means of serving; spṛhā-desire; hi-indeed; naḥ-our.





Since the human form of life is the sublime position for spiritual realization, all the demigods in heaven speak in this way: How wonderful it is for these human beings to have been born in the land of Bhārata-varṣa. They must have executed pious acts of austerity in the past, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself must have been pleased with them. Otherwise, how could they engage in devotional service in so many ways? We demigods can only aspire to achieve human births in Bhārata-varṣa to execute devotional service, but these human beings are already engaged there.





These facts are further explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 9.41):



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra





"One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India [Bhārata-varṣa] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all other people."



There are many facilities in India, Bhārata-varṣa, for executing devotional service. In Bhārata-varṣa, all the ācāryas contributed their experience, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu personally appeared to teach the people of Bhārata-varṣa how to progress in spiritual life and be fixed in devotional service to the Lord. From all points of view, Bhārata-varṣa is the special land where one can very easily understand the process of devotional service and adopt it to make his life successful. If one makes his life successful in devotional service and then preaches devotional service in other parts of the world, people throughout the world will actually benefit.





TEXT 22



kiṁ duṣkarair naḥ kratubhis tapo-vratair

dānādibhir vā dyujayena phalgunā

na yatra nārāyaṇa-pāda-paṅkaja-

smṛtiḥ pramuṣṭātiśayendriyotsavāt

SYNONYMS



kim-what is the value; duṣkaraiḥ-very difficult to perform; naḥ-our; kratubhiḥ-with performances of sacrifice; tapaḥ-with austerities; vrataiḥ-vows; dāna-ādibhiḥ-with executing charitable activities and so on; vā-or; dyujayena-with achieving the heavenly kingdom; phalgunā-which is insignificant; na-no; yatra-where; nārāyaṇa-pāda-paṅkaja-of the lotus feet of Lord Nārāyaṇa; smṛtiḥ-the remembrance; pramuṣṭa-lost; atiśaya-excessive; indriya-utsavāt-due to material sense gratification.





The demigods continue: After performing the very difficult tasks of executing Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, undergoing austerities, observing vows and giving charity, we have achieved this position as inhabitants of the heavenly planets. But what is the value of this achievement? Here we are certainly very engaged in material sense gratification, and therefore we can hardly remember the lotus feet of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Indeed, because of our excessive sense gratification, we have almost forgotten His lotus feet.





The land of Bhārata-varṣa is so exalted that by taking birth there one can not only attain the heavenly planets but also go directly back home, back to Godhead. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.25):



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām





"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with Me." people in the land of Bhārata-varṣa generally follow the Vedic principles and consequently perform great sacrifices by which they can be elevated to the heavenly planets. However, what is the use of such great attainments? As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (9.21), kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti: after the results of one's sacrifices, charity and other pious activities expire, one must return to the lower planetary systems and again feel the pangs of birth and death. However, one who becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious can go back to Kṛṣṇa (yānti-mad-yājino 'pi mām). Therefore the demigods even regret having been elevated to the higher planetary systems. The denizens of the heavenly planets regret that they could not take full advantage of being born in the land of Bhārata-varṣa. Instead, they became captivated by a higher standard of sense gratification, and therefore they forgot the lotus feet of Lord Nārāyaṇa at the time of death. The conclusion is that one who has taken birth in the land of Bhārata-varṣa must follow the instructions given personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]. One should try to return home, back to Godhead, to the Vaikuṇṭha planets-or to the topmost Vaikuṇṭha planet, Goloka Vṛndāvana-to live eternally in full, blissful knowledge in the company of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 23



kalpāyuṣāṁ sthānajayāt punar-bhavāt

kṣaṇāyuṣāṁ bhārata-bhūjayo varam

kṣaṇena martyena kṛtaṁ manasvinaḥ

sannyasya saṁyānty abhayaṁ padaṁ hareḥ

SYNONYMS



kalpa-āyuṣām-of those who have a life duration of many millions of years, like Lord Brahmā; sthāna-jayāt-than achievement of the place or planetary systems; punaḥ-bhavāt-which is liable to birth, death and old age; kṣaṇa-āyuṣām-of persons who have only one hundred years of life; bhārata-bhū-jayaḥ-a birth in the land of Bhārata-varṣa; varam-more valuable; kṣaṇena-for such a short life; martyena-by the body; kṛtam-the work executed; manasvinaḥ-those actually understanding the value of life; sannyasya-surrendering unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa; saṁyānti-they achieve; abhayam-where there is no anxiety; padam-the abode; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





A short life in the land of Bharata-varṣa is preferable to a life achieved in Brahmaloka for millions and billions of years because even if one is elevated to Brahmaloka, he must return to repeated birth and death. Although life in Bhārata-varṣa, in a lower planetary system, is very short, one who lives there can elevate himself to full Kṛṣṇa consciousness and achieve the highest perfection, even in this short life, by fully surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus one attains Vaikuṇṭhaloka, where there is neither anxiety nor repeated birth in a material body.





This is further confirmation of the statement given by Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]





One who has taken birth in the land of Bhārata-varṣa has a full opportunity to study the direct instructions given by Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā and thus finally decide what to do in his human form of life. One should certainly give up all other propositions and surrender to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa will then immediately take charge and relieve one of the results of past sinful life (ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ). Therefore one should take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, as Kṛṣṇa Himself recommends. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: [Bg. 18.65] "Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer Me obeisances." This is very easy, even for a child. Why not take this path? One should try to follow the instructions of Kṛṣṇa exactly and thus become fully eligible to be promoted to the kingdom of God (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). One should go directly to Kṛṣṇa and engage in His service. This is the best opportunity offered to the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa. One who is fit to return home, back to Godhead, is no longer liable to the results of karma, good or bad.





TEXT 24



na yatra vaikuṇṭha-kathā-sudhāpagā

na sādhavo bhāgavatās tadāśrayāḥ

na yatra yajñeśa-makhā mahotsavāḥ

sureśa-loko 'pi na vai sa sevyatām

SYNONYMS



na-not; yatra-where; vaikuṇṭha-kathā-sudhā-āpagāḥ-the nectarean rivers of discussions about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is called Vaikuṇṭha, or one who drives away all anxiety; na-nor; sādhavaḥ-devotees; bhāgavatāḥ-always engaged in the service of the Lord; tat-āśrayāḥ-who are sheltered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na-nor; yatra-where; yajña-īśa-makhāḥ-the performance of devotional service to the Lord of sacrifices; mahā-utsavāḥ-which are actual festivals; sureśa-lokaḥ-a place inhabited by the denizens of heaven; api-although; na-not; vai-certainly; saḥ-that; sevyatām-be frequented.





An intelligent person does not take interest in a place, even in the topmost planetary system, if the pure Ganges of topics concerning the Supreme Lord's activities does not flow there, if there are not devotees engaged in service on the banks of such a river of piety, or if there are no festivals of saṅkīrtana-yajña to satisfy the Lord [especially since saṅkīrtana-yajña is recommended in this age].





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in the land of Bhārata-varṣa, specifically in Bengal, in the district of Nadia, where Navadvīpa is situated. It is therefore to be concluded, as stated by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, that within this universe, this earth is the best planet, and on this planet the land of Bhārata-varṣa is the best; in the land of Bhāratavarṣa, Bengal is still better, in Bengal the district of Nadia is still better, and in Nadia the best place is Navadvīpa because Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared there to inaugurate the performance of the sacrifice of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. The śāstras recommend:



kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ

[SB 11.5.32]





Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is always accompanied by His very confidential associates such as Śrī Nityānanda, Śrī Gadādhara and Śrī Advaita and by many devotees like Śrīvāsa. They are always engaged in chanting the name of the Lord and are always describing Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore this is the best among all the places in the universe. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has established its center in Māyāpur, the birthsite of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, to give men the great opportunity to go there and perform a constant festival of saṅkīrtana-yajña, as recommended herein (yajñeśa-makhā mahotsavāḥ) and to distribute prasāda to millions of hungry people hankering for spiritual emancipation. This is the mission of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Caitanya-bhāgavata confirms this as follows: "One should not desire to be elevated even to a place in the heavenly planetary systems if it has no propaganda to expand the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, no trace of Vaiṣṇavas, pure devotees of the Lord, and no festivals for spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness. It would be better to live perpetually cramped within the airtight bag of a mother's womb, where one can at least remember the lotus feet of the Lord, than to live in a place where there is no opportunity to remember His lotus feet. I pray not to be allowed to take birth in such a condemned place." Similarly, in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī says that since Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the inaugurator of the saṅkīrtana movement, anyone who performs saṅkīrtana to please the Lord is very, very glorious. Such a person has perfect intelligence, whereas others are in the ignorance of material existence. Of all the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedic literatures, the performance of saṅkīrtana-yajña is the best. Even the performance of one hundred aśvamedha sacrifices cannot compare to the sacrifice of saṅkīrtana. According to the author of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, if one compares saṅkīrtana-yajña to other yajñas, he is a pāṣaṇḍī, an infidel, and is liable to be punished by Yamarāja. There are many Māyāvādīs who think that the performance of saṅkīrtana-yajña is a pious activity similar to the performance of the aśvamedha-yajña and other such pious functions, but this is a nāma-aparādha. Chanting of the holy name of Nārāyaṇa and chanting of other names are never equal, despite what Māyāvādīs think.





TEXT 25



prāptā nṛ-jātiṁ tv iha ye ca jantavo

jñāna-kriyā-dravya-kalāpa-sambhṛtām

na vai yaterann apunar-bhavāya te

bhūyo vanaukā iva yānti bandhanam

SYNONYMS



prāptāḥ-who have obtained; nṛ-jātim-a birth in human society; tu-certainly; iha-in this land of Bhārata-varṣa; ye-those who; ca-also; jantavaḥ-the living beings; jñāna-with knowledge; kriyā-with activities; dravya-of ingredients; kalāpa-with a collection; sambhṛtām-full; na-not; vai-certainly; yateran-endeavor; apunaḥ-bhavāya-for the position of immortality; te-such persons; bhūyaḥ-again; vanaukāḥ-birds; iva-like; yānti-go; bandhanam-to bondage.





Bhārata-varṣa offers the proper land and circumstances in which to execute devotional service, which can free one from the results of jñāna and karma. If one obtains a human body in the land of Bhārata-varṣa, with clear sensory organs with which to execute the saṅkīrtana-yajña, but in spite of this opportunity he does not take to devotional service, he is certainly like liberated forest animals and birds that are careless and are therefore again bound by a hunter.





In the land of Bhārata-varṣa one can very easily perform the saṅkīrtana-yajña, which consists of śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23], or one can perform other methods of devotional service, such as smaraṇaṁ vandanam arcanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam and ātma-nivedanam. In Bhārata-varṣa one has the opportunity to visit many holy places, especially Lord Caitanya's birthsite and Lord Kṛṣṇa's birthsite-Navadvīpa and Vṛndāvana-where there are many pure devotees who have no desire other than to execute devotional service (anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Madhya 19.167]), and one may thus become free from the bondage of material conditions. Other paths, such as the path of jñāna and the path of karma, are not very profitable. Pious activities can elevate one to the higher planetary systems, and by speculative knowledge one can merge into the Brahman existence, but that is not real profit, for one has to come down again even from the liberated condition of being merged in Brahman, and certainly one must come down from the heavenly kingdom. One should endeavor to go back home, back to Godhead (yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām). Otherwise there is no difference between human life and the lives of jungle animals and birds. Animals and birds also have freedom, but because of their lower birth, they cannot use it. Taking advantage of all the facilities offered him, a human being who has taken birth in the land of Bhārata-varṣa should become a fully enlightened devotee and go back home, back to Godhead. This is the subject matter of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. The inhabitants of places other than Bhārata-varṣa have facilities for material enjoyment, but they do not have the same facility to take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has advised that one who has taken birth as a human being in Bhārata-varṣa must first realize himself as a part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, and after taking to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he must distribute this knowledge all over the world.





TEXT 26



yaiḥ śraddhayā barhiṣi bhāgaśo havir

niruptam iṣṭaṁ vidhi-mantra-vastutaḥ

ekaḥ pṛthaṅ-nāmabhir āhuto mudā

gṛhṇāti pūrṇaḥ svayam āśiṣāṁ prabhuḥ

SYNONYMS



yaiḥ-by whom (the inhabitants of Bhārata-varṣa); śraddhayā-faith and confidence; barhiṣi-in the performance of Vedic ritualistic sacrifices; bhāgaśaḥ-by division; haviḥ-oblations; niruptam-offered; iṣṭam-to the desired deity; vidhi-by the proper method; mantra-by reciting mantras; vastutaḥ-with the proper ingredients; ekaḥ-that one Supreme Personality of Godhead; pṛthak-separate; nāmabhiḥ-by names; āhutaḥ-called; mudā-with great happiness; gṛhṇāti-He accepts; pūrṇaḥ-the Supreme Lord. who is full in Himself; svayam-personally; āśiṣām-of all benedictions; prabhuḥ-the bestower.





In India [Bhārata-varṣa], there are many worshipers of the demigods, the various officials appointed by the Supreme Lord, such as Indra, Candra and Sūrya, all of whom are worshiped differently. The worshipers offer the demigods their oblations, considering the demigods part and parcel of the whole, the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts these offerings and gradually raises the worshipers to the real standard of devotional service by fulfilling their desires and aspirations. Because the Lord is complete, He offers the worshipers the benedictions they desire even if they worship only part of His transcendental body.





In Bhagavad-gītā (9.13) Lord Kṛṣṇa says:



mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam





"O son of Pṛthā, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and inexhaustible." Mahātmā, advanced devotees, worship only the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Others, however, who are also sometimes called mahātmās, worship the Lord as ekatvena pṛthaktvena. In other words, they accept the demigods as different parts of Kṛṣṇa and worship them for various benedictions. Although the devotees of the demigods thus achieve the desired results offered by Kṛṣṇa, they have been described in Bhagavad-gītā as hṛta jñāna, not very intelligent. Kṛṣṇa does not desire to be worshiped indirectly through the different parts of His body; Kṛṣṇa wants direct devotional worship. Therefore a devotee who directly worships Lord Kṛṣṇa through staunch devotional service, as recommended in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, (tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena yajeta puruṣaṁ param [SB 2.3.10]), is very quickly elevated to the transcendental position. Nevertheless, devotees who worship the demigods, the different parts of the Lord, receive the benedictions they desire because the Lord is the original master of all benedictions. If anyone wants a particular benediction, for the Lord to award it is not at all difficult.





TEXT 27



satyaṁ diśaty arthitam arthito nṛṇāṁ

naivārthado yat punar arthitā yataḥ

svayaṁ vidhatte bhajatām anicchatām

icchāpidhānaṁ nija-pāda-pallavam

SYNONYMS



satyam-certainly; diśati-He offers; arthitam-the object prayed for; arthitaḥ-being prayed to; nṛṇām-by the human beings; na-not; eva-indeed; artha-daḥ-the bestower of benedictions; yat-which; punaḥ-again; arthitā-a demand for a benediction; yataḥ-from which; svayam-personally; vidhatte-He gives; bhajatām-unto those engaged in His service; anicchatām-although not desiring it; icchā-pidhānam-which covers all desirable things; nija-pāda-pallavam-His own lotus feet.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead fulfills the material desires of a devotee who approaches Him with such motives, but He does not bestow benedictions upon the devotee that will cause him to demand more benedictions again. However, the Lord willingly gives the devotee shelter at His own lotus feet, even though such a person does not aspire for it, and that shelter satisfies all his desires. That is the Supreme Personality's special mercy.





The devotees mentioned in the previous verse approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead with material motives, but this verse explains how such devotees are saved from those desires. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.10) advises:



akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param





"Whether one is freed from all material desires, is full of material desires, or desires to become one with the Supreme, he should engage in devotional service." In this way, not only will the devotee's desires be fulfilled, but the day will come when he will have no other desire than to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. One who engages in the service of the Lord with some motive is called a sakāma-bhakta, and one who serves the Lord without any motives is called an akāma-bhakta. Kṛṣṇa is so merciful that He turns a sakāma-bhakta into an akāma-bhakta. A pure devotee, an akāma-bhakta, who has no material motives, is satisfied simply to serve the lotus feet of the Lord. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (6.22). Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ: if one engages in the service of the lotus feet of the Lord, he does not want anything more. This is the highest stage of devotional service. The Lord is so kind even to a sakāma-bhakta, a motivated devotee, that He satisfies his desires in such a way that one day he becomes an akāma-bhakta. Dhruva Mahārāja, for example, became a bhakta with the motive of getting a better kingdom than that of his father, but finally he became an akāma-bhakta and said to the Lord, svāmin kṛtārtho'smi varaṁ na yāce: "My dear Lord, I am very satisfied simply to serve Your lotus feet. I do not want any material benefits." Sometimes it is found that a small child eats dirty things, but his parents take away the dirty things and offer him a sandeśa or some other sweetmeat. Devotees who aspire for material benedictions are compared to such children. The Lord is so kind that He takes away their material desires and gives them the highest benediction. Therefore, even for material motives, one should not worship anyone other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead; one must fully engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord so that all his desires will be fulfilled and at the end he can go back home, back to Godhead. This is explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.37–39, 41) as follows.



Anyakāmī-a devotee may desire something other than service to the lotus feet of the Lord; yadi kare kṛṣṇera bhajana-but if he engages in Lord Kṛṣṇa's service; nā māgiteha kṛṣṇa tāre dena sva-caraṇa-Kṛṣṇa gives him shelter at His lotus feet, even though he does not aspire for it. Kṛṣṇa kahe-the Lord says; āmā bhaje-"He is engaged in My service"; māge viṣaya-sukha-"but he wants the benefits of material sense gratification." Amṛta chāḍi' viṣa māge:-"such a devotee is like a person who asks for poison instead of nectar." Ei baḍa mūrkha: "That is his foolishness." Ami-vijña: "But I am experienced." Ei mūrkhe 'viṣaya' kene diba: "Why should I give such a foolish person the dirty things of material enjoyment?" Sva-caraṇa-mṛta: "It would be better for Me to give him shelter at My lotus feet." 'Viṣaya' bhulāiba: "I shall cause him to forget all material desires." Kāma lāgi' kṛṣṇa bhaje-if one engages in the service of the Lord for sense gratification; paya kṛṣṇa-rase-the result is that he ultimately gets a taste for serving the lotus feet of the Lord. Kāma chāḍi' 'da' haite haya abhilāṣe: He then gives up all material desires and wants to become an eternal servant of the Lord.





TEXT 28



yady atra naḥ svarga-sukhāvaśeṣitaṁ

sviṣṭasya sūktasya kṛtasya śobhanam

tenājanābhe smṛtimaj janma naḥ syād

varṣe harir yad-bhajatāṁ śaṁ tanoti

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; atra-in this heavenly planet; naḥ-of us; svarga-sukha-avaśeṣitam-whatever remains after the enjoyment of heavenly happiness; su-iṣṭasya-of a perfect sacrifice; su-uktasya-of diligently studying the Vedic literature; kṛtasya-of having performed a kind act; śobhanam-the resultant actions; tena-by such a resultant action; ajanābhe-in the land of Bhārata-varṣa; smṛti-mat janma-a birth enabling one to remember the lotus feet of the Lord; naḥ-of us; syāt-let there be; varṣe-in the land; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yat-wherein; bhajatām-of the devotees; śam tanoti-expands the auspiciousness.





We are now living in the heavenly planets, undoubtedly as a result of our having performed ritualistic ceremonies, pious activities and yajñas and having studied the Vedas. However, our lives here will one day be finished. We pray that at that time, if any merit remains from our pious activities, we may again take birth in Bhārata-varṣa as human beings able to remember the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord is so kind that He personally comes to the land of Bhārata-varṣa and expands the good fortune of its people.





It is certainly as a result of pious activities that one takes birth in the heavenly planets, but from those planets one must nevertheless come down again to earth, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti [Bg. 9.21]). Even the demigods must return to earth to work like ordinary men when the results of their pious activities expire. Nevertheless, the demigods desire to come to the land of Bhārata-varṣa if even a small portion of the merits of their pious activities remains. In other words, to take birth in Bhārata-varṣa, one must perform more pious activities than the demigods. In Bhārata-varṣa one is naturally Kṛṣṇa conscious, and if one further cultivates his Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa he certainly expands his good fortune by becoming perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and very easily going back home, back to Godhead. In many other places in the Vedic literature it is found that even the demigods want to come to this land of Bhārata-varṣa. A foolish person may desire to be promoted to the heavenly planets as a result of his pious activities, but even the demigods from the heavenly planets want to come to Bhārata-varṣa and achieve bodies that may be very easily used to cultivate Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu repeatedly says:



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra

[Cc. Ādi 9.41]





A human being born in the land of Bhārata-varṣa has the special prerogative to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Therefore those already born in Bhārata-varṣa should take lessons from the śāstras and guru and should fully take advantage of the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in order to be fully equipped with Kṛṣṇa consciousness. By taking full advantage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one goes back home, back to Godhead (yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām). The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore spreading this facility to human society by opening many, many centers all over the world so that people may associate with the pure devotees of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, understand the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and ultimately go back home, back to Godhead.





TEXTS 29–30



śrī-śuka uvāca

jambūdvīpasya ca rājann upadvīpān aṣṭau haika upadiśanti sagarātmajair aśvānveṣaṇa imāṁ mahīṁ parito nikhanadbhir upakalpitān; tad yathā svarṇaprasthaś candraśukla āvartano ramaṇako mandarahariṇaḥ pāñcajanyaḥ siṁhalo laṅketi.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; jambūdvīpasya-of the island known as Jambūdvīpa; ca-also; rājan-O King; upadvīpān aṣṭau-eight subordinate islands; ha-certainly; eke-some; upadiśanti-learned scholars describe; sagara-ātma-jaiḥ-by the sons of Mahārāja Sagara; aśva-anveṣaṇe-while trying to find their lost horse; imām-this; mahīm-tract of land; paritaḥ-all around; nikhanadbhiḥ-digging; upakalpitān-created; tat-that; yathā-as follows; svarṇa-prasthaḥ-Svarṇaprastha; candra-śuklaḥ-Candraśukla; āvartanaḥ-Āvartana; ramaṇakaḥ-Ramaṇaka; mandara-hariṇaḥ-Mandara-hariṇa; pāñcajanyaḥ-Pāñcajanya; siṁhalaḥ-Siṁhala; laṅkā-Laṅkā; iti-thus.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, in the opinion of some learned scholars, eight smaller islands surround Jambūdvīpa. When the sons of Mahārāja Sagara were searching all over the world for their lost horse, they dug up the earth, and in this way eight adjoining islands came into existence. The names of these islands are Svarṇaprastha, Candraśukla, Āvartana, Ramaṇaka, Mandara-hariṇa, Pāñcajanya, Siṁhala and Laṅkā.





In the Kūrma Purāṇa there is this statement about the desires of the demigods:



anadhikāriṇo devāḥ

svarga-sthā bhāratodbhavam

vāñchanty ātma-vimokṣārtha-

mudrekārthe 'dhikāriṇaḥ





Although the demigods are situated in exalted positions in the heavenly planets, they nevertheless desire to descend to the land of Bhārata-varṣa on the planet earth. This indicates that even the demigods are unfit to reside in Bhārata-varṣa. Therefore if persons already born in Bhāratavarṣa live like cats and dogs, not taking full advantage of their birth in this land, they are certainly unfortunate.





TEXT 31



evaṁ tava bhāratottama jambūdvīpa-varṣa-vibhāgo yathopadeśam upavarṇita iti.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; tava-unto you; bhārata-uttama-O best of the descendents of Bharata; jambūdvīpa-varṣa-vibhāgaḥ-the divisions of the island of Jambūdvīpa; yathā-upadeśam-as much as I am instructed by the authorities; upavarṇitaḥ-explained; iti-thus.





My dear King Parīkṣit, O best of the descendants of Bharata Mahārāja, I have thus described to you, as I myself have been instructed, the island of Bhārata-varṣa and its adjoining islands. These are the islands that constitute Jambūdvīpa.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "A Description of the Island of Jambūdvīpa."



Chapter Twenty



Studying the Structure of the Universe





In this chapter there is a description of various islands, beginning with Plakṣadvīpa, and the oceans that surround them. There is also a description of the location and dimensions of the mountain known as Lokāloka. The island of Plakṣadvīpa, which is twice as broad as Jambūdvīpa, is surrounded by an ocean of salt water. The master of this island is Idhmajihva, one of the sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata. The island is divided into seven regions, each with a mountain and a large river.





The second island is called Sālmalīdvīpa. It is surrounded by an ocean of liquor and is 3,200,000 miles wide, twice as wide as Plakṣadvīpa. The master of this island is Yajñabāhu, one of the sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata. Like Plakṣadvīpa, this island is also divided into seven regions, each with a mountain and a very large river. The inhabitants of this island worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Candrātmā.





The third island, which is surrounded by an ocean of clarified butter and is also divided into seven regions, is called Kuśadvīpa. Its master is Hiraṇyaretā, another son of Mahārāja Priyavrata, and its inhabitants worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Agni, the fire-god. The width of this island is 6,400,000 miles, or, in other words, twice the width of Sālmalīdvīpa.





The fourth island, Krauñcadvīpa, which is surrounded by an ocean of milk, is 12,800,000 miles wide and is also divided, like the others, into seven regions, each with a large mountain and a large river. The master of this island is Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, another son of Mahārāja Priyavrata. The inhabitants of this island worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of water.





The fifth island, Śākadvīpa, which is 25,600,000 miles wide, is surrounded by an ocean of yogurt. Its master is Medhātithi, another son of Mahārāja Priyavrata. It is also divided into seven regions, each with a large mountain and a large river. Its inhabitants worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Vāyu, air.





The sixth island, Puṣkaradvīpa, which is twice as wide as the previous island, is surrounded by an ocean of clear water. Its master is Vītihotra, another son of Mahārāja Priyavrata. The island is divided in two by a large mountain named Mānasottara. The inhabitants of this island worship Svayambhū, another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Beyond Puṣkaradvīpa there are two islands, one always lit by the sunshine and the other always dark. Between them is a mountain called Lokāloka, which is situated one billion miles from the edge of the universe. Lord Nārāyaṇa, expanding His opulence, resides upon this mountain. The area beyond Lokāloka Mountain is called Aloka-varṣa, and beyond Aloka-varṣa is the pure destination of persons who desire liberation.





Vertically, the sun-globe is situated just in the middle of the universe, in Antarikṣa, the space between Bhūrloka and Bhuvarloka. The distance between the sun and the circumference of Aṇḍa-golaka, the globe of the universe, is estimated to be twenty-five koṭi yojanas (two billion miles). Because the sun enters the universe and divides the sky, it is known as Mārtaṇḍa, and because it is produced from Hiraṇyagarbha, the body of the mahat-tattva, it is also called Hiraṇyagarbha.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

ataḥ paraṁ plakṣādīnāṁ pramāṇa-lakṣaṇa-saṁsthānato varṣa-vibhāga upavarṇyate.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ataḥ param-after this; plakṣa-ādīnām-of the island named Plakṣa and others; pramāṇa-lakṣaṇa-saṁsthānataḥ-from the angle of dimensions, particular characteristics and form; varṣa-vibhāgaḥ-the division of the island; upavarṇyate-is described.





The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hereafter I shall describe the dimensions, characteristics and forms of the six islands beginning with the island of Plakṣa.





TEXT 2



jambūdvīpo 'yaṁ yāvat-pramāṇa-vistāras tāvatā kṣārodadhinā pariveṣṭito yathā merur jambv-ākhyena lavaṇodadhir api tato dvi-guṇa-viśālena plakṣākhyena parikṣipto yathā parikhā bāhyopavanena; plakṣo jambū-pramāṇo dvīpākhyākaro hiraṇmaya utthito yatrāgnir upāste sapta-jihvas tasyādhipatiḥ priyavratātmaja idhmajihvaḥ svaṁ dvīpaṁ sapta-varṣāṇi vibhajya sapta-varṣa-nāmabhya ātmajebhya ākalayya svayam ātma-yogenopararāma.



SYNONYMS



jambū-dvīpaḥ-Jambūdvīpa, the island named Jambū; ayam-this; yāvat-pramāṇa-vistāraḥ-as much as the measure of its width, namely 100,000 yojanas (one yojana equals eight miles); tāvatā-so much; kṣāra-udadhinā-by the ocean of salt water; pariveṣṭitaḥ-surrounded; yathā-just as; meruḥ-Sumeru Mountain; jambū-ākhyena-by the island named Jambū; lavaṇa-udadhiḥ-the ocean of salt water; api-certainly; tataḥ-thereafter; dvi-guṇa-viśālena-which is twice as wide; plakṣa-ākhyena-by the island named Plakṣa; parikṣiptaḥ-surrounded; yathā-like; parikhā-a moat; bāhya-external; upavanena-by a gardenlike forest; plakṣaḥ-a plakṣa tree; jambū-pramāṇaḥ-having the height of the jambū tree; dvīpa-ākhyā-karaḥ-causing the name of the island; hiraṇmayaḥ-magnificently splendorous; utthitaḥ-rising; yatra-where; agniḥ-a fire; upāste-is situated; sapta-jihvaḥ-having seven flames; tasya-of that island; adhipatiḥ-the king or master; priyavrata-ātmajaḥ-the son of King Priyavrata; idhma-jihvaḥ-named Idhmajihva; svam-own; dvīpam-island; sapta-seven; varṣāṇi-tracts of land; vibhajya-dividing into; sapta-varṣa-nāmabhyaḥ-for whom the seven tracts of land were named; ātmajebhyaḥ-to his own sons; ākalayya-offering; svayam-personally; ātma-yogena-by the devotional service of the Lord; upararāma-he retired from all material activities.





As Sumeru Mountain is surrounded by Jambūdvīpa, Jambūdvīpa is also surrounded by an ocean of salt water. The breadth of Jambūdvīpa is 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles], and the breadth of the saltwater ocean is the same. As a moat around a fort is sometimes surrounded by gardenlike forest, the saltwater ocean surrounding Jambūdvīpa is itself surrounded by Plakṣadvīpa. The breadth of Plakṣadvīpa is twice that of the saltwater ocean-in other words 260,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles]. On Plakṣadvīpa there is a tree shining like gold and as tall as the jambū tree on Jambūdvīpa. At its root is a fire with seven flames. It is because this tree is a plakṣa tree that the island is called Plakṣadvīpa. Plakṣadvīpa was governed by Idhmajihva, one of the sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata. He endowed the seven islands with the names of his seven sons, divided the islands among the sons, and then retired from active life to engage in the devotional service of the Lord.





TEXTS 3–4



śivaṁ yavasaṁ subhadraṁ śāntaṁ kṣemam amṛtam abhayam iti varṣāṇi teṣu girayo nadyaś ca saptaivābhijñātāḥ; maṇikūṭo vajrakūṭa indraseno jyotiṣmān suparṇo hiraṇyaṣṭhīvo meghamāla iti setu-śailāḥ aruṇā nṛmṇāṅgirasī sāvitrī suptabhātā ṛtambharā satyambharā iti mahā-nadyaḥ; yāsāṁ jalopasparśana-vidhūta-rajas-tamaso haṁsa-pataṅgordhvāyana-satyāṅga-saṁjñāś catvāro varṇāḥ sahasrāyuṣo vibudhopama-sandarśana-prajananāḥ svarga-dvāraṁ trayyā vidyayā bhagavantaṁ trayīmayaṁ sūryam ātmānaṁ yajante.



SYNONYMS



śivam-Śiva; yavasam-Yavasa; subhadram-Subhadra; śāntam-Śānta; kṣemam-Kṣema; amṛtam-Amṛta; abhayam-Abhaya; iti-thus; varṣāṇi-the tracts of land according to the names of the seven sons; teṣu-in them; girayaḥ-mountains; nadyaḥ ca-and rivers; sapta-seven; eva-indeed; abhijñātāḥ-are known; maṇi-kūṭaḥ-Maṇikūṭa; vajra-kūṭaḥ-Vajrakūṭa; indra-senaḥ-Indrasena; jyotiṣmān-Jyotiṣmān; suparṇaḥ-Suparṇa; hiraṇya-ṣṭhīvaḥ-Hiraṇyaṣṭhīva; megha-mālaḥ-Meghamāla; iti-thus; setu-śailāḥ-the ranges of mountains marking the borders of the varṣas; aruṇā-Aruṇā; nṛmṇā-Nṛmṇā; āṅgirasī-Āṅgirasī; sāvitrī-Sāvitrī; supta-bhātā-Suptabhātā; ṛtambharā-Ṛtambharā; satyambharā-Satyambharā; iti-thus; mahā-nadyaḥ-very large rivers; yāsām-of which; jala-upasparśana-simply by touching the water; vidhūta-washed off; rajaḥ-tamasaḥ-whose modes of passion and ignorance; haṁsa-Haṁsa; pataṅga-Pataṅga; ūrdhvāyana-Ūrdhvāyana; satyāṅga-Satyāṅga; saṁjñāḥ-named; catvāraḥ-four; varṇāḥ-castes or divisions of men; sahasra-āyuṣaḥ-living for one thousand years; vibudha-upama-similar to the demigods; sandarśana-in having very beautiful forms; prajananāḥ-and in producing children; svarga-dvāram-the gateway to the heavenly planets; trayyā vidyayā-by performing ritualistic ceremonies according to Vedic principles; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; trayī-mayam-established in the Vedas; sūryam ātmānam-the Supersoul, represented by the sun-god; yajante-they worship.





The seven islands [varṣas] are named according to the names of those seven sons-Śiva, Yavasa, Subhadra, Śānta, Kṣema, Amṛta and Abhaya. In those seven tracts of land, there are seven mountains and seven rivers. The mountains are named Maṇikūṭa, Vajrakūṭa, Indrasena, Jyotiṣmān, Suparṇa, Hiraṇyaṣṭhīva and Meghamāla, and the rivers are named Aruṇā, Nṛmṇā, Āṅgirasī, Sāvitrī, Suptabhātā, Ṛtambharā and Satyambharā. One can immediately be free from material contamination by touching or bathing in those rivers, and the four castes of people who live in Plakṣadvīpa-the Haṁsas, Pataṅgas, Ūrdhvāyanas and Satyāṅgas-purify themselves in that way. The inhabitants of Plakṣadvīpa live for one thousand years. They are beautiful like the demigods, and they also beget children like the demigods. By completely performing the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas and by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead as represented by the sun-god, they attain the sun, which is a heavenly planet.





According to general understanding, there are originally three deities-Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Śiva-and people with a poor fund of knowledge consider Lord Viṣṇu no better than Lord Brahmā or Lord Śiva. This conclusion, however, is invalid. As stated in the Vedas, iṣṭāpūrtaṁ bahudhā jāyamānaṁ viśvaṁ bibharti bhuvanasya nābhiḥ tad evāgnis tad vāyus tat sūryas tad u candramāḥ agniḥ sarvadaivataḥ. This means that the Supreme Lord, who accepts and enjoys the results of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies (technically called iṣṭāpūrta), who maintains the entire creation, who supplies the necessities of all living entities (eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān) and who is the central point of all creation, is Lord Viṣṇu. Lord Viṣṇu expands as the demigods known as Agni, Vāyu, Sūrya and Candra, who are simply parts and parcels of His body. Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (9.23):



ye 'py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te 'pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam





"Devotees who worship the demigods with firm faith worship Me also, but not according to regulative principles." In other words, if one worships the demigods but does not understand the relationship between the demigods and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his worship is irregular. Kṛṣṇa also says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.24), ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca: "I am the only enjoyer of ritualistic ceremonies."



It may be argued that the demigods are as important as Lord Viṣṇu because the names of the demigods are different names of Viṣṇu. This, however, is not a sound conclusion, for it is contradicted in the Vedic literatures. The Vedas declare:



candramā manaso jātaś cakṣoḥ sūryo ajāyata; śrotrādayaś ca prāṇaś ca mukhād agnir ajāyata; nārāyaṇād brahmā, nārāyaṇād rudro jāyate, nārāyaṇāt prajāpatiḥ jāyate, nārāyaṇād indro jāyate, nārāyaṇād aṣṭau vasavo jāyante, nārāyaṇād ekādaśa rudrā jāyante.

"The demigod of the moon, Candra, came from the mind of Nārāyaṇa, and the sun-god came from His eyes. The controlling deities of hearing and the life air came from Nārāyaṇa, and the controlling deity of fire was generated from His mouth. Prajāpati, Lord Brahmā, came from Nārāyaṇa, Indra came from Nārāyaṇa, and the eight Vasus, the eleven expansions of Lord Śiva and the twelve Ādityas also came from Nārāyaṇa." In the smṛti Vedic literature it is also said:



brahmā śambhus tathaivārkaś

candramāś ca śatakratuḥ

evam ādyās tathaivānye

yuktā vaiṣṇava-tejasā





jagat-kāryāvasāne tu

viyujyante ca tejasā

vitejaś ca te sarve

pañcatvam upayānti te





"Brahmā, Śambhu, Sūrya and Indra are all merely products of the power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also true of the many other demigods whose names are not mentioned here. When the cosmic manifestation is annihilated, these different expansions of Nārāyaṇa's potencies will merge into Nārāyaṇa. In other words, all these demigods will die. Their living force will be withdrawn, and they will merge into Nārāyaṇa."



Therefore it should be concluded that Lord Viṣṇu, not Lord Brahmā or Lord Śiva, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As a government officer is sometimes accepted as the entire government although he is actually but a departmental manager, so the demigods, having achieved power of attorney from Viṣṇu, act on His behalf, although they are not as powerful as He. All the demigods must work under the orders of Viṣṇu. Therefore it is said, ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya. The only master is Lord Kṛṣṇa, or Lord Viṣṇu, and all others are His obedient servants, who act exactly according to His orders. The distinction between Lord Viṣṇu and the demigods is also expressed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.25). Yānti deva-vratā devān. .. yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām: those who worship the demigods go to the planets of the demigods, whereas the worshipers of Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Viṣṇu go to the planets in Vaikuṇṭha. These are the statements of the smṛti. Therefore the idea that Lord Viṣṇu is on the same level as the demigods is in contradiction to the śāstras. The demigods are not supreme. The supremacy of the demigods is dependent on the mercy of Lord Nārāyaṇa (Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa).





TEXT 5



pratnasya viṣṇo rūpaṁ yat

satyasyartasya brahmaṇaḥ

amṛtasya ca mṛtyoś ca

sūryam ātmānam īmahīti

SYNONYMS



pratnasya-of the oldest person; viṣṇoḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; rūpam-the form; yat-which; satyasya-of the Absolute Truth; ṛtasya-of dharma; brahmaṇaḥ-of the Supreme Brahman; amṛtasya-of the auspicious result; ca-and; mṛtyoḥ-of death (the inauspicious result); ca-and; sūryam-the demigod Sūrya; ātmānam-the Supersoul or origin of all souls; īmahi-we approach for shelter; iti-thus.





[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of Plakṣadvīpa worship the Supreme Lord.] Let us take shelter of the sun-god, who is a reflection of Lord Viṣṇu, the all-expanding Supreme Personality of Godhead, the oldest of all persons. Viṣṇu is the only worshipable Lord. He is the Vedas, He is religion, and He is the origin of all auspicious and inauspicious results.





Lord Viṣṇu is even the Supreme Lord of death, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham). There are two kinds of activity-auspicious and inauspicious-and both are controlled by Lord Viṣṇu. Inauspicious activities are said to be behind Lord Viṣṇu, whereas auspicious activities stand before Him. The auspicious and the inauspicious exist throughout the entire world, and Lord Viṣṇu is the controller of them both.



In regard to this verse, Śrīla Madhvācārya says:



sūrya-somāgni-vārīśa-

vidhātṛṣu yathā-kramam

plakṣādi-dvīpa-saṁsthāsu

sthitaṁ harim upāsate





There are many lands, fields, mountains and oceans throughout the creation, and everywhere the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by His different names.



Śrīla Vīrarāghava Ācārya explains this verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as follows. The original cause of the cosmic manifestation must be the oldest person and must therefore be beyond material transformations. He is the enjoyer of all auspicious activities and is the cause of conditional life and also liberation. The demigod Sūrya, who is categorized as a very powerful jīva, or living entity, is a representation of one of the parts of His body. We are naturally subordinate to powerful living entities, and therefore we can worship the various demigods as living beings who are powerful representatives of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although the worship of the sun-god is recommended in this mantra, He is worshiped not as the Supreme Personality of Godhead but as His powerful representative.



In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.3.1) it is said:



ṛtaṁ pibantau sukṛtasya loke

guhāṁ praviṣṭau parame parārdhe

chāyātapau brahmavido vadanti

pañcāgnayo ye ca tri-ṇāciketāḥ





"O Nāciketā, the expansions of Lord Viṣṇu as the tiny living entity and the Supersoul are both situated within the cave of the heart of this body. Having entered that cavity, the living entity, resting on the chief of the life airs, enjoys the results of activities, and the Supersoul, acting as witness enables him to enjoy them. Those who are well-versed in knowledge of Brahman and those householders who carefully follow the Vedic regulations say that the difference between the two is like the difference between a shadow and the sun."



In the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.16) it is said:



sa viśvakṛd viśvavidātmayoniḥ

jñaḥ kālākāro guṇī sarvavid yaḥ

pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ

saṁsāra-mokṣa-sthiti-bandha-hetuḥ





"The Supreme Lord, the creator of this cosmic manifestation, knows every nook and corner of His creation. Although He is the cause of creation, there is no cause for His appearance. He is fully aware of everything. He is the Supersoul, the master of all transcendental qualities, and He is the master of this cosmic manifestation in regard to bondage to the conditional state of material existence and liberation from that bondage."



Similarly, in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.8) it is said:



bhīṣāsmād vātaḥ pavate

bhīṣodeti sūryaḥ

bhīṣāsmād agniś candraś ca

mṛtyur dhāvati pañcamaḥ





"It is out of fear of the Supreme Brahman that the wind is blowing, out of fear of Him that the sun regularly rises and sets, and out of fear of Him that fire acts. It is only due to fear of Him that death and Indra, the King of heaven, perform their respective duties."



As described in this chapter, the inhabitants of the five islands beginning with Plakṣadvīpa worship the sun-god, the moon-god, the fire-god, the air-god and Lord Brahmā respectively. Although they engage in the worship of these five demigods, however, they actually worship Lord Viṣṇu, the Supersoul of all living entities, as indicated in this verse by the words pratnasya viṣṇo rūpam. Viṣṇu is brahma, amṛta, mṛtyu-the Supreme Brahman and the origin of everything, auspicious and inauspicious. He is situated in the heart of everyone, including all the demigods. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.20), kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya devatāḥ: those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto the demigods. People who are almost blind because of lusty desires are recommended to worship the demigods to have their material desires fulfilled, but actually those desires are not fulfilled by the material demigods. Whatever the demigods do is done with the sanction of Lord Viṣṇu. People who are too lusty worship various demigods instead of worshiping Lord Viṣṇu, the Supersoul of all living entities, but ultimately it is Lord Viṣṇu they worship because He is the Supersoul of all demigods.





TEXT 6



plakṣādiṣu pañcasu puruṣāṇām āyur indriyam ojaḥ saho balaṁ buddhir vikrama iti ca sarveṣām autpattikī siddhir aviśeṣeṇa vartate.



SYNONYMS



plakṣa-ādiṣu-in the islands headed by Plakṣa; pañcasu-five; puruṣāṇām-of the inhabitants; āyuḥ-long duration of life; indriyam-soundness of the senses; ojaḥ-bodily strength; sahaḥ-mental strength; balam-physical strength; buddhiḥ-intelligence; vikramaḥ-bravery; iti-thus; ca-also; sarveṣām-of all of them; autpattikī-inborn; siddhiḥ-perfection; aviśeṣeṇa-without distinction; vartate-exists.





O King, longevity, sensory prowess, physical and mental strength, intelligence and bravery are naturally and equally manifested in all the inhabitants of the five islands headed by Plakṣadvīpa.





TEXT 7



plakṣaḥ sva-samānenekṣu-rasodenāvṛto yathā tathā dvīpo 'pi śālmalo dvi-guṇa-viśālaḥ samānena surodenāvṛtaḥ parivṛṅkte.



SYNONYMS



plakṣaḥ-the land known as Plakṣadvīpa; sva-samānena-equal in width; ikṣu-rasa-of sugarcane juice; udena-by an ocean; āvṛtaḥ-surrounded; yathā-just as; tathā-similarly; dvīpaḥ-another island; api-also; śālmalaḥ-known as Śālmala; dvi-guṇa-viśālaḥ-twice as big; samānena-equal in width; surā-udena-by an ocean of liquor; āvṛtaḥ-surrounded; parivṛṅkte-exists.





Plakṣadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean of sugarcane juice, equal in breadth to the island itself. Similarly, there is then another island-Sālmalīdvīpa-twice as broad as Plakṣadvīpa [400,000 yojanas, or 3,200,000 miles] and surrounded by an equally broad body of water called Surāsāgara, the ocean that tastes like liquor.





TEXT 8



yatra ha vai śālmalī plakṣāyāmā yasyāṁ vāva kila nilayam āhur bhagavataś chandaḥ-stutaḥ patattri-rājasya sā dvīpa-hūtaye upalakṣyate.



SYNONYMS



yatra-where; ha vai-certainly; śālmalī-a śālmalī tree; plakṣa-āyāmā-as big as the plakṣa tree (one hundred yojanas broad and eleven hundred yojanas high); yasyām-in which; vāva kila-indeed; nilayam-rest or living place; āhuḥ-they say; bhagavataḥ-of the most powerful; chandaḥ-stutaḥ-who worships the Lord by Vedic prayers; patattri-rājasya-of Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu; sā-that tree; dvīpa-hūtaye-for the name of the island; upalakṣyate-is distinguished.





On Sālmalīdvīpa there is a śālmalī tree, from which the island takes its name. That tree is as broad and tall as the plakṣa tree-in other words 100 yojanas [800 miles] broad and 1,100 yojanas [8,800 miles] tall. Learned scholars say that this gigantic tree is the residence of Garuḍa, the king of all birds and carrier of Lord Viṣṇu. In that tree, Garuḍa offers Lord Viṣṇu his Vedic prayers.





TEXT 9



tad-dvīpādhipatiḥ priyavratātmajo yajñabāhuḥ sva-sutebhyaḥ saptabhyas tan-nāmāni sapta-varṣāṇi vyabhajat surocanaṁ saumanasyaṁ ramaṇakaṁ deva-varṣaṁ pāribhadram āpyāyanam avijñātam iti.



SYNONYMS



tat-dvīpa-adhipatiḥ-the master of that island; priyavrata-ātmajaḥ-the son of Mahārāja Priyavrata; yajña-bāhuḥ-named Yajñabāhu; sva-sutebhyaḥ-unto his sons; saptabhyaḥ-seven in number; tat-nāmāni-having names according to their names; sapta-varṣāṇi-seven tracts of land; vyabhajat-divided; surocanam-Surocana; saumanasyam-Saumanasya; ramaṇakam-Ramaṇaka; deva-varṣam-Deva-varṣa; pāribhadram-Pāribhadra; āpyāyanam-Āpyāyana; avijñātam-Avijñāta; iti-thus.





The son of Mahārāja Priyavrata named Yajñabāhu, the master of Sālmalīdvīpa, divided the island into seven tracts of land, which he gave to his seven sons. The names of those divisions, which correspond to the names of the sons, are Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramaṇaka, Deva-varṣa, Pāribhadra, Āpyāyana and Avijñāta.





TEXT 10



teṣu varṣādrayo nadyaś ca saptaivābhijñātāḥ svarasaḥ śataśṛṅgo vāmadevaḥ kundo mukundaḥ puṣpa-varṣaḥ sahasra-śrutir iti; anumatiḥ sinīvālī sarasvatī kuhū rajanī nandā rāketi.



SYNONYMS



teṣu-in those tracts of land; varṣa-adrayaḥ-mountains; nadyaḥ ca-as well as rivers; sapta eva-seven in number; abhijñātāḥ-understood; svarasaḥ-Svarasa; śata-śṛṅgaḥ-Śataśṛṅga; vāma-devaḥ-Vāmadeva; kundaḥ-Kunda; mukundaḥ-Mukunda; puṣpa-varṣaḥ-Puṣpa-varṣa; sahasra-śrutiḥ-Sahasra-śruti; iti-thus; anumatiḥ-Anumati; sinīvālī-Sinīvālī; sarasvatī-Sarasvatī; kuhū-Kuhū; rajanī-Rajanī; nandā-Nandā; rākā-Rākā; iti-thus.





In those tracts of land there are seven mountains-Svarasa, Śataśṛṅga, Vāmadeva, Kunda, Mukunda, Puṣpa-varṣa and Sahasra-śruti. There are also seven rivers-Anumati, Sinīvālī, Sarasvatī, Kuhū, Rajanī, Nandā and Rākā. They are still existing.





TEXT 11



tad-varṣa-puruṣāḥ śrutadhara-vīryadhara-vasundhareṣandhara-saṁjñā bhagavantaṁ vedamayaṁ somam ātmānaṁ vedena yajante.



SYNONYMS



tat-varṣa-puruṣāḥ-the residents of those tracts of land; śrutadhara-Śrutadhara; vīryadhara-Vīryadhara; vasundhara-Vasundhara; iṣandhara-Iṣandhara; saṁjñāḥ-known as; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; veda-mayam-fully conversant with the Vedic knowledge; somam ātmānam-represented by the living entity known as Soma; vedena-by following the Vedic rules and regulations; yajante-they worship.





Strictly following the cult of varṇāśrama-dharma, the inhabitants of those islands, who are known as Śrutidharas, Vīryadharas, Vasundharas and Iṣandharas, all worship the expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead named Soma, the moon-god.





TEXT 12



sva-gobhiḥ pitṛ-devebhyo

vibhajan kṛṣṇa-śuklayoḥ

prajānāṁ sarvāsāṁ rājā-

ndhaḥ somo na āstv iti

SYNONYMS



sva-gobhiḥ-by expansion of his own illuminating rays; pitṛ-devebhyaḥ-unto the pitās and the demigods; vibhajan-dividing; kṛṣṇa-śuklayoḥ-into the two fortnights, dark and light; prajānām-of the citizens; sarvāsām-of all; rājā-the king; andhaḥ-food grains; somaḥ-the moon-god; naḥ-toward us; āstu-let him remain favorable; iti-thus.





[The inhabitants of Śālmalīdvīpa worship the demigod of the moon in the following words.] By his own rays, the moon-god has divided the month into two fortnights, known as śukla and kṛṣṇa, for the distribution of food grains to the pitās and the demigods. The demigod of the moon is he who divides time, and he is the king of all the residents of the universe. We therefore pray that he may remain our king and guide, and we offer him our respectful obeisances.





TEXT 13



evaṁ surodād bahis tad-dvi-guṇaḥ samānenāvṛto ghṛtodena yathā-pūrvaḥ kuśa-dvīpo yasmin kuśa-stambo deva-kṛtas tad-dvīpākhyākaro jvalana ivāparaḥ sva-śaṣpa-rociṣā diśo virājayati.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; surodāt-from the ocean of liquor; bahiḥ-outside; tat-dvi-guṇaḥ-twice that; samānena-equal in width; āvṛtaḥ-surrounded; ghṛta-udena-an ocean of clarified butter; yathā-pūrvaḥ-as previously with Sālmalīdvīpa; kuśa-dvīpa-the island called Kuśadvīpa; yasmin-in which; kuśa-stambaḥ-kuśa grass; deva-kṛtaḥ-created by the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-dvīpa-ākhyā-karaḥ-giving the island its name; jvalanaḥ-fire; iva-like; aparaḥ-another; sva-śaṣpa-rociṣā-by the effulgence of the young sprouting grass; diśaḥ-all directions; virājayati-illuminates.





Outside the ocean of liquor is another island, known as Kuśadvīpa, which is 800,000 yojanas [6,400,000 miles] wide, twice as wide as the ocean of liquor. As Śālmalīdvīpa is surrounded by a liquor ocean, Kuśadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean of liquid ghee as broad as the island itself. On Kuśadvīpa there are clumps of kuśa grass, from which the island takes its name. This kuśa grass, which was created by the demigods by the will of the Supreme Lord, appears like a second form of fire, but with very mild and pleasing flames. Its young shoots illuminate all directions.





From the descriptions in this verse, we can make an educated guess about the nature of the flames on the moon. Like the sun, the moon must also be full of flames because without flames there cannot be illumination. The flames on the moon, however, unlike those on the sun, must be mild and pleasing. This is our conviction. The modern theory that the moon is full of dust is not accepted in the verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In regard to this verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, suśaṣpāṇi sukomala-śikhās teṣāṁ rociṣā: the kuśa grass illuminates all directions, but its flames are very mild and pleasing. This gives some idea of the flames existing on the moon.





TEXT 14



tad-dvīpa-patiḥ praiyavrato rājan hiraṇyaretā nāma svaṁ dvīpaṁ saptabhyaḥ sva-putrebhyo yathā-bhāgaṁ vibhajya svayaṁ tapa ātiṣṭhata vasu-vasudāna-dṛḍharuci-nābhigupta-stutyavrata-vivikta-vāmadeva-nāmabhyaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tat-dvīpa-patiḥ-the master of that island; praiyavrataḥ-the son of Mahārāja Priyavrata; rājan-O King; hiraṇyaretā-Hiraṇyaretā; nāma-named; svam-his own; dvīpam-island; saptabhyaḥ-unto seven; sva-putrebhyaḥ-his own sons; yathā-bhāgam-according to division; vibhajya-dividing; svayam-himself; tapaḥ ātiṣṭhata-engaged in austerities; vasu-unto Vasu; vasudāna-Vasudāna; dṛḍharuci-Dṛḍharuci; nābhi-gupta-Nābhigupta; stutya-vrata-Stutyavrata; vivikta-Vivikta; vāma-deva-Vāmadeva; nāmabhyaḥ-named.





O King, another son of Mahārāja Priyavrata, Hiraṇyaretā, was the king of this island. He divided it into seven parts, which he delivered to his seven sons according to the rights of inheritance. The King then retired from family life to engage in austerities. The names of those sons are Vasu, Vasudāna, Dṛḍharuci, Stutyavrata, Nābhigupta, Vivikta and Vāmadeva.





TEXT 15



teṣāṁ varṣeṣu sīmā-girayo nadyaś cābhijñātāḥ sapta saptaiva cakraś catuḥśṛṅgaḥ kapilaś citrakūṭo devānīka ūrdhvaromā draviṇa iti rasakulyā madhukulyā mitravindā śrutavindā devagarbhā ghṛtacyutā mantramāleti.



SYNONYMS



teṣām-all those sons; varṣeṣu-in the tracts of land; sīmā-girayaḥ-border mountains; nadyaḥ ca-as well as rivers; abhijñātāḥ-known; sapta-seven; sapta-seven; eva-certainly; cakraḥ-Cakra; catuḥ-śṛṅgaḥ-Catuḥ-śṛṅga; kapilaḥ-Kapila; citra-kūṭaḥ-Citrakūṭa; devānīkaḥ-Devānīka; ūrdhva-romā-Ūrdhvaromā; draviṇaḥ-Draviṇa; iti-thus; rasa-kulyā-Ramakulyā; madhu-kulyā-Madhukulyā; mitra-vindā-Mitravindā; śruta-vindā-Śrutavindā; deva-garbhā-Devagarbhā; ghṛta-cyutā-Ghṛtacyutā; mantra-mālā-Mantramālā; iti-thus.





In those seven islands there are seven boundary mountains, known as Cakra, Catuḥśṛṅga, Kapila, Citrakūṭa, Devānīka, Ūrdhvaromā and Draviṇa. There are also seven rivers, known as Ramakulyā, Madhukulyā, Mitravindā, Śrutavindā, Devagarbhā, Ghṛtacyutā and Mantramālā.





TEXT 16



yāsāṁ payobhiḥ kuśadvīpaukasaḥ kuśala-kovidābhiyukta-kulaka-saṁjñā bhagavantaṁ jātaveda-sarūpiṇaṁ karma-kauśalena yajante.



SYNONYMS



yāsām-of which; payobhiḥ-by the water; kuśa-dvīpa-okasaḥ-the inhabitants of the island known as Kuśadvīpa; kuśala-Kuśala; kovida-Kovida; abhiyukta-Abhiyukta; kulaka-Kulaka; saṁjñāḥ-named; bhagavantam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jātaveda-the demigod of fire; sa-rūpiṇam-manifesting the form; karma-kauśalena-by expertise in ritualistic ceremonies; yajante-they worship.





The inhabitants of the island of Kuśadvīpa are celebrated as the Kuśalas, Kovidas, Abhiyuktas and Kulakas. They are like the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras respectively. By bathing in the waters of those rivers, they all become purified. They are expert in performing ritualistic ceremonies according to the orders of the Vedic scriptures. Thus they worship the Lord in His aspect as the demigod of fire.





TEXT 17



parasya brahmaṇaḥ sākṣāj

jāta-vedo 'si havyavāṭ

devānāṁ puruṣāṅgānāṁ

yajñena puruṣaṁ yajeti

SYNONYMS



parasya-of the Supreme; brahmaṇaḥ-Brahman; sākṣāt-directly; jāta-vedaḥ-O fire-god; asi-you are; havyavāṭ-the carrier of Vedic offerings of grains and ghee; devānām-of all the demigods; puruṣa-aṅgānām-who are limbs of the Supreme Person; yajñena-by performing the ritualistic sacrifices; puruṣam-to the Supreme person; yaja-please carry oblations; iti-thus.





[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of Kuśadvīpa worship the fire-god.] O fire-god, you are a part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, and you carry to Him all the offerings of sacrifices. Therefore we request you to offer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead the yajñic ingredients we are offering the demigods, for the Lord is the real enjoyer.





The demigods are servants who assist the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one worships the demigods, the demigods, as servants of the Supreme, carry the sacrificial offerings to the Lord, like tax collectors collecting revenue from the citizens and bringing it to the government's treasury. The demigods cannot accept the sacrificial offerings; they simply carry the offerings to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ: ** since the guru is a representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he carries to the Lord whatever is offered to him. Similarly, all the demigods, as faithful servants of the Supreme Lord, hand over to the Supreme Lord whatever is offered to them in sacrificial performances. There is no fault in worshiping the demigods with this understanding, but to think that the demigods are independent of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and equal to Him is called hṛta-jñāna, a loss of intelligence (kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ [Bg. 7.20]). One who thinks that the demigods themselves are the actual benefactors is mistaken.





TEXT 18



tathā ghṛtodād bahiḥ krauñcadvīpo dvi-guṇaḥ sva-mānena kṣīrodena parita upakḷpto vṛto yathā kuśadvīpo ghṛtodena yasmin krauñco nāma parvata-rājo dvīpa-nāma-nirvartaka āste.



SYNONYMS



tathā-so also; ghṛta-udāt-from the ocean of clarified butter; bahiḥ-outside; krauñca-dvīpaḥ-another island, known as Krauñcadvīpa; dvi-guṇaḥ-twice as big; sva-mānena-as the same measurement; kṣīra-udena-by an ocean of milk; paritaḥ-all around; upakḷptaḥ-surrounded; vṛtaḥ-surrounded; yathā-like; kuśa-dvīpaḥ-the island known as Kuśadvīpa; ghṛta-udena-by an ocean of clarified butter; yasmin-in which; krauñcaḥ nāma-named Krauñca; parvata-rājaḥ-a king of mountains; dvīpa-nāma-the name of the island; nirvartakaḥ-bringing about; āste-exists.





Outside the ocean of clarified butter is another island, known as Krauñcadvīpa, which has a width of 1,600,000 yojanas [12,800,000 miles], twice the width of the ocean of clarified butter. As Kuśadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean of clarified butter, Krauñcadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean of milk as broad as the island itself. On Krauñcadvīpa there is a great mountain known as Krauñca, from which the island takes its name.





TEXT 19



yo 'sau guha-praharaṇonmathita-nitamba-kuñjo 'pi kṣīrodenā-sicyamāno bhagavatā varuṇenābhigupto vibhayo babhūva.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-which; asau-that (mountain); guha-praharaṇa-by the weapons of Kārttikeya, the son of Lord Śiva; unmathita-shaken; nitamba-kuñjaḥ-whose trees and vegetables along the slopes; api-although; kṣīra-udena-by the ocean of milk; āsicyamānaḥ-being always bathed; bhagavatā-by the greatly powerful; varuṇena-the demigod known as Varuṇa; abhiguptaḥ-protected; vibhayaḥ babhūva-has become fearless.





Although the vegetables living on the slopes of Mount Krauñca were attacked and devastated by the weapons of Kārttikeya, the mountain has become fearless because it is always bathed on all sides by the ocean of milk and protected by Varuṇadeva.





TEXT 20



tasminn api praiyavrato ghṛtapṛṣṭho nāmādhipatiḥ sve dvīpe varṣāṇi sapta vibhajya teṣu putra-nāmasu sapta rikthādān varṣapān niveśya svayaṁ bhagavān bhagavataḥ parama-kalyāṇa-yaśasa ātma-bhūtasya hareś caraṇāravindam upajagāma.



SYNONYMS



tasmin-in that island; api-also; praiyavrataḥ-the son of Mahārāja Priyavrata; ghṛta-pṛṣṭhaḥ-Ghṛtapṛṣṭha; nāma-named; adhipatiḥ-the king of that island; sve-his own; dvīpe-in the island; varṣāṇi-tracts of land; sapta-seven; vibhajya-dividing; teṣu-in each of them; putra-nāmasu-possessing the names of his sons; sapta-seven; rikthā-dān-sons; varṣa-pān-the masters of the varṣas; niveśya-appointing; svayam-himself; bhagavān-very powerful; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parama-kalyāṇa-yaśasaḥ-whose glories are so auspicious; ātma-bhūtasya-the soul of all souls; hareḥ caraṇa-aravindam-the lotus feet of the Lord; upajagāma-took shelter at.





The ruler of this island was another son of Mahārāja Priyavrata. His name was Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, and he was a very learned scholar. He also divided his own island among his seven sons. After dividing the island into seven parts, named according to the names of his sons, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha Mahārāja completely retired from family life and took shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, the soul of all souls, who has all auspicious qualities. Thus he attained perfection.





TEXT 21



āmo madhuruho meghapṛṣṭhaḥ sudhāmā bhrājiṣṭho lohitārṇo vanaspatir iti ghṛtapṛṣṭha-sutās teṣāṁ varṣa-girayaḥ sapta saptaiva nadyaś cābhikhyātāḥ śuklo vardhamāno bhojana upabarhiṇo nando nandanaḥ sarvatobhadra iti abhayā amṛtaughā āryakā tīrthavatī rūpavatī pavitravatī śukleti.



SYNONYMS



āmaḥ-Āma; madhu-ruhaḥ-Madhuruha; megha-pṛṣṭhaḥ-Meghapṛṣṭha; sudhāmā-Sudhāmā; bhrājiṣṭhaḥ-Bhrājiṣṭha; lohitārṇaḥ-Lohitārṇa; vanaspatiḥ-Vanaspati; iti-thus; ghṛtapṛṣṭha-sutāḥ-the sons of Ghṛtapṛṣṭha; teṣām-of those sons; varṣa-girayaḥ-boundary hills of the tracts of land; sapta-seven; sapta-seven; eva-also; nadyaḥ-rivers; ca-and; abhikhyātāḥ-celebrated; śuklaḥ vardhamānaḥ-Śukla and Vardhamāna; bhojanaḥ-Bhojana; upabarhiṇaḥ-Upabarhiṇa; nandaḥ-Nanda; nandanaḥ-Nandana; sarvataḥ-bhadraḥ-Sarvatobhadra; iti-thus; abhayā-Abhayā; amṛtaughā-Amṛtaughā; āryakā-Āryakā; tīrthavatī-Tīrthavatī; rūpavatī-Rūpavatī; pavitravatī-Pavitravatī; śuklā-Śuklā; iti-thus.





The sons of Mahārāja Ghṛtapṛṣṭha were named Āma, Madhuruha, Meghapṛṣṭha, Sudhāmā, Bhrājiṣṭha, Lohitārṇa and Vanaspati. In their island there are seven mountains, which indicate the boundaries of the seven tracts of land, and there are also seven rivers. The mountains are named Śukla, Vardhamāna, Bhojana, Upabarhiṇa, Nanda, Nandana and Sarvatobhadra. The rivers are named Abhayā, Amṛtaughā, Āryakā, Tīrthavatī, Rūpavatī, Pavitravatī and Śuklā.





TEXT 22



yāsām ambhaḥ pavitram amalam upayuñjānāḥ puruṣa-ṛṣabha-draviṇa-devaka-saṁjñā varṣa-puruṣā āpomayaṁ devam apāṁ pūrṇenāñjalinā yajante.



SYNONYMS



yāsām-of all the rivers; ambhaḥ-the water; pavitram-very sanctified; amalam-very clean; upayuñjānāḥ-using; puruṣa-Puruṣa; ṛṣabha-Ṛṣabha; draviṇa-Draviṇa; devaka-Devaka; saṁjñāḥ-endowed with the names; varṣa-puruṣāḥ-the inhabitants of those varṣas; āpaḥ-mayam-Varuṇa, the lord of water; devam-as the worshipable deity; apām-of water; pūrṇena-with full; añjalinā-folded palms; yajante-do worship.





The inhabitants of Krauñcadvīpa are divided into four castes, called the Puruṣas, Ṛṣabhas, Draviṇas and Devakas. Using the waters of those sanctified rivers, they worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead by offering a palmful of water at the lotus feet of Varuṇa, the demigod who has a form of water.





Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, āpomayaḥ asmayam: with joined palms the inhabitants of the various sections of Krauñcadvīpa offer the sanctified waters of the rivers to a deity made of stone or iron.





TEXT 23



āpaḥ puruṣa-vīryāḥ stha

punantīr bhūr-bhuvaḥ-suvaḥ

tā naḥ punītāmīva-ghnīḥ

spṛśatām ātmanā bhuva iti

SYNONYMS



āpaḥ-O water; puruṣa-vīryāḥ-endowed with the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; stha-you are; punantīḥ-sanctifying; bhūḥ-of the planetary system known as Bhūḥ; bhuvaḥ-of the Bhuvaḥ planetary system; suvaḥ-of the Svaḥ planetary system; tāḥ-that water; naḥ-of us; punīta-purify; amīva-ghnīḥ-who destroys sin; spṛśatām-of those touching; ātmanā-by your constitutional position; bhuvaḥ-the bodies; iti-thus.





[The inhabitants of Krauñcadvīpa worship with this mantra.] O water of the rivers, you have obtained energy from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore you purify the three planetary systems, known as Bhūloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka. By your constitutional nature, you take away sins, and that is why we are touching you. Kindly continue to purify us.





Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.4):



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā





"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego-all together these eight comprise My separated material energies."



The energy of the Lord acts throughout the creation, just as heat and light, the energies of the sun, act within the universe and make everything work. The specific rivers mentioned in the śāstras are also energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and people who regularly bathe in them are purified. It can actually be seen that many people are cured of diseases simply by bathing in the Ganges. Similarly, the inhabitants of Krauñcadvīpa purify themselves by bathing in the rivers there.





TEXT 24



evaṁ purastāt kṣīrodāt parita upaveśitaḥ śākadvīpo dvātriṁśal-lakṣa-yojanāyāmaḥ samānena ca dadhi-maṇḍodena parīto yasmin śāko nāma mahīruhaḥ sva-kṣetra-vyapadeśako yasya ha mahā-surabhi-gandhas taṁ dvīpam anuvāsayati.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; purastāt-beyond; kṣīra-udāt-from the ocean of milk; paritaḥ-all around; upaveśitaḥ-situated; śāka-dvīpaḥ-another island, known as Śākadvīpa; dvā-triṁśat-thirty-two; lakṣa-100,000; yojana-yojanas; āyāmaḥ-whose measure; samānena-of equal length; ca-and; dadhi-maṇḍa-udena-by an ocean containing water resembling churned yogurt; parītaḥ-surrounded; yasmin-in which land; śākaḥ-śāka; nāma-named; mahīruhaḥ-a fig tree; sva-kṣetra-vyapadeśakaḥ-giving the island its name; yasya-of which; ha-indeed; mahā-surabhi-a greatly fragrant; gandhaḥ-aroma; tam dvīpam-that island; anuvāsayati-makes fragrant.





Outside the ocean of milk is another island, Śākadvīpa, which has a width of 3,200,000 yojanas [25,600,000 miles]. As Krauñcadvīpa is surrounded by its own ocean of milk, Śākadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean of churned yogurt as broad as the island itself. In Śākadvīpa there is a big śāka tree, from which the island takes its name. This tree is very fragrant. Indeed, it lends its scent to the entire island.





TEXT 25



tasyāpi praiyavrata evādhipatir nāmnā medhātithiḥ so 'pi vibhajya sapta varṣāṇi putra-nāmāni teṣu svātmajān purojava-manojava-pavamāna-dhūmrānīka-citrarepha-bahurūpa-viśvadhāra-saṁjñān nidhāpyādhipatīn svayaṁ bhagavaty ananta ā-veśita-matis tapovanaṁ praviveśa.



SYNONYMS



tasya api-of that island also; praiyavrataḥ-a son of Mahārāja Priyavrata; eva-certainly; adhipatiḥ-the ruler; nāmnā-by the name; medhā-tithiḥ-Medhātithi; saḥ api-he also; vibhajya-dividing; sapta varṣāṇi-seven divisions of the island; putra-nāmāni-possessing the names of his sons; teṣu-in them; sva-ātmajān-his own sons; purojava-Purojava; manojava-Manojava; pavamāna-Pavamāna; dhūmrānīka-Dhūmrānīka; citra-repha-Citrarepha; bahu-rūpa-Bahurūpa; viśvadhāra-Viśvadhāra; saṁjñān-having as names; nidhāpya-establishing as; adhipatīn-the rulers; svayam-himself; bhagavati-in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anante-in the unlimited; āveśita-matiḥ-whose mind was fully absorbed; tapaḥ-vanam-in the forest where meditation is performed; praviveśa-he entered.





The master of this island, also one of the sons of Priyavrata, was known as Medhātithi. He also divided his island into seven sections, named according to the names of his own sons, whom he made the kings of that island. The names of those sons are Purojava, Manojava, Pavamāna, Dhūmrānīka, Citrarepha, Bahurūpa and Viśvadhāra. After dividing the island and situating his sons as its rulers, Medhātithi personally retired, and to fix his mind completely upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he entered a forest suitable for meditation.





TEXT 26



eteṣāṁ varṣa-maryādā-girayo nadyaś ca sapta saptaiva īśāna uruśṛṅgo balabhadraḥ śatakesaraḥ sahasrasroto devapālo mahānasa iti anaghāyurdā ubhayaspṛṣṭir aparājitā pañcapadī sahasrasrutir nijadhṛtir iti.



SYNONYMS



eteṣām-of all these divisions; varṣa-maryādā-acting as the boundary limits; girayaḥ-the big hills; nadyaḥ ca-and the rivers also; sapta-seven; sapta-seven; eva-indeed; īśānaḥ-Īśāna; uruśṛṅgaḥ-Uruśṛṅga; bala-bhadraḥ-Balabhadra; śata-kesaraḥ-Śatakesara; sahasra-srotaḥ-Sahasrasrota; deva-pālaḥ-Devapāla; mahānasaḥ-Mahānasa; iti-thus; anaghā-Anaghā; āyurdā-Āyurdā; ubhayaspṛṣṭiḥ-Ubhayaspṛṣṭi; aparājitā-Aparājitā; pañcapadī-Pañcapadī; sahasra-srutiḥ-Sahasra-śruti; nija-dhṛtiḥ-Nijadhṛti; iti-thus.





For these lands also, there are seven boundary mountains and seven rivers. The mountains are Īśāna, Uruśṛṅga, Balabhadra, Śatakesara, Sahasrasrota, Devapāla and Mahānasa. The rivers are Anaghā, Āyurdā, Ubhayaspṛṣṭi, Aparājitā, Pañcapadī, Sahasra-śruti and Nijadhṛti.





TEXT 27



tad-varṣa-puruṣā ṛtavrata-satyavrata-dānavratānuvrata-nāmāno bhagavantaṁ vāyv-ātmakaṁ prāṇāyāma-vidhūta-rajas-tamasaḥ parama-samādhinā yajante.



SYNONYMS



tat-varṣa-puruṣāḥ-the inhabitants of those tracts of land; ṛta-vrata-Ṛtavrata; satya-vrata-Satyavrata; dāna-vrata-Dānavrata; anuvrata-Anuvrata; nāmānaḥ-having the four names; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāyu-ātmakam-represented by the demigod Vāyu; prāṇāyāma-by the practice of regulating the airs within the body; vidhūta-cleansed away; rajaḥ-tamasaḥ-whose passion and ignorance; parama-sublime; samādhinā-by trance; yajante-they worship.





The inhabitants of those islands are also divided into four castes-Ṛtavrata, Satyavrata, Dānavrata and Anuvrata-which exactly resemble brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. They practice prāṇāyāma and mystic yoga, and in trance they worship the Supreme Lord in the form of Vāyu.





TEXT 28



antaḥ-praviśya bhūtāni

yo bibharty ātma-ketubhiḥ

antaryāmīśvaraḥ sākṣāt

pātu no yad-vaśe sphuṭam

SYNONYMS



antaḥ-praviśya-entering within; bhūtāni-all living entities; yaḥ-who; bibharti-maintains; ātma-ketubhiḥ-by the functions of the inner airs (prāṇa, apāna, etc.); antaryāmī-the Supersoul within; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme person; sākṣāt-directly; pātu-please maintain; naḥ-us; yat-vaśe-under whose control; sphuṭam-the cosmic manifestation.





[The inhabitants of Śākadvīpa worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of Vāyu in the following words.] O Supreme Person, situated as the Supersoul within the body, You direct the various actions of the different airs, such as prāṇa, and thus You maintain all living entities. O Lord, O Supersoul of everyone, O controller of the cosmic manifestation under whom everything exists, may You protect us from all dangers.





Through the mystic yoga practice called prāṇāyāma, the yogī controls the airs within the body to maintain the body in a healthy condition. In this way, the yogī comes to the point of trance and tries to see the Supersoul within the core of his heart. Prāṇāyāma is the means to attain samādhi, trance, in order to fully absorb oneself in seeing the Supreme Lord as antaryāmī, the Supersoul within the core of the heart.





TEXT 29



evam eva dadhi-maṇḍodāt parataḥ puṣkaradvīpas tato dvi-guṇāyāmaḥ samantata upakalpitaḥ samānena svādūdakena samudreṇa bahir āvṛto yasmin bṛhat-puṣkaraṁ jvalana-śikhāmala-kanaka-patrāyutāyutaṁ bhagavataḥ kamalāsanasyādhyāsanaṁ parikalpitam.



SYNONYMS



evam eva-thus; dadhi-maṇḍa-udāt-the ocean of yogurt; parataḥ-beyond; puṣkara-dvīpaḥ-another island, named Puṣkaradvīpa; tataḥ-than that (Śākadvīpa); dvi-guṇa-āyāmaḥ-whose measurement is twice as great; samantataḥ-on all sides; upakalpitaḥ-surrounded; samānena-equal in width; svādu-udakena-possessing sweet water; samudreṇa-by an ocean; bahiḥ-outside; āvṛtaḥ-surrounded; yasmin-in which; bṛhat-very big; puṣkaram-lotus flower; jvalana-śikhā-like the flames of a blazing fire; amala-pure; kanaka-gold; patra-leaves; ayuta-ayutam-possessing 100,000,000; bhagavataḥ-greatly powerful; kamala āsanasya-of Lord Brahmā, whose sitting place is on the lotus flower; adhyāsanam-sitting place; parikalpitam-considered.





Outside the ocean of yogurt is another island, known as Puṣkaradvīpa, which is 6,400,000 yojanas [51,200,000 miles] wide, twice as wide as the ocean of yogurt. It is surrounded by an ocean of very tasteful water as broad as the island itself. On Puṣkaradvīpa there is a great lotus flower with 100,000,000 pure golden petals, as effulgent as the flames of fire. That lotus flower is considered the sitting place of Lord Brahmā, who is the most powerful living being and who is therefore sometimes called bhagavān.





TEXT 30



tad-dvīpa-madhye mānasottara-nāmaika evārvācīna-parācīna-varṣayor maryādācalo 'yuta-yojanocchrāyāyāmo yatra tu catasṛṣu dikṣu catvāri purāṇi loka-pālānām indrādīnāṁ yad-upariṣṭāt sūrya-rathasya meruṁ paribhramataḥ saṁvatsarātmakaṁ cakraṁ devānām aho-rātrābhyāṁ paribhramati.



SYNONYMS



tat-dvīpa-madhye-within that island; mānasottara-Mānasottara; nāma-named; ekaḥ-one; eva-indeed; arvācīna-on this side; parācīna-and beyond, or outside; varṣayoḥ-of tracts of land; maryādā-indicating the boundary; acalaḥ-a great mountain; ayuta-ten thousand; yojana-eight miles; ucchrāya-āyāmaḥ-whose height and width; yatra-where; tu-but; catasṛṣu-in the four; dikṣu-directions; catvāri-four; purāṇi-cities; loka-pālānām-of the directors of planetary systems; indra-ādīnām-headed by Indra; yat-of which; upariṣṭāt-on the top; sūrya-rathasya-of the chariot of the sun-god; merum-Meru Mountain; paribhramataḥ-while circumambulating; saṁvatsara-ātmakam-consisting of one saṁvatsara; cakram-wheel or orbit; devānām-of the demigods; ahaḥ-rātrābhyām-by the day and night; paribhramati-moves around.





In the middle of that island is a great mountain named Mānasottara, which forms the boundary between the inner side and the outer side of the island. Its breadth and height are 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles]. On that mountain, in the four directions, are the residential quarters of demigods such as Indra. In the chariot of the sun-god, the sun travels on the top of the mountain in an orbit called the Saṁvatsara, encircling Mount Meru. The sun's path on the northern side is called Uttarāyaṇa, and its path on the southern side is called Dakṣiṇāyana. One side represents a day for the demigods, and the other represents their night.





The movement of the sun is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52): yasyājñāya bhramati saṁbhṛta-kāla-cakraḥ. The sun orbits around Mount Sumeru, for six months on the northern side and for six months on the southern. This adds up to the duration of a day and night of the demigods in the upper planetary systems.





TEXT 31



tad-dvīpasyāpy adhipatiḥ praiyavrato vītihotro nāmaitasyātmajau ramaṇaka-dhātaki-nāmānau varṣa-patī niyujya sa svayaṁ pūrvajavad-bhagavat-karma-śīla evāste.



SYNONYMS



tat-dvīpasya-of that island; api-also; adhipatiḥ-the ruler; praiyavrataḥ-a son of Mahārāja Priyavrata; vītihotraḥ nāma-named Vītihotra; etasya-of him; ātma-jau-unto the two sons; ramaṇaka-Ramaṇaka; dhātaki-and Dhātaki; nāmānau-having the names; varṣa-patī-the rulers of the two tracts of land; niyujya-appointing; saḥ svayam-himself; pūrvaja-vat-like his other brothers; bhagavat-karma-śīlaḥ-being absorbed in activities to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva-indeed; āste-remains.





The ruler of this island, the son of Mahārāja Priyavrata named Vītihotra, had two sons named Ramaṇaka and Dhātaki. He granted the two sides of the island to these two sons and then personally engaged himself in activities for the sake of the Supreme Personality of Godhead like his elder brother Medhātithi.





TEXT 32



tad-varṣa-puruṣā bhagavantaṁ brahma-rūpiṇaṁ sakarmakeṇa karmaṇārādhayantīdaṁ codāharanti.



SYNONYMS



tat-varṣa-puruṣāḥ-the inhabitants of that island; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahma-rūpiṇam-exhibited as Lord Brahmā being seated on the lotus; sa-karmakeṇa-for fulfillment of material desires; karmaṇā-by performing ritualistic activities according to the Vedas; ārādhayanti-worship; idam-this; ca-and; udāharanti-they chant.





For the fulfillment of material desires, the inhabitants of this tract of land worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead as represented by Lord Brahmā. They offer prayers to the Lord as follows.





TEXT 33



yat tat karmamayaṁ liṅgaṁ

brahma-liṅgaṁ jano 'rcayet

ekāntam advayaṁ śāntaṁ

tasmai bhagavate nama iti

SYNONYMS



yat-which; tat-that; karma-mayam-obtainable by the Vedic ritualistic system; liṅgam-the form; brahma-liṅgam-which makes known the Supreme Brahman; janaḥ-a person; arcayet-must worship; ekāntam-who has full faith in the one Supreme; advayam-nondifferent; śāntam-peaceful; tasmai-unto him; bhagavate-the most powerful; namaḥ-our respects; iti-thus.





Lord Brahmā is known as karma-maya, the form of ritualistic ceremonies, because by performing ritualistic ceremonies one may attain his position and because the Vedic ritualistic hymns become manifest from him. He is devoted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead without deviation, and therefore in one sense he is not different from the Lord. Nevertheless, he should be worshiped not as the monists worship him, but in duality. One should always remain a servitor of the Supreme Lord, the supreme worshipable Deity. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Lord Brahmā, the form of manifest Vedic knowledge.





In this verse, the word karma-mayam ("obtainable by the Vedic ritualistic system") is significant. The Vedas say, svadharma-niṣṭhaḥ śata janmabhiḥ pumān viriñcatām eti: "One who strictly follows the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma for at least one hundred births will be rewarded with the post of Lord Brahmā." It is also significant that although Lord Brahmā is extremely powerful, he never thinks himself one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; he always knows that he is an eternal servitor of the Lord. Because the Lord and the servant are identical on the spiritual platform, Brahmā is herein addressed as bhagavān. Bhagavān is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, but if a devotee serves Him with full faith, the meaning of the Vedic literature is revealed to him. Therefore Brahmā is called brahma-liṅga, which indicates that his entire form consists of Vedic knowledge.





TEXT 34



tataḥ parastāl lokāloka-nāmācalo lokālokayor antarāle parita upakṣiptaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from that ocean of sweet drinking water; parastāt-beyond; lokāloka-nāma-named Lokāloka; acalaḥ-a mountain; loka-alokayoḥ antarāle-between the countries full of sunlight and those without sunlight; paritaḥ-all around; upakṣiptaḥ-exists.





Thereafter, beyond the ocean of sweet water and fully surrounding it, is a mountain named Lokāloka, which divides the countries that are full of sunlight from those not lit by the sun.





TEXT 35



yāvan mānasottara-mervor antaraṁ tāvatī bhūmiḥ kāñcany anyādarśa-talopamā yasyāṁ prahitaḥ padārtho na kathañcit punaḥ pratyupalabhyate tasmāt sarva-sattva-parihṛtāsīt.



SYNONYMS



yāvat-as much as; mānasottara-mervoḥ antaram-the land between Mānasottara and Meru (beginning from the middle of Mount Sumeru); tāvatī-that much; bhūmiḥ-land; kāñcanī-made of gold; anyā-another; ādarśa-tala-upamā-whose surface is just like the surface of a mirror; yasyām-on which; prahitaḥ-dropped; padārthaḥ-a thing; na-not; kathañcit-in any way; punaḥ-again; pratyupalabhyate-is found; tasmāt-therefore; sarva-sattva-by all living entities; parihṛtā-abandoned; āsīt-was.





Beyond the ocean of sweet water is a tract of land as broad as the area between the middle of Mount Sumeru and the boundary of Mānasottara Mountain. In that tract of land there are many living beings. Beyond it, extending to Lokāloka Mountain, is another land, which is made of gold. Because of its golden surface, it reflects light like the surface of a mirror, and any physical article that falls on that land can never be perceived again. All living entities, therefore, have abandoned that golden land.





TEXT 36



lokāloka iti samākhyā yad anenācalena lokālokasyāntarvar-tināvasthāpyate.



SYNONYMS



loka-with light (or with inhabitants); alokaḥ-without light (or without inhabitants); iti-in this way; samākhyā-designation; yat-which; anena-by this; acalena-mountain; loka-of the land inhabited by living entities; alokasya-and of the land not inhabited by living entities; antarvartinā-which is in the middle; avasthāpyate-is established.





Between the lands inhabited by living entities and those that are uninhabited stands the great mountain which separates the two and which is therefore celebrated as Lokāloka.





TEXT 37



sa loka-trayānte parita īśvareṇa vihito yasmāt sūryādīnāṁ dhruvāpavargāṇāṁ jyotir-gaṇānāṁ gabhastayo 'rvācīnāṁs trīḹ lokān āvitanvānā na kadācit parācīnā bhavitum utsahante tāvad un-nahanāyāmaḥ.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that mountain; loka-traya-ante-at the end of the three lokas (Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka); paritaḥ-all around; īśvareṇa-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; vihitaḥ-created; yasmāt-from which; sūrya-ādīnām-of the sun planet; dhruva-apavargāṇām-up to Dhruvaloka and other, inferior luminaries; jyotiḥ-gaṇānām-of all the luminaries; gabhastayaḥ-the rays; arvācīnān-on this side; trīn-the three; lokān-planetary systems; āvitanvānāḥ-spreading throughout; na-not; kadācit-at any time; parācīnāḥ-beyond the jurisdiction of that mountain; bhavitum-to be; utsahante-are able; tāvat-that much; unnahana-āyāmaḥ-the measure of the height of the mountain.





By the supreme will of Kṛṣṇa, the mountain known as Lokāloka has been installed as the outer border of the three worlds-Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka-to control the rays of the sun throughout the universe. All the luminaries, from the sun up to Dhruvaloka, distribute their rays throughout the three worlds, but only within the boundary formed by this mountain. Because it is extremely high, extending even higher than Dhruvaloka, it blocks the rays of the luminaries, which therefore can never extend beyond it.





When we speak of loka-traya, we refer to the three primary planetary systems-Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ and Svaḥ-into which the universe is divided. Surrounding these planetary systems are the eight directions, namely east, west, north, south, northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest. Lokāloka Mountain has been established as the outer boundary of all the lokas to distribute the rays of the sun and other luminaries equally throughout the universe.



This vivid description of how the rays of the sun are distributed throughout the different planetary systems of the universe is very scientific. Śukadeva Gosvāmī described these universal affairs to Mahārāja Parīkṣit as he had heard about them from his predecessor. He explained these facts five thousand years ago, but the knowledge existed long, long before because Śukadeva Gosvāmī received it through disciplic succession. Because this knowledge is accepted through the disciplic succession, it is perfect. The history of modern scientific knowledge, on the contrary, does not go back more than a few hundred years. Therefore, even if modern scientists do not accept the other factual presentations of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, how can they deny the perfect astronomical calculations that existed long before they could imagine such things? There is so much information to gather from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Modern scientists, however, have no information of other planetary systems and, indeed, are hardly conversant with the planet on which we are now living.





TEXT 38



etāvāḹ loka-vinyāso māna-lakṣaṇa-saṁsthābhir vicintitaḥ kavibhiḥ sa tu pañcāśat-koṭi-gaṇitasya bhū-golasya turīya-bhāgo 'yaṁ lokālokācalaḥ.



SYNONYMS



etāvān-this much; loka-vinyāsaḥ-the placing of the different planets; māna-with measurements; lakṣaṇa-symptoms; saṁsthābhiḥ-as well as with their different situations; vicintitaḥ-established by scientific calculations; kavibhiḥ-by learned scholars; saḥ-that; tu-but; pañcāśat-koṭi-500,000,000 yojanas; gaṇitasya-which is measured at; bhū-golasya-of the planetary system known as Bhūgolaka; turīya-bhāgaḥ-one fourth; ayam-this; lokāloka-acalaḥ-the mountain known as Lokāloka.





Learned scholars who are free from mistakes, illusions and propensities to cheat have thus described the planetary systems and their particular symptoms, measurements and locations. With great deliberation, they have established the truth that the distance between Sumeru and the mountain known as Lokāloka is one fourth of the diameter of the universe-or, in other words, 125,000,000 yojanas [1 billion miles].





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given accurate astronomical information about the location of Lokāloka Mountain, the movements of the sun globe and the distance between the sun and the circumference of the universe. However, the technical terms used in the astronomical calculations given by the Jyotir Veda are difficult to translate into English. Therefore to satisfy the reader, we may include the exact Sanskrit statement given by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, which records exact calculations regarding universal affairs.



sa tu lokālokas tu bhū-golakasya bhū-sambandhāṇḍa-golakasyety arthaḥ; sūryasy eva bhuvo 'py aṇḍa-golakayor madhya-vartitvāt kha-golam iva bhū-golam api pañcāśat-koṭi-yojana-pramāṇaṁ tasya turīya-bhāgaḥ sārdha-dvādaśa-koṭi-yojana-vistārocchrāya ity arthaḥ bhūs tu catus-triṁśal-lakṣonapañcāśat-koṭi-pramāṇā jñeyā; yathā meru-madhyān mānasottara-madhya-paryantaṁ sārdha-sapta-pañcāśal-lakṣottara-koṭi-yojana-pramāṇam; mānasottara-madhyāt svādūdaka-samudra-paryantaṁ ṣaṇ-ṇavati-lakṣa-yojana-pramāṇaṁ tataḥ kāñcanī-bhūmiḥ sārdha-sapta-pañcāśal-lakṣottara-koṭi-yojana-pramāṇā evam ekato meru-lokālokayor antarālam ekādaśa-śal-lakṣādhika-catuṣ-koṭi-parimitam anyato 'pi tathatyeto lokālokāl loka-paryantaṁ sthānaṁ dvāviṁśati-lakṣottarāṣṭa-koṭi-parimitaṁ lokālokād bahir apy ekataḥ etāvad eva anyato 'py etāvad eva yad vakṣyate, yo 'ntar-vistāra etena hy aloka-parimāṇaṁ ca vyākhyātaṁ yad-bahir lokālokācalād ity ekato lokālokaḥ sārdha-dvādaśa-koṭi-yojana-parimāṇaḥ anyato 'pi sa tathety evaṁ catus-triṁśal-lakṣonapañcāśat-koṭi-pramāṇā bhūḥ sābdhi-dvīpa-parvatā jñeyā; ata evāṇḍa-golakāt sarvato dikṣu sapta-daśa-lakṣa-yojanāvakāśe vartamāne sati pṛthivyāḥ śeṣa-nāgena dhāraṇaṁ dig-gajaiś ca niścalī-karaṇaṁ sārthakaṁ bhaved anyathā tu vyākhyāntare pañcāśat-koṭi-pramāṇatvād aṇḍa-golaka-lagnatve tat tat sarvam akiñcit-karaṁ syāt cākṣuṣe manvantare cākasmāt majjanaṁ śrī-varāha-devenotthāpanaṁ ca durghaṭaṁ syād ity adikaṁ vivecanīyam.



TEXT 39



tad-upariṣṭāc catasṛṣv āśāsvātma-yoninākhila-jagad-guruṇādhiniveśitā ye dvirada-pataya ṛṣabhaḥ puṣkaracūḍo vāmano 'parājita iti sakala-loka-sthiti-hetavaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tat-upariṣṭāt-on the top of Lokāloka Mountain; catasṛṣu āśāsu-in the four directions; ātma-yoninā-by Lord Brahmā; akhila-jagat-guruṇā-the spiritual master of the whole universe; adhiniveśitāḥ-established; ye-all those; dvirada-patayaḥ-the best of elephants; ṛṣabhaḥ-Ṛṣabha; puṣkara-cūḍaḥ-Puṣkaracūḍa; vāmanaḥ-Vāmana; aparājitaḥ-Aparājita; iti-thus; sakala-loka-sthiti-hetavaḥ-the causes of the maintenance of the different planets within the universe.





On the top of Lokāloka Mountain are the four gaja-patis, the best of elephants, which were established in the four directions by Lord Brahmā, the supreme spiritual master of the entire universe. The names of those elephants are Ṛṣabha, Puṣkaracūḍa, Vāmana and Aparājita. They are responsible for maintaining the planetary systems of the universe.





TEXT 40



teṣāṁ sva-vibhūtīnāṁ loka-pālānāṁ ca vividha-vīryopabṛṁhaṇāya bhagavān parama-mahā-puruṣo mahā-vibhūti-patir antaryāmy ātmano viśuddha-sattvaṁ dharma-jñāna-vairāgyaiśvaryādy-aṣṭa-mahā-siddhy-upalakṣaṇaṁ viṣvaksenādibhiḥ sva-pārṣada-pravaraiḥ parivārito nija-varāyudhopaśobhitair nija-bhuja-daṇḍaiḥ sandhārayamāṇas tasmin giri-vare samantāt sakala-loka-svastaya āste.



SYNONYMS



teṣām-of all of them; sva-vibhūtīnām-who are his personal expansions and assistants; loka-pālānām-who are entrusted with looking after the universal affairs; ca-and; vividha-varieties; vīrya-upabṛṁhaṇāya-for expanding the powers; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parama-mahā-puruṣaḥ-the foremost master of all kinds of opulence, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-vibhūti-patiḥ-the master of all inconceivable potencies; antaryāmī-the Supersoul; ātmanaḥ-of Himself; viśuddha-sattvam-having an existence without contamination by the material modes of nature; dharma-jñāna-vairāgya-of religion, pure knowledge and renunciation; aiśvarya-ādi-of all kinds of opulence; aṣṭa-eight; mahā-siddhi-and of great mystic perfections; upalakṣaṇam-having the characteristics; viṣvaksena-ādibhiḥ-by His expansion known as Viṣvaksena and others; sva-pārṣada-pravaraiḥ-the best of personal assistants; parivāritaḥ-surrounded; nija-His own; vara-āyudha-by different types of weapons; upaśobhitaiḥ-being decorated; nija-own; bhuja-daṇḍaiḥ-with stout arms; sandhārayamāṇaḥ-manifesting this form; tasmin-on that; giri-vare-great mountain; samantāt-all around; sakala-loka-svastaye-for the benefit of all the planetary systems; āste-exists.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of all transcendental opulences and the master of the spiritual sky. He is the Supreme Person, Bhagavān, the Supersoul of everyone. The demigods, led by Indra, the King of heaven, are entrusted with seeing to the affairs of the material world. To benefit all living beings in all the varied planets and to increase the power of those elephants and of the demigods, the Lord manifests Himself on top of that mountain in a spiritual body, uncontaminated by the modes of material nature. Surrounded by His personal expansions and assistants like Viṣvaksena, He exhibits all His perfect opulences, such as religion and knowledge, and His mystic powers such as aṇimā, laghimā and mahimā. He is beautifully situated, and He is decorated by the different weapons in His four hands.





TEXT 41



ākalpam evaṁ veṣaṁ gata eṣa bhagavān ātma-yogamāyayā viracita-vividha-loka-yātrā-gopīyāyety arthaḥ.



SYNONYMS



ā-kalpam-for the duration of the time of creation; evam-thus; veṣam-appearance; gataḥ-has accepted; eṣaḥ-this; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma-yoga-māyayā-by His own spiritual potency; viracita-perfected; vividha-loka-yātrā-the livelihood of the various planetary systems; gopīyāya-just to maintain; iti-thus; arthaḥ-the purpose.





The various forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, such as Nārāyaṇa and Viṣṇu, are beautifully decorated with different weapons. The Lord exhibits those forms to maintain all the varied planets created by His personal potency, yogamāyā.





In Bhagavad-gītā (4.6) Lord Kṛṣṇa says, sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā: "I appear by My internal potency. "The word ātma-māyā refers to the Lord's personal potency, yogamāyā. After creating both the material world and spiritual world through yogamāyā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead personally maintains them by expanding Himself in different categories as the Viṣṇu mūrtis and the demigods. He maintains the material creation from beginning to end, and He personally maintains the spiritual world.





TEXT 42



yo 'ntar-vistāra etena hy aloka-parimāṇaṁ ca vyākhyātaṁ yad bahir lokālokācalāt; tataḥ parastād yogeśvara-gatiṁ viśuddhām udāharanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-that which; antaḥ-vistāraḥ-the distance inside Lokāloka Mountain; etena-by this; hi-indeed; aloka-parimāṇam-the width of the tract of land known as Aloka-varṣa; ca-and; vyākhyātam-described; yat-which; bahiḥ-outside; lokāloka-acalāt-beyond Lokāloka Mountain; tataḥ-that; parastāt-beyond; yogeśvara-gatim-the path of Yogeśvara (Kṛṣṇa) in penetrating the coverings of the universe; viśuddhām-without material contamination; udāharanti-they say.





My dear King, outside Lokāloka Mountain is the tract of land known as Aloka-varṣa, which extends for the same breadth as the area within the mountain-in other words, 125,000,000 yojanas [one billion miles]. Beyond Aloka-varṣa is the destination of those who aspire for liberation from the material world. It is beyond the jurisdiction of the material modes of nature, and therefore it is completely pure. Lord Kṛṣṇa took Arjuna through this place to bring back the sons of the brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 43



aṇḍa-madhya-gataḥ sūryo

dyāv-ābhūmyor yad antaram

sūryāṇḍa-golayor madhye

koṭyaḥ syuḥ pañca-viṁśatiḥ

SYNONYMS



aṇḍa-madhya-gataḥ-situated in the center of the universe; sūryaḥ-the sun globe; dyāv-ābhūmyoḥ-the two planetary systems Bhūrloka and Bhuvarloka; yat-which; antaram-in between; sūrya-of the sun; aṇḍa-golayoḥ-and the globe of the universe; madhye-in the middle; koṭyaḥ-groups of ten million; syuḥ-are; pañca-viṁśatiḥ-twenty-five.





The sun is situated [vertically] in the middle of the universe, in the area between Bhūrloka and Bhuvarloka, which is called antarikṣa, outer space. The distance between the sun and the circumference of the universe is twenty-five koṭi yojanas [two billion miles].





The word koṭi means ten million, and a yojana is eight miles. The diameter of the universe is fifty koṭi yojanas (four billion miles). Therefore, since the sun is in the middle of the universe, the distance between the sun and the edge of the universe is calculated to be twenty-five koṭi yojanas (two billion miles).





TEXT 44



mṛte 'ṇḍa eṣa etasmin yad abhūt tato mārtaṇḍa iti vyapadeśaḥ; hiraṇyagarbha iti yad dhiraṇyāṇḍa-samudbhavaḥ.



SYNONYMS



mṛte-dead; aṇḍe-in the globe; eṣaḥ-this; etasmin-in this; yat-which; abhūt-entered personally at the time of creation; tataḥ-from that; mārtaṇḍa-Mārtaṇḍa; iti-thus; vyapadeśaḥ-the designation; hiraṇya-garbhaḥ-known as Hiraṇyagarbha; iti-thus; yat-because; hiraṇya-aṇḍa-samudbhavaḥ-his material body was created from Hiraṇyagarbha.





The sun-god is also known as Vairāja, the total material body for all living entities. Because he entered this dull egg of the universe at the time of creation, he is also called Mārtaṇḍa. He is also known as Hiraṇyagarbha because he received his material body from Hiraṇyagarbha [Lord Brahmā].





The post of Lord Brahmā is meant for very highly elevated, spiritually advanced living beings. When such living beings are unavailable, Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, expands Himself as Lord Brahmā. This takes place very rarely. Consequently there are two kinds of Brahmās. Sometimes Brahmā is an ordinary living entity, and at other times Brahmā is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Brahmā spoken of here is an ordinary living being. Whether Brahmā is the Supreme Personality of Godhead or an ordinary living being, he is known as Vairāja Brahmā and Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā. Therefore the sun-god is also accepted as Vairāja Brahmā.





TEXT 45



sūryeṇa hi vibhajyante

diśaḥ khaṁ dyaur mahī bhidā

svargāpavargau narakā

rasaukāṁsi ca sarvaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



sūryeṇa-by the sun-god within the sun planet; hi-indeed; vibhajyante-are divided; diśaḥ-the directions; kham-the sky; dyauḥ-the heavenly planets; mahī-the earthly planets; bhidā-other divisions; svarga-the heavenly planets; apavargau-and the places for liberation; narakāḥ-the hellish planets; rasaukāṁsi-such as Atala; ca-also; sarvaśaḥ-all.





O King, the sun-god and the sun planet divide all the directions of the universe. It is only because of the presence of the sun that we can understand what the sky, the higher planets, this world and the lower planets are. It is also only because of the sun that we can understand which places are for material enjoyment, which are for liberation, which are hellish and subterranean.





TEXT 46



deva-tiryaṅ-manuṣyāṇāṁ

sarīsṛpa-savīrudhām

sarva-jīva-nikāyānāṁ

sūrya ātmā dṛg-īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



deva-of the demigods; tiryak-the lower animals; manuṣyāṇām-and the human beings; sarīsṛpa-the insects and the serpents; sa-vīrudhām-and the plants and trees; sarva-jīva-nikāyānām-of all groups of living entities; sūryaḥ-the sun-god; ātmā-the life and soul; dṛk-of the eyes; īśvaraḥ-the personality of Godhead.





All living entities, including demigods, human beings, animals, birds, insects, reptiles, creepers and trees, depend upon the heat and light given by the sun-god from the sun planet. Furthermore, it is because of the sun's presence that all living entities can see, and therefore he is called dṛg-īśvara, the Personality of Godhead presiding over sight.





In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, sūrya ātmā ātmatvenopāsyaḥ. The actual life and soul of all living entities within this universe is the sun. He is therefore upāsya, worshipable. We worship the sun-god by chanting the Gāyatrī mantra (oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur vareṇyaṁ bhargo devasya dhīmahi). Sūrya is the life and soul of this universe, and there are innumerable universes for which a sun-god is the life and soul, just as the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the life and soul of the entire creation. We have information that Vairāja, Hiraṇyagarbha, entered the great, dull, material globe called the sun. This indicates that the theory held by so-called scientists that no one lives there is wrong. Bhagavad-gītā also says that Kṛṣṇa first instructed Bhagavad-gītā to the sun-god (imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam [Bg. 4.1]). Therefore the sun is not vacant. It is inhabited by living entities, and the predominating deity is Vairāja, or Vivasvān. The difference between the sun and earth is that the sun is a fiery planet, but everyone there has a suitable body and can live there without difficulty.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "Studying the Structure of the Universe."



Chapter Twenty-one



The Movements of the Sun





This chapter informs us of the movements of the sun. The sun is not stationary; it is also moving like the other planets. The sun's movements determine the duration of night and day. When the sun travels north of the equator, it moves slowly during the day and very quickly at night, thus increasing the duration of the daytime and decreasing the duration of night. Similarly, when the sun travels south of the equator, the exact opposite is true-the duration of the day decreases, and the duration of night increases. When the sun enters Karkaṭa-rāśi (Cancer) and then travels to Siṁha-rāśi (Leo) and so on through Dhanuḥ-rāśi (Sagittarius), its course is called Dakṣiṇāyana, the southern way, and when the sun enters Makara-rāśi (Capricorn) and thereafter travels through Kumbharāśi (Aquarius) and so on through Mithuna-rāśi (Gemini), its course is called Uttarāyaṇa, the northern way. When the sun is in Meṣa-rāśi (Aries) and Tulā-rāśi (Libra), the duration of day and night are equal.





On Mānasottara Mountain are the abodes of four demigods. East of Sumeru Mountain is Devadhānī, where King Indra lives, and south of Sumeru is Saṁyamanī, the abode of Yamarāja, the superintendent of death. Similarly, west of Sumeru is Nimlocanī, the abode of Varuṇa, the demigod who controls the water, and north of Sumeru is Vibhāvarī, where the demigod of the moon lives. Sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight occur in all these places because of the movements of the sun. Diametrically opposite the place where the sunrise takes places and the sun is seen by human eyes, the sun will be setting and passing away from human vision. Similarly, the people residing diametrically opposite the point where it is midday will be experiencing midnight. The sun rises and sets with all the other planets, headed by the moon and other luminaries.





The entire kāla-cakra, or wheel of time, is established on the wheel of the sun-god's chariot. This wheel is known as Saṁvatsara. The seven horses pulling the chariot of the sun are known as Gāyatrī, Bṛhatī, Uṣṇik, Jagatī, Triṣṭup, Anuṣṭup and Paṅkti. They are harnessed by a demigod known as Aruṇadeva to a yoke 900,000 yojanas wide. Thus the chariot carries Ādityadeva, the sun-god. Always staying in front of the sun-god and offering their prayers are sixty thousand sages known as Vālikhilyas. There are fourteen Gandharvas, Apsarās and other demigods, who are divided into seven parties and who perform ritualistic activities every month to worship the Supersoul through the sun-god according to different names. Thus the sun-god travels through the universe for a distance of 95,100,000 yojanas (760,800,000 miles) at a speed of 16,004 miles at every moment.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

etāvān eva bhū-valayasya sanniveśaḥ pramāṇa-lakṣaṇato vyākhyātaḥ.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; etāvān-so much; eva-certainly; bhū-valayasya sanniveśaḥ-the arrangement of the whole universe; pramāṇa-lakṣaṇataḥ-according to measurement (fifty crores of yojanas, or four billion miles in width and length) and characteristics; vyākhyātaḥ-estimated.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, I have thus far described the diameter of the universe [fifty crores of yojanas, or four billion miles] and its general characteristics, according to the estimations of learned scholars.





TEXT 2



etena hi divo maṇḍala-mānaṁ tad-vida upadiśanti yathā dvi-dalayor niṣpāvādīnāṁ te antareṇāntarikṣaṁ tad-ubhaya-sandhitam.



SYNONYMS



etena-by this estimation; hi-indeed; divaḥ-of the upper planetary system; maṇḍala-mānam-the measurement of the globe; tat-vidaḥ-the experts who know about it; upadiśanti-instruct; yathā-just as; dvi-dalayoḥ-in the two halves; niṣpāva-ādīnām-of grain such as wheat; te-of the two divisions; antareṇa-in the intervening space; antarikṣam-the sky or outer space; tat-by the two; ubhaya-on both sides; sandhitam-where the two parts join.





As a grain of wheat is divided into two parts and one can estimate the size of the upper part by knowing that of the lower, so, expert geographers instruct, one can understand the measurements of the upper part of the universe by knowing those of the lower part. The sky between the earthly sphere and heavenly sphere is called antarikṣa, or outer space. It adjoins the top of the sphere of earth and the bottom of that of heaven.





TEXT 3



yan-madhya-gato bhagavāṁs tapatāṁ patis tapana ātapena tri-lokīṁ pratapaty avabhāsayaty ātma-bhāsā sa eṣa udagayana-dakṣiṇāyana-vaiṣuvata-saṁjñābhir māndya-śaighrya-samānābhir gatibhir ārohaṇāvarohaṇa-samāna-sthāneṣu yathā-savanam abhipadyamāno makarādiṣu rāśiṣv aho-rātrāṇi dīrgha-hrasva-samānāni vidhatte.



SYNONYMS



yat-of which (the intermediate space); madhya-gataḥ-being situated in the middle; bhagavān-the most powerful; tapatām patiḥ-the master of those that heat the whole universe; tapanaḥ-the sun; ātapena-by heat; tri-lokīm-the three worlds; pratapati-heats; avabhāsayati-lights; ātma-bhāsā-by its own illuminating rays; saḥ-that; eṣaḥ-the sun globe; udagayana-of passing to the northern side of the equator; dakṣiṇa-ayana-of passing to the southern side of the equator; vaiṣuvata-or of passing through the equator; saṁjñābhiḥ-by different names; māndya-characterized by slowness; śaighrya-swiftness; samānābhiḥ-and by equality; gatibhiḥ-by movement; ārohaṇa-of rising; avarohaṇa-of going down; samāna-or of staying in the middle; sthāneṣu-in positions; yathā-savanam-according to the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhipadyamānaḥ-moving; makara-ādiṣu-headed by the sign Makara (Capricorn); rāśiṣu-in different signs; ahaḥ-rātrāṇi-the days and nights; dīrgha-long; hrasva-short; samānāni-equal; vidhatte-makes.





In the midst of that region of outer space [antarikṣa] is the most opulent sun, the king of all the planets that emanate heat, such as the moon. By the influence of its radiation, the sun heats the universe and maintains its proper order. It also gives light to help all living entities see. While passing toward the north, toward the south or through the equator, in accordance with the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, it is said to move slowly, swiftly or moderately. According to its movements in rising above, going beneath or passing through the equator-and correspondingly coming in touch with various signs of the zodiac, headed by Makara [Capricorn]-days and nights are short, long or equal to one another.





Lord Brahmā prays in his Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52):



yac cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati saṁbhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat and light." Although the sun is described as bhagavān, the most powerful, and although it is actually the most powerful planet within the universe, it nevertheless has to carry out the order of Govinda, Kṛṣṇa. The sun-god cannot deviate even an inch from the orbit designated to him. Therefore in every sphere of life, the supreme order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is carried out. The entire material nature carries out His orders. However, we foolishly see the activities of material nature without understanding the supreme order and Supreme Person behind them. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ: [Bg. 9.10] material nature carries out the orders of the Lord, and thus everything is maintained in an orderly way.





TEXT 4



yadā meṣa-tulayor vartate tadāho-rātrāṇi samānāni bhavanti yadā vṛṣabhādiṣu pañcasu ca rāśiṣu carati tadāhāny eva vardhante hrasati ca māsi māsy ekaikā ghaṭikā rātriṣu.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; meṣa-tulayoḥ-in Meṣa (Aries) and Tulā (Libra); vartate-the sun exists; tadā-at that time; ahaḥ-rātrāṇi-the days and nights; samānāni-equal in duration; bhavanti-are; yadā-when; vṛṣabha-ādiṣu-headed by Vṛṣabha (Taurus) and Mithuna (Gemini); pañcasu-in the five; ca-also; rāśiṣu-signs; carati-moves; tadā-at that time; ahāni-the days; eva-certainly; vardhante-increase; hrasati-is diminished; ca-and; māsi māsi-in every month; eka-ekā-one; ghaṭikā-half hour; rātriṣu-in the nights.





When the sun passes through Meṣa [Aries] and Tulā [Libra], the durations of day and night are equal. When it passes through the five signs headed by Vṛṣabha [Taurus], the duration of the days increases [until Cancer], and then it gradually decreases by half an hour each month, until day and night again become equal [in Libra].





TEXT 5



yadā vṛścikādiṣu pañcasu vartate tadāho-rātrāṇi viparyayāṇi bhavanti.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; vṛścika-ādiṣu-headed by Vṛścika (Scorpio); pañcasu-five; vartate-remains; tadā-at that time; ahaḥ-rātrāṇi-the days and nights; viparyayāṇi-the opposite (the duration of the day decreases, and that of night increases); bhavanti-are.





When the sun passes through the five signs beginning with Vṛścika [Scorpio], the duration of the days decreases [until Capricorn], and then gradually it increases month after month, until day and night become equal [in Aries].





TEXT 6



yāvad dakṣiṇāyanam ahāni vardhante yāvad udagayanaṁ rātrayaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yāvat-until; dakṣiṇa-ayanam-the sun passes to the southern side; ahāni-the days; vardhante-increase; yāvat-until; udagayanam-the sun passes to the northern side; rātrayaḥ-the nights.





Until the sun travels to the south the days grow longer, and until it travels to the north the nights grow longer.





TEXT 7



evaṁ nava koṭaya eka-pañcāśal-lakṣāṇi yojanānāṁ mānasottara-giri-parivartanasyopadiśanti tasminn aindrīṁ purīṁ pūrvasmān meror devadhānīṁ nāma dakṣiṇato yāmyāṁ saṁyamanīṁ nāma paścād vāruṇīṁ nimlocanīṁ nāma uttarataḥ saumyāṁ vibhāvarīṁ nāma tāsūdaya-madhyāhnāstamaya-niśīthānīti bhūtānāṁ pravṛtti-nivṛtti-nimittāni samaya-viśeṣeṇa meroś catur-diśam.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; nava-nine; koṭayaḥ-ten millions; eka-pañcāśat-fifty-one; lakṣāṇi-hundred thousands; yojanānām-of the yojanas; mānasottara-giri-of the mountain known as Mānasottara; parivartanasya-of the circumambulation; upadiśanti-they (learned scholars) teach; tasmin-on that (Mānasottara Mountain); aindrīm-of King Indra; purīm-the city; pūrvasmāt-on the eastern side; meroḥ-of Sumeru Mountain; devadhānīm-Devadhānī; nāma-of the name; dakṣiṇataḥ-on the southern side; yāmyām-of Yamarāja; saṁyamanīm-Saṁyamanī; nāma-named; paścāt-on the western side; vāruṇīm-of Varuṇa; nimlocanīm-Nimlocanī; nāma-named; uttarataḥ-on the northern side; saumyām-of the moon; vibhāvarīm-Vibhāvarī; nāma-named; tāsu-in all of them; udaya-rising; madhyāhna-midday; astamaya-sunset; niśīthāni-midnight; iti-thus; bhūtānām-of the living entities; pravṛtti-of activity; nivṛtti-and cessation of activity; nimittāni-the causes; samaya-viśeṣeṇa-by the particular times; meroḥ-of Sumeru Mountain; catuḥ-diśam-the four sides.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued; My dear King, as stated before, the learned say that the sun travels over all sides of Mānasottara Mountain in a circle whose length is 95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles]. On Mānasottara Mountain, due east of Mount Sumeru, is a place known as Devadhānī, possessed by King Indra. Similarly, in the south is a place known as Saṁyamanī, possessed by Yamarāja, in the west is a place known as Nimlocanī, possessed by Varuṇa, and in the north is a place named Vibhāvarī, possessed by the moon-god. Sunrise, midday, sunset and midnight occur in all those places according to specific times, thus engaging all living entities in their various occupational duties and also making them cease such duties.





TEXTS 8–9



tatratyānāṁ divasa-madhyaṅgata eva sadādityas tapati savyenācalaṁ dakṣiṇena karoti; yatrodeti tasya ha samāna-sūtra-nipāte nimlocati yatra kvacana syandenābhitapati tasya haiṣa samāna-sūtra-nipāte prasvāpayati tatra gataṁ na paśyanti ye taṁ samanupaśyeran.



SYNONYMS



tatratyānām-for the living entities residing on Mount Meru; divasa-madhyaṅgataḥ-being positioned as at midday; eva-indeed; sadā-always; ādityaḥ-the sun; tapati-heats; savyena-to the left side; acalam-Sumeru Mountain; dakṣiṇena-to the right (being forced by wind blowing to the right, the sun moves to the right); karoti-moves; yatra-the point where; udeti-it rises; tasya-of that position; ha-certainly; samāna-sūtra-nipāte-at the diametrically opposite point; nimlocati-the sun sets; yatra-where; kvacana-somewhere; syandena-with perspiration; abhitapati-heats (at midday); tasya-of that; ha-certainly; eṣaḥ-this (the sun); samāna-sūtra-nipāte-at the diametrically opposite point; prasvāpayati-the sun causes to sleep (as at midnight); tatra-there; gatam-gone; na paśyanti-do not see; ye-who; tam-the sunset; samanupaśyeran-seeing.





The living entities residing on Sumeru Mountain are always very warm, as at midday, because for them the sun is always overhead. Although the sun moves counterclockwise, facing the constellations, with Sumeru Mountain on its left, it also moves clockwise and appears to have the mountain on its right because it is influenced by the dakṣiṇāvarta wind. People living in countries at points diametrically opposite to where the sun is first seen rising will see the sun setting, and if a straight line were drawn from a point where the sun is at midday, the people in countries at the opposite end of the line would be experiencing midnight. Similarly, if people residing where the sun is setting were to go to countries diametrically opposite, they would not see the sun in the same condition.





TEXT 10



yadā caindryāḥ puryāḥ pracalate pañcadaśa-ghaṭikābhir yāmyāṁ sapāda-koṭi-dvayaṁ yojanānāṁ sārdha-dvādaśa-lakṣāṇi sādhikāni copayāti.



SYNONYMS



yadā-when; ca-and; aindryāḥ-of Indra; puryāḥ-from the residence; pracalate-it moves; pañcadaśa-by fifteen; ghaṭikābhiḥ-half hours (actually twenty-four minutes); yāmyām-to the residence of Yamarāja; sapāda-koṭi-dvayam-two and a quarter crores (22,500,000); yojanānām-of yojanas; sārdha-and one half; dvādaśa-lakṣāṇi-twelve hundred thousand; sādhikāni-twenty-five thousand more; ca-and; upayāti-he passes over.





When the sun travels from Devadhānī, the residence of Indra, to Saṁyamanī, the residence of Yamarāja, it travels 23,775,000 yojanas [190,200,000 miles] in fifteen ghaṭikās [six hours].





The distance indicated by the word sādhikāni is pañca-viṁśati-sahasrādhikāni, or 25,000 yojanas. That plus two and a half crores and twelve and a half lakṣa of yojanas is the distance the sun travels between each two cities. This comes to 23,775,000 yojanas, or 190,200,000 miles. The total orbit of the sun is four times that distance, or 95,100,000 yojanas (760,800,000 miles).





TEXT 11



evaṁ tato vāruṇīṁ saumyām aindrīṁ ca punas tathānye ca grahāḥ somādayo nakṣatraiḥ saha jyotiś-cakre samabhyudyanti saha vā nimlo-canti.



SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; tataḥ-from there; vāruṇīm-to the quarters where Varuṇa lives; saumyām-to the quarters where the moon lives; aindrīṁ ca-and to the quarters where Indra lives; punaḥ-again; tathā-so also; anye-the others; ca-also; grahāḥ-planets; soma-ādayaḥ-headed by the moon; nakṣatraiḥ-all the stars; saha-with; jyotiḥ-cakre-in the celestial sphere; samabhyudyanti-rise; saha-along with; vā-or; nimlocanti-set.





From the residence of Yamarāja the sun travels to Nimlocanī, the residence of Varuṇa, from there to Vibhāvarī, the residence of the moon-god, and from there again to the residence of Indra. In a similar way, the moon, along with the other stars and planets, becomes visible in the celestial sphere and then sets and again becomes invisible.





In Bhagavad-gītā (10.21) Kṛṣṇa says, nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī: "Of stars I am the moon." This indicates that the moon is similar to the other stars. The Vedic literature informs us that within this universe there is one sun, which is moving. The Western theory that all the luminaries in the sky are different suns is not confirmed in the Vedic literature. Nor can we assume that these luminaries are the suns of other universes, for each universe is covered by various layers of material elements, and therefore although the universes are clustered together, we cannot see from one universe to another. In other words, whatever we see is within this one universe. In each universe there is one Lord Brahmā, and there are other demigods on other planets, but there is only one sun.





TEXT 12



evaṁ muhūrtena catus-triṁśal-lakṣa-yojanāny aṣṭa-śatādhikāni sauro rathas trayīmayo 'sau catasṛṣu parivartate purīṣu.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; muhūrtena-in a muhūrta (forty-eight minutes); catuḥ-triṁśat-thirty-four; lakṣa-hundred thousands; yojanāni-yojanas; aṣṭa-śatādhikāni-increased by eight hundred; sauraḥ rathaḥ-the chariot of the sun-god; trayī-mayaḥ-which is worshiped by the Gāyatrī mantra (oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ tat savitur, etc.); asau-that; catasṛṣu-to the four; parivartate-he moves; purīṣu-through different residential quarters.





Thus the chariot of the sun-god, which is trayīmaya, or worshiped by the words oṁ bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ, travels through the four residences mentioned above at a speed of 3,400,800 yojanas [27,206,400 miles] in a muhūrta.





TEXT 13



yasyaikaṁ cakraṁ dvādaśāraṁ ṣaṇ-nemi tri-ṇābhi saṁvatsarātmakaṁ samāmananti tasyākṣo meror mūrdhani kṛto mānasottare kṛtetara-bhāgo yatra protaṁ ravi-ratha-cakraṁ taila-yantra-cakravad bhraman mānasottara-girau paribhramati.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of which; ekam-one; cakram-wheel; dvādaśa-twelve; aram-spokes; ṣaṭ-six; nemi-the segments of the rim; tri-ṇābhi-the three pieces of the hub; saṁvatsara-ātmakam-whose nature is a saṁvatsara; samāmananti-they fully describe; tasya-the chariot of the sun-god; akṣaḥ-the axle; meroḥ-of Sumeru Mountain; mūrdhani-on the top; kṛtaḥ-fixed; mānasottare-on the mountain known as Mānasottara; kṛta-fixed; itara-bhāgaḥ-the other end; yatra-where; protam-fixed on; ravi-ratha-cakram-the wheel of the chariot of the sun-god; taila-yantra-cakra-vat-like the wheel of an oil-pressing machine; bhramat-moving; mānasottara-girau-on Mānasottara Mountain; paribhramati-turns.





The chariot of the sun-god has only one wheel, which is known as Saṁvatsara. The twelve months are calculated to be its twelve spokes, the six seasons are the sections of its rim, and the three cātur-māsya periods are its three-sectioned hub. One side of the axle carrying the wheel rests upon the summit of Mount Sumeru, and the other rests upon Mānasottara Mountain. Affixed to the outer end of the axle, the wheel continuously rotates on Mānasottara Mountain like the wheel of an oil-pressing machine.





TEXT 14



tasminn akṣe kṛtamūlo dvitīyo 'kṣas turyamānena sammitas taila-yantrākṣavad dhruve kṛtopari-bhāgaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tasmin akṣe-in that axle; kṛta-mūlaḥ-whose base is fixed; dvitīyaḥ-a second; akṣaḥ-axle; turyamānena-by one fourth; sammitaḥ-measured; taila-yantra-akṣa-vat-like the axle of an oil-pressing machine; dhruve-to Dhruvaloka; kṛta-fixed; upari-bhāgaḥ-upper portion.





As in an oil-pressing machine, this first axle is attached to a second axle, which is one-fourth as long [3,937,500 yojanas, or 31,500,000 miles]. The upper end of this second axle is attached to Dhruvaloka by a rope of wind.





TEXT 15



ratha-nīḍas tu ṣaṭ-triṁśal-lakṣa-yojanāyatas tat-turīya-bhāga-viśālas tāvān ravi-ratha-yugo yatra hayāś chando-nāmānaḥ saptāruṇa-yojitā vahanti devam ādityam.



SYNONYMS



ratha-nīḍaḥ-the interior of the chariot; tu-but; ṣaṭ-triṁśat-lakṣa-yojana-āyataḥ-3,600,000 yojanas long; tat-turīya-bhāga-one quarter of that measure (900,000 yojanas); viśālaḥ-having a width; tāvān-so much also; ravi-ratha-yugaḥ-the yoke for the horses; yatra-where; hayāḥ-horses; chandaḥ-nāmānaḥ-having the different names of Vedic meters; sapta-seven; aruṇa-yojitāḥ-hooked up by Aruṇadeva; vahanti-carry; devam-the demigod; ādityam-the sun-god.





My dear King, the carriage of the sun-god's chariot is estimated to be 3,600,000 yojanas [28,800,000 miles] long and one-fourth as wide [900,000 yojanas, or 7,200,000 miles]. The chariot's horses, which are named after Gāyatrī and other Vedic meters, are harnessed by Aruṇadeva to a yoke that is also 900,000 yojanas wide. This chariot continuously carries the sun-god.





In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is stated:



gāyatrī ca bṛhaty uṣṇig

jagatī triṣṭup eva ca

anuṣṭup paṅktir ity uktāś

chandāṁsi harayo raveḥ





The seven horses yoked to the sun-god's chariot are named Gāyatrī, Bṛhati, Uṣṇik, Jagatī, Triṣṭup, Anuṣṭup and Paṅkti. These names of various Vedic meters designate the seven horses that carry the sun-god's chariot.





TEXT 16



purastāt savitur aruṇaḥ paścāc ca niyuktaḥ sautye karmaṇi kilāste.



SYNONYMS



purastāt-in front; savituḥ-of the sun-god; aruṇaḥ-the demigod named Aruṇa; paścāt-looking backward; ca-and; niyuktaḥ-engaged; sautye-of a charioteer; karmaṇi-in the work; kila-certainly; āste-remains.





Although Aruṇadeva sits in front of the sun-god and is engaged in driving the chariot and controlling the horses, he looks backward toward the sun-god.





In the Vāyu Purāṇa the position of the horses is described:



saptāśva-rūpa-cchandāṁsī

vahante vāmato ravim

cakra-pakṣa-nibaddhāni

cakre vākṣaḥ samāhitaḥ





Although Aruṇadeva is in the front seat, controlling the horses, he looks back toward the sun-god from his left side.





TEXT 17



tathā vālikhilyā ṛṣayo 'ṅguṣṭha-parva-mātrāḥ ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi purataḥ sūryaṁ sūkta-vākāya niyuktāḥ saṁstuvanti.



SYNONYMS



tathā-there; vālikhilyāḥ-Vālikhilyas; ṛṣayaḥ-great sages; aṅguṣṭha-parva-mātrāḥ-whose size is that of a thumb; ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi-sixty thousand; purataḥ-in front; sūryam-the sun-god; su-ukta-vākāya-for speaking eloquently; niyuktāḥ-engaged; saṁstuvanti-offer prayers.





There are sixty thousand saintly persons named Vālikhilyas, each the size of a thumb, who are located in front of the sun-god and who offer him eloquent prayers of glorification.





TEXT 18



tathānye ca ṛṣayo gandharvāpsaraso nāgā grāmaṇyo yātudhānā devā ity ekaikaśo gaṇāḥ sapta caturdaśa māsi māsi bhagavantaṁ sūryam ātmānaṁ nānā-nāmānaṁ pṛthaṅ-nānā-nāmānaḥ pṛthak-karmabhir dvandvaśa upāsate.



SYNONYMS



tathā-similarly; anye-others; ca-also; ṛṣayaḥ-saintly persons; gandharva-apsarasaḥ-Gandharvas and Apsarās; nāgāḥ-Nāga snakes; grāmaṇyaḥ-Yakṣas; yātudhānāḥ-Rākṣasas; devāḥ-demigods; iti-thus; eka-ekaśaḥ-one by one; gaṇāḥ-groups; sapta-seven; caturdaśa-fourteen in number; māsi māsi-in every month; bhagavantam-unto the most powerful demigod; sūryam-the sun-god; ātmānam-the life of the universe; nānā-various; nāmānam-who possesses names; pṛthak-separate; nānā-nāmānaḥ-having various names; pṛthak-separate; karmabhiḥ-by ritualistic ceremonies; dvandvaśaḥ-in groups of two; upāsate-worship.





Similarly, fourteen other saints, Gandharvas, Apsarās, Nāgas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas and demigods, who are divided into groups of two, assume different names every month and continuously perform different ritualistic ceremonies to worship the Supreme Lord as the most powerful demigod Sūryadeva, who holds many names.





In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is said:



stuvanti munayaḥ sūryaṁ

gandharvair gīyate puraḥ

nṛtyanto 'psaraso yānti

sūryasyānu niśācarāḥ





vahanti pannagā yakṣaiḥ

kriyate 'bhiṣusaṅgrahaḥ

vālikhilyās tathaivainaṁ

parivārya samāsate





so 'yaṁ sapta-gaṇaḥ sūrya-

maṇḍale muni-sattama

himoṣṇa vāri-vṛṣṭīṇāṁ

hetutve samayaṁ gataḥ





Worshiping the most powerful demigod Sūrya, the Gandharvas sing in front of him, the Apsarās dance before the chariot, the Niśācaras follow the chariot, the Pannagas decorate the chariot, the Yakṣas guard the chariot, and the saints called the Vālikhilyas surround the sun-god and offer prayers. The seven groups of fourteen associates arrange the proper times for regular snow, heat and rain throughout the universe.





TEXT 19



lakṣottaraṁ sārdha-nava-koṭi-yojana-parimaṇḍalaṁ bhū-valayasya kṣaṇena sagavyūty-uttaraṁ dvi-sahasra-yojanāni sa bhuṅkte.



SYNONYMS



lakṣa-uttaram-increased by 100,000; sārdha-with 5,000,000; nava-koṭi-yojana-of 90,000,000 yojanas; parimaṇḍalam-circumference; bhū-valayasya-of the earthly sphere; kṣaṇena-in one moment; sagavyūti-uttaram-augmented by two krośas (four miles); dvi-sahasra-yojanāni-2,000 yojanas; saḥ-the sun-god; bhuṅkte-traverses.





My dear King, in his orbit through Bhū-maṇḍala, the sun-god traverses a distance of 95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles] at the speed of 2,000 yojanas and two krośas [16,004 miles] in a moment.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "The Movements of the Sun."



Chapter Twenty-two



The Orbits of the Planets





In this chapter the orbits of the planets are described. According to the movements of the moon and other planets, all the inhabitants of the universe are prone to auspicious and inauspicious situations. This is referred to as the influence of the stars.





The sun-god, who controls the affairs of the entire universe, especially in regard to heat, light, seasonal changes and so on, is considered an expansion of Nārāyaṇa. He represents the three Vedas-Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma-and therefore he is known as Trayīmaya, the form of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Sometimes the sun-god is also called Sūrya Nārāyaṇa. The sun-god has expanded himself in twelve divisions, and thus he controls the six seasonal changes and causes winter, summer, rain and so on. Yogīs and karmīs following the varṇāśrama institution, who practice haṭha or aṣṭāṅga-yoga or who perform agnihotra sacrifices, worship Sūrya Nārāyaṇa for their own benefit. The demigod Sūrya is always in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. Residing in outer space, which is in the middle of the universe, between Bhūloka and Bhuvarloka, the sun rotates through the time circle of the zodiac, represented by twelve rāśis, or signs, and assumes different names according to the sign he is in. For the moon, every month is divided into two fortnights. Similarly, according to solar calculations, a month is equal to the time the sun spends in one constellation; two months constitute one season, and there are twelve months in a year. The entire area of the sky is divided into two halves, each representing an ayana, the course traversed by the sun within a period of six months. The sun travels sometimes slowly, sometimes swiftly and sometimes at a moderate speed. In this way it travels within the three worlds, consisting of the heavenly planets, the earthly planets and outer space. These orbits are referred to by great learned scholars by the names Saṁvatsara, Parivatsara, Iḍāvatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara.





The moon is situated 100,000 yojanas above the rays of the sunshine. Day and night on the heavenly planets and Pitṛloka are calculated according to its waning and waxing. Above the moon by a distance of 200,000 yojanas are some stars, and above these stars is Śukra-graha (Venus), whose influence is always auspicious for the inhabitants of the entire universe. Above Śukra-graha by 200,000 yojanas is Budha-graha (Mercury), whose influence is sometimes auspicious and sometimes inauspicious. Next, above Budha-graha by 200,000 yojanas, is Aṅgāraka (Mars), which almost always has an unfavorable influence. Above Aṅgāraka by another 200,000 yojanas is the planet called Bṛhaspati-graha (Jupiter), which is always very favorable for qualified brāhmaṇas. Above Bṛhaspati-graha is the planet Śanaiścara (Saturn), which is very inauspicious, and above Saturn is a group of seven stars occupied by great saintly persons who are always thinking of the welfare of the entire universe. These seven stars circumambulate Dhruvaloka, which is the residence of Lord Viṣṇu within this universe.





TEXT 1



rājovāca

yad etad bhagavata ādityasya meruṁ dhruvaṁ ca pradakṣiṇena parikrāmato rāśīnām abhimukhaṁ pracalitaṁ cāpradakṣiṇaṁ bhagavatopavarṇitam amuṣya vayaṁ katham anumimīmahīti.



SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-the King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit) inquired; yat-which; etat-this; bhagavataḥ-of the most powerful; ādityasya-of the sun (Sūrya Nārāyaṇa); merum-the mountain known as Sumeru; dhruvam ca-as well as the planet known as Dhruvaloka; pradakṣiṇena-by placing on the right; parikrāmataḥ-which is going around; rāśīnām-the different signs of the zodiac; abhimukham-facing toward; pracalitam-moving; ca-and; apradakṣiṇam-placing on the left; bhagavatā-by Your Lordship; upavarṇitam-described; amuṣya-of that; vayam-we (the hearer); katham-how; anumimīmahi-can accept it by argument and inference; iti-thus.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My dear lord, you have already affirmed the truth that the supremely powerful sun-god travels around Dhruvaloka with both Dhruvaloka and Mount Sumeru on his right. Yet at the same time the sun-god faces the signs of the zodiac and keeps Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on his left. How can we reasonably accept that the sun-god proceeds with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on both his left and right simultaneously?





TEXT 2



sa hovāca

yathā kulāla-cakreṇa bhramatā saha bhramatāṁ tad-āśrayāṇāṁ pipīlikādīnāṁ gatir anyaiva pradeśāntareṣv apy upalabhyamānatvād evaṁ nakṣatra-rāśibhir upalakṣitena kāla-cakreṇa dhruvaṁ meruṁ ca pradakṣiṇena paridhāvatā saha paridhāvamānānāṁ tad-āśrayāṇāṁ sūryādīnāṁ grahāṇāṁ gatir anyaiva nakṣatrāntare rāśy-antare copalabhyamānatvāt.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-Śukadeva Gosvāmī; ha-very clearly; uvāca-answered; yathā-just as; kulāla-cakreṇa-a potter's wheel; bhramatā-turning around; saha-with; bhramatām-of those turning around; tat-āśrayāṇām-being located on that (wheel); pipīlika-ādīnām-of small ants; gatiḥ-the motion; anyā-other; eva-certainly; pradeśa-antareṣu-in different locations; api-also; upalabhyamānatvāt-due to being experienced; evam-similarly; nakṣatra-rāśibhiḥ-by the stars and signs; upalakṣitena-being seen; kāla-cakreṇa-with the great wheel of time; dhruvam-the star known as Dhruvaloka; merum-the mountain known as Sumeru; ca-and; pradakṣiṇena-on the right; paridhāvatā-going around; saha-with; paridhāvamānānām-of those going around; tat-āśrayāṇām-whose shelter is that wheel of time; sūrya-ādīnām-headed by the sun; grahāṇām-of the planets; gatiḥ-the motion; anyā-other; eva-certainly; nakṣatra-antare-in different stars; rāśi-antare-in different signs; ca-and; upalabhyamānatvāt-due to being observed.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī clearly answered: When a potter's wheel is moving and small ants located on that big wheel are moving with it, one can see that their motion is different from that of the wheel because they appear sometimes on one part of the wheel and sometimes on another. Similarly, the signs and constellations, with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on their right, move with the wheel of time, and the antlike sun and other planets move with them. The sun and planets, however, are seen in different signs and constellations at different times. This indicates that their motion is different from that of the zodiac and the wheel of time itself.





TEXT 3



sa eṣa bhagavān ādi-puruṣa eva sākṣān nārāyaṇo lokānāṁ svastaya ātmānaṁ trayīmayaṁ karma-viśuddhi-nimittaṁ kavibhir api ca vedena vijijñāsyamāno dvādaśadhā vibhajya ṣaṭsu vasantādiṣv ṛtuṣu yathopa-joṣam ṛtu-guṇān vidadhāti.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that; eṣaḥ-this; bhagavān-the supremely powerful; ādi-puruṣaḥ-the original person; eva-certainly; sākṣāt-directly; nārāyaṇaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa; lokānām-of all the planets; svastaye-for the benefit; ātmānam-Himself; trayī-mayam-consisting of the three Vedas (Sāma, Yajur and Ṛg); karma-viśuddhi-of purification of fruitive activities; nimittam-the cause; kavibhiḥ-by great saintly persons; api-also; ca-and; vedena-by Vedic knowledge; vijijñāsyamānaḥ-being inquired about; dvādaśa-dhā-in twelve divisions; vibhajya-dividing; ṣaṭsu-in six; vasanta-ādiṣu-headed by spring; ṛtuṣu-seasons; yathā-upajoṣam-according to the enjoyment of their past activities; ṛtu-guṇān-the qualities of the different seasons; vidadhāti-he arranges.





The original cause of the cosmic manifestation is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. When great saintly persons, fully aware of the Vedic knowledge, offered prayers to the Supreme Person, He descended to this material world in the form of the sun to benefit all the planets and purify fruitive activities. He divided Himself into twelve parts and created seasonal forms, beginning with spring. In this way He created the seasonal qualities, such as heat, cold and so on.





TEXT 4



tam etam iha puruṣās trayyā vidyayā varṇāśramācārānupathā uccāvacaiḥ karmabhir āmnātair yoga-vitānaiś ca śraddhayā yajanto 'ñjasā śreyaḥ samadhigacchanti.



SYNONYMS



tam-Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); etam-this; iha-in this world of mortality; puruṣāḥ-all people; trayyā-having three divisions; vidyayā-by the Vedic knowledge; varṇa-āśrama-ācāra-the practices of the varṇāśrama system; anupathāḥ-following; ucca-avacaiḥ-higher or lower according to the different positions in the varṇāśrama-dharma (brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra); karmabhiḥ-by their respective activities; āmnātaiḥ-handed down; yoga-vitānaiḥ-by meditation and other yogic processes; ca-and; śraddhayā-with great faith; yajantaḥ-worshiping; añjasā-without difficulty; śreyaḥ-the ultimate benefit of life; samadhigacchanti-they attain.





According to the system of four varṇas and four āśramas, people generally worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, who is situated as the sun-god. With great faith they worship the Supreme Personality as the Supersoul according to ritualistic ceremonies handed down in the three Vedas, such as agnihotra and similar higher and lower fruitive acts, and according to the process of mystic yoga. In this way they very easily attain the ultimate goal of life.





TEXT 5



atha sa eṣa ātmā lokānāṁ dyāv-āpṛthivyor antareṇa nabho-valayasya kālacakra-gato dvādaśa māsān bhuṅkte rāśi-saṁjñān saṁvatsarāvayavān māsaḥ pakṣa-dvayaṁ divā naktaṁ ceti sapādarkṣa-dvayam upadiśanti yāvatā ṣaṣṭham aṁśaṁ bhuñjīta sa vai ṛtur ity upadiśyate saṁvatsarāvayavaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; saḥ-He; eṣaḥ-this; ātmā-the living force; lokānām-of all the three worlds; dyāv-ā-pṛthivyoḥ antareṇa-between the upper and lower portions of the universe; nabhaḥ-valayasya-of outer space; kāla-cakra-gataḥ-positioned in the wheel of time; dvādaśa māsān-twelve months; bhuṅkte-passes; rāśi-saṁjñān-named after the zodiac signs; saṁvatsara-avayavān-the parts of the whole year; māsaḥ-one month; pakṣa-dvayam-two fortnights; divā-a day; naktam ca-and a night; iti-thus; sapāda-ṛkṣa-dvayam-by stellar calculations, two and a quarter constellations; upadiśanti-they instruct; yāvatā-by as much time; ṣaṣṭham aṁśam-one sixth of his orbit; bhuñjīta-pass; saḥ-that portion; vai-indeed; ṛtuḥ-a season; iti-thus; upadiśyate-is instructed; saṁvatsara-avayavaḥ-a part of a year.





The sun-god, who is Nārāyaṇa, or Viṣṇu, the soul of all the worlds, is situated in outer space between the upper and lower portions of the universe. Passing through twelve months on the wheel of time, the sun comes in touch with twelve different signs of the zodiac and assumes twelve different names according to those signs. The aggregate of those twelve months is called a saṁvatsara, or an entire year. According to lunar calculations, two fortnights-one of the waxing moon and the other of the waning-form one month. That same period is one day and night for the planet Pitṛloka. According to stellar calculations, a month equals two and one quarter constellations. When the sun travels for two months, a season passes, and therefore the seasonal changes are considered parts of the body of the year.





TEXT 6



atha ca yāvatārdhena nabho-vīthyāṁ pracarati taṁ kālam ayanam ācakṣate.



SYNONYMS



atha-now; ca-also; yāvatā-by as long as; ardhena-half; nabhaḥ-vīthyām-in outer space; pracarati-the sun moves; tam-that; kālam-time; ayanam-ayana; ācakṣate-is said.





Thus the time the sun takes to rotate through half of outer space is called an ayana, or its period of movement [in the north or in the south].





TEXT 7



atha ca yāvan nabho-maṇḍalaṁ saha dyāv-āpṛthivyor maṇḍalābhyāṁ kārtsnyena sa ha bhuñjīta taṁ kālaṁ saṁvatsaraṁ parivatsaram iḍāvatsaram anuvatsaraṁ vatsaram iti bhānor māndya-śaighrya-sama-gatibhiḥ samāmananti.



SYNONYMS



atha-now; ca-also; yāvat-as long as; nabhaḥ-maṇḍalam-outer space, between the upper and lower world; saha-along with; dyau-of the upper world; āpṛthivyoḥ-of the lower world; maṇḍalābhyām-the spheres; kārtsnyena-entirely; saḥ-he; ha-indeed; bhuñjīta-may pass through; tam-that; kālam-time; saṁvatsaram-Saṁvatsara; parivatsaram-Parivatsara; iḍāvatsaram-Iḍāvatsara; anuvatsaram-Anuvatsara; vatsaram-Vatsara; iti-thus; bhānoḥ-of the sun; māndya-slow; śaighrya-speedy; sama-and equal; gatibhiḥ-by the speeds; samāmananti-the experienced scholars describe.





The sun-god has three speeds-slow, fast and moderate. The time he takes to travel entirely around the spheres of heaven, earth and space at these three speeds is referred to, by learned scholars, by the five names Saṁvatsara, Parivatsara, Iḍāvatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara.





According to solar astronomical calculations, each year extends six days beyond the calendar year, and according to lunar calculations, each year is six days shorter. Therefore, because of the movements of the sun and moon, there is a difference of twelve days between the solar and lunar years. As the Saṁvatsara, Parivatsara, Iḍāvatsara, Anuvatsara and Vatsara pass by, two extra months are added within each five years. This makes a sixth saṁvatsara, but because that saṁvatsara is extra, the solar system is calculated according to the above five names.





TEXT 8



evaṁ candramā arka-gabhastibhya upariṣṭāl lakṣa-yojanata upalabhyamāno 'rkasya saṁvatsara-bhuktiṁ pakṣābhyāṁ māsa-bhuktiṁ sapādarkṣābhyāṁ dinenaiva pakṣa-bhuktim agracārī drutatara-gamano bhuṅkte.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; candramā-the moon; arka-gabhastibhyaḥ-from the rays of the sunshine; upariṣṭāt-above; lakṣa-yojanataḥ-by a measurement of 100,000 yojanas; upalabhyamānaḥ-being situated; arkasya-of the sun globe; saṁvatsara-bhuktim-the passage of one year of enjoyment; pakṣābhyām-by two fortnights; māsa-bhuktim-the passage of one month; sapāda-ṛkṣābhyām-by two and a quarter days; dinena-by a day; eva-only; pakṣa-bhuktim-the passage of a fortnight; agracārī-moving impetuously; druta-tara-gamanaḥ-passing more speedily; bhuṅkte-passes through.





Above the rays of the sunshine by a distance of 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles] is the moon, which travels at a speed faster than that of the sun. In two lunar fortnights the moon travels through the equivalent of a saṁvatsara of the sun, in two and a quarter days it passes through a month of the sun, and in one day it passes through a fortnight of the sun.





When we take into account that the moon is 100,000 yojanas, or 800,000 miles, above the rays of the sunshine, it is very surprising that the modern excursions to the moon could be possible. Since the moon is so distant, how space vehicles could go there is a doubtful mystery. Modern scientific calculations are subject to one change after another, and therefore they are uncertain. We have to accept the calculations of the Vedic literature. These Vedic calculations are steady; the astronomical calculations made long ago and recorded in the Vedic literature are correct even now. Whether the Vedic calculations or modern ones are better may remain a mystery for others, but as far as we are concerned, we accept the Vedic calculations to be correct.





TEXT 9



atha cāpūryamāṇābhiś ca kalābhir amarāṇāṁ kṣīyamāṇābhiś ca kalābhiḥ pitṝṇām aho-rātrāṇi pūrva-pakṣāpara-pakṣābhyāṁ vitanvānaḥ sarva-jīva-nivaha-prāṇo jīvaś caikam ekaṁ nakṣatraṁ triṁśatā muhūrtair bhuṅkte.



SYNONYMS



atha-thus; ca-also; āpūryamāṇābhiḥ-gradually increasing; ca-and; kalābhiḥ-by the parts of the moon; amarāṇām-of the demigods; kṣīyamāṇābhiḥ-by gradually decreasing; ca-and; kalābhiḥ-by parts of the moon; pitṝṇām-of those on the planet known as Pitṛloka; ahaḥ-rātrāṇi-the days and nights; pūrva-pakṣa-apara-pakṣābhyām-by the period of waxing and waning; vitanvānaḥ-distributing; sarva-jīva-nivaha-of the total living entities; prāṇaḥ-the life; jīvaḥ-the chief living being; ca-also; ekam ekam-one after another; nakṣatram-a constellation of stars; triṁśatā-by thirty; muhūrtaiḥ-muhūrtas; bhuṅkte-passes through.





When the moon is waxing, the illuminating portions of it increase daily, thus creating day for the demigods and night for the pitās. When the moon is waning, however, it causes night for the demigods and day for the pitās. In this way the moon passes through each constellation of stars in thirty muhūrtas [an entire day]. The moon is the source of nectarean coolness that influences the growth of food grains, and therefore the moon-god is considered the life of all living entities. He is consequently called Jīva, the chief living being within the universe.





TEXT 10



ya eṣa ṣoḍaśa-kalaḥ puruṣo bhagavān manomayo 'nnamayo 'mṛtamayo deva-pitṛ-manuṣya-bhūta-paśu-pakṣi-sarīsṛpa-vīrudhāṁ prāṇāpy āyana-śīlatvāt sarvamaya iti varṇayanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-that; eṣaḥ-this; ṣoḍaśa-kalaḥ-having all sixteen parts (the full moon); puruṣaḥ-the person; bhagavān-having great power received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead; manaḥ-mayaḥ-the predominating deity of the mind; anna-mayaḥ-the source of potency for food grains; amṛta-mayaḥ-the source of the substance of life; deva-of all the demigods; pitṛ-of all the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; manuṣya-all human beings; bhūta-all living entities; paśu-of the animals; pakṣi-of the birds; sarīsṛpa-of the reptiles; vīrudhām-of all kinds of herbs and plants; prāṇa-life air; api-certainly; āyana-śīlatvāt-due to refreshing; sarva-mayaḥ-all-pervading; iti-thus; varṇayanti-the learned scholars describe.





Because the moon is full of all potentialities, it represents the influence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The moon is the predominating deity of everyone's mind, and therefore the moon-god is called Manomaya. He is also called Annamaya because he gives potency to all herbs and plants, and he is called Amṛtamaya because he is the source of life for all living entities. The moon pleases the demigods, pitās, human beings, animals, birds, reptiles, trees, plants and all other living entities. Everyone is satisfied by the presence of the moon. Therefore the moon is also called Sarvamaya [all-pervading].





TEXT 11



tata upariṣṭād dvi-lakṣa-yojanato nakṣatrāṇi meruṁ dakṣiṇenaiva kālāyana īśvara-yojitāni sahābhijitāṣṭā-viṁśatiḥ.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from that region of the moon; upariṣṭāt-above; dvi-lakṣa-yojanataḥ-200,000 yojanas; nakṣatrāṇi-many stars; merum-Sumeru Mountain; dakṣiṇena eva-to the right side; kāla-ayane-in the wheel of time; īśvara-yojitāni-attached by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saha-with; abhijitā-the star known as Abhijit; aṣṭā-viṁśatiḥ-twenty-eight.





There are many stars located 200,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles] above the moon. By the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are fixed to the wheel of time, and thus they rotate with Mount Sumeru on their right, their motion being different from that of the sun. There are twenty-eight important stars, headed by Abhijit.





The stars referred to herein are 1,600,000 miles above the sun, and thus they are 4,000,000 miles above the earth.





TEXT 12



tata upariṣṭād uśanā dvi-lakṣa-yojanata upalabhyate purataḥ paścāt sahaiva vārkasya śaighrya-māndya-sāmyābhir gatibhir arkavac carati lokānāṁ nityadānukūla eva prāyeṇa varṣayaṁś cāreṇānumīyate sa vṛṣṭi-viṣṭambha-grahopaśamanaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from that bunch of stars; upariṣṭāt-above; uśanā-Venus; dvi-lakṣa-yojanataḥ-200,000 yojanas (1,600,000 miles); upalabhyate-is experienced; purataḥ-in front; paścāt-behind; saha-along with; eva-indeed; vā-and; arkasya-of the sun; śaighrya-speedy; māndya-slow; sāmyābhiḥ-equal; gatibhiḥ-the movements; arkavat-exactly like the sun; carati-rotates; lokānām-of all the planets within the universe; nityadā-constantly; anukūlaḥ-offering favorable conditions; eva-indeed; prāyeṇa-almost always; varṣayan-causing rainfall; cāreṇa-by infusing the clouds; anumīyate-is perceived; saḥ-he (Venus); vṛṣṭi-viṣṭambha-obstacles to rainfall; graha-upaśamanaḥ-nullifying planets.





Some 1,600,000 miles above this group of stars is the planet Venus, which moves at almost exactly the same pace as the sun according to swift, slow and moderate movements. Sometimes Venus moves behind the sun, sometimes in front of the sun and sometimes along with it. Venus nullifies the influence of planets that are obstacles to rainfall. Consequently its presence causes rainfall, and it is therefore considered very favorable for all living beings within this universe. This has been accepted by learned scholars.





TEXT 13



uśanasā budho vyākhyātas tata upariṣṭād dvi-lakṣa-yojanato budhaḥ soma-suta upalabhyamānaḥ prāyeṇa śubha-kṛd yadārkād vyatiricyeta tadātivātābhra-prāyānāvṛṣṭy-ādi-bhayam āśaṁsate.



SYNONYMS



uśanasā-with Venus; budhaḥ-Mercury; vyākhyātaḥ-explained; tataḥ-from that (Venus); upariṣṭāt-above; dvi-lakṣa-yojanataḥ-1,600,000 miles; budhaḥ-Mercury; soma-sutaḥ-the son of the moon; upalabhyamānaḥ-is situated; prāyeṇa-almost always; śubha-kṛt-very auspicious to the inhabitants of the universe; yadā-when; arkāt-from the sun; vyatiricyeta-is separated; tadā-at that time; ativāta-of cyclones and other bad effects; abhra-clouds; prāya-almost always; anāvṛṣṭi-ādi-such as scarcity of rain; bhayam-fearful conditions; āśaṁsate-expands.





Mercury is described to be similar to Venus, in that it moves sometimes behind the sun, sometimes in front of the sun and sometimes along with it. It is 1,600,000 miles above Venus, or 7,200,000 miles above earth. Mercury, which is the son of the moon, is almost always very auspicious for the inhabitants of the universe, but when it does not move along with the sun, it forbodes cyclones, dust, irregular rainfall, and waterless clouds. In this way it creates fearful conditions due to inadequate or excessive rainfall.





TEXT 14



ata ūrdhvam aṅgārako 'pi yojana-lakṣa-dvitaya upalabhyamānas tribhis tribhiḥ pakṣair ekaikaśo rāśīn dvādaśānubhuṅkte yadi na vakreṇābhivartate prāyeṇāśubha-graho 'gha-śaṁsaḥ.



SYNONYMS



ataḥ-from this; ūrdhvam-above; aṅgārakaḥ-Mars; api-also; yojana-lakṣa-dvitaye-at a distance of 1,600,000 miles; upalabhyamānaḥ-is situated; tribhiḥ tribhiḥ-with each three and three; pakṣaiḥ-fortnights; eka-ekaśaḥ-one after another; rāśīn-the signs; dvādaśa-twelve; anubhuṅkte-passes through; yadi-if; na-not; vakreṇa-with a curve; abhivartate-approaches; prāyeṇa-almost always; aśubha-grahaḥ-an unfavorable, inauspicious planet; agha-śaṁsaḥ-creating trouble.





Situated 1,600,000 miles above Mercury, or 8,800,000 miles above earth, is the planet Mars. If this planet does not travel in a crooked way, it crosses through each sign of the zodiac in three fortnights and in this way travels through all twelve, one after another. It almost always creates unfavorable conditions in respect to rainfall and other influences.





TEXT 15



tata upariṣṭād dvi-lakṣa-yojanāntara-gatā bhagavān bṛhaspatir ekaikasmin rāśau parivatsaraṁ parivatsaraṁ carati yadi na vakraḥ syāt prāyeṇānukūlo brāhmaṇa-kulasya.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-that (Mars); upariṣṭāt-above; dvi-lakṣa-yojana-antara-gatāḥ-situated at a distance of 1,600,000 miles; bhagavān-the most powerful planet; bṛhaspatiḥ-Jupiter; eka-ekasmin-in one after another; rāśau-sign; parivatsaram parivatsaram-for the period of Parivatsara; carati-moves; yadi-if; na-not; vakraḥ-curved; syāt-becomes; prāyeṇa-almost always; anukūlaḥ-very favorable; brāhmaṇa-kulasya-to the brāhmaṇas of the universe.





Situated 1,600,000 miles above Mars, or 10,400,000 miles above earth, is the planet Jupiter, which travels through one sign of the zodiac within the period of a Parivatsara. If its movement is not curved, the planet Jupiter is very favorable to the brāhmaṇas of the universe.





TEXT 16



tata upariṣṭād yojana-lakṣa-dvayāt pratīyamānaḥ śanaiścara ekaikasmin rāśau triṁśan māsān vilambamānaḥ sarvān evānuparyeti tāvadbhir anuvatsaraiḥ prāyeṇa hi sarveṣām aśāntikaraḥ.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-that (Jupiter); upariṣṭāt-above; yojana-lakṣa-dvayāt-by a distance of 1,600,000 miles; pratīyamānaḥ-is situated; śanaiścaraḥ-the planet Saturn; eka-ekasmin-in one after another; rāśau-zodiac signs; triṁśat māsān-for a period of thirty months in each; vilam-bamānaḥ-lingering; sarvān-all twelve signs of the zodiac; eva-certainly; anuparyeti-passes through; tāvadbhiḥ-by so many; anuvatsaraiḥ-Anuvatsaras; prāyeṇa-almost always; hi-indeed; sarveṣām-to all the inhabitants; aśāntikaraḥ-very troublesome.





Situated 1,600,000 miles above Jupiter, or 12,000,000 miles above earth, is the planet Saturn, which passes through one sign of the zodiac in thirty months and covers the entire zodiac circle in thirty Anuvatsaras. This planet is always very inauspicious for the universal situation.





TEXT 17



tata uttarasmād ṛṣaya ekādaśa-lakṣa-yojanāntara upalabhyante ya eva lokānāṁ śam anubhāvayanto bhagavato viṣṇor yat paramaṁ padaṁ pradakṣiṇaṁ prakramanti.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-the planet Saturn; uttarasmāt-above; ṛṣayaḥ-great saintly sages; ekādaśa-lakṣa-yojana-antare-at a distance of 1,100,000 yojanas; upalabhyante-are situated; ye-all of them; eva-indeed; lokānām-for all the inhabitants of the universe; śam-the good fortune; anubhāvayantaḥ-always thinking of; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇoḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; yat-which; paramam padam-the supreme abode; pradakṣiṇam-placing on the right; prakramanti-circumambulate.





Situated 8,800,000 miles above Saturn, or 20,800,000 miles above earth, are the seven saintly sages, who are always thinking of the well-being of the inhabitants of the universe. They circumambulate the supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu, known as Dhruvaloka, the polestar.





Śrīla Madhvācārya quotes the following verse from the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa:



jñānānandātmano viṣṇuḥ

śiśumāra-vapuṣy atha

ūrdhva-lokeṣu sa vyāpta

ādityādyās tad-āśritā





Lord Viṣṇu, who is the source of knowledge and transcendental bliss, has assumed the form of Śiśumāra in the seventh heaven, which is situated in the topmost level of the universe. All the other planets, beginning with the sun, exist under the shelter of this Śiśumāra planetary system.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Orbits of the Planets."



Chapter Twenty-three



The Śiśumāra Planetary Systems





This chapter describes how all the planetary systems take shelter of the polestar, Dhruvaloka. It also describes the totality of these planetary systems to be Śiśumāra, another expansion of the external body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Dhruvaloka, the abode of Lord Viṣṇu within this universe, is situated 1,300,000 yojanas from the seven stars. In the planetary system of Dhruvaloka are the planets of the fire-god, Indra, Prajāpati, Kaśyapa and Dharma, all of whom are very respectful to the great devotee Dhruva, who lives on the polestar. Like bulls yoked to a central pivot, all the planetary systems revolve around Dhruvaloka, impelled by eternal time. Those who worship the virāṭ-puruṣa, the universal form of the Lord, conceive of this entire rotating system of planets as an animal known as śiśumāra. This imaginary śiśumāra is another form of the Lord. The head of the śiśumāra form is downward, and its body appears like that of a coiled snake. On the end of its tail is Dhruvaloka, on the body of the tail are Prajāpati, Agni, Indra and Dharma, and on the root of the tail are Dhātā and Vidhātā. On its waist are the seven great sages. The entire body of the śiśumāra faces toward its right and appears like a coil of stars. On the right side of this coil are the fourteen prominent stars from Abhijit to Punarvasu, and on the left side are the fourteen prominent stars from Puṣyā to Uttarāṣāḍhā. The stars known as Punarvasu and Puṣyā are on the right and left hips of the śiśumāra, and the stars known as Ārdrā and Aśleṣā are on the right and left feet of the śiśumāra. Other stars are also fixed on different sides of the Śiśumāra planetary system according to the calculations of Vedic astronomers. To concentrate their minds, yogīs worship the Śiśumāra planetary system, which is technically known as the kuṇḍalini-cakra.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

atha tasmāt paratas trayodaśa-lakṣa-yojanāntarato yat tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam abhivadanti yatra ha mahā-bhāgavato dhruva auttānapādir agninendreṇa prajāpatinā kaśyapena dharmeṇa ca samakāla-yugbhiḥ sabahu-mānaṁ dakṣiṇataḥ kriyamāṇa idānīm api kalpa-jīvinām ājīvya upāste tasyehānubhāva upavarṇitaḥ.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha-thereupon; tasmāt-the sphere of the seven stars; parataḥ-beyond that; trayodaśa-lakṣa-yojana-antarataḥ-another 1,300,000 yojanas; yat-which; tat-that; viṣṇoḥ paramam padam-the supreme abode of Lord Viṣṇu, or the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu; abhivadanti-the Ṛg Veda mantras praise; yatra-on which; ha-indeed; mahā-bhāgavataḥ-the great devotee; dhruvaḥ-Mahārāja Dhruva; auttānapādiḥ-the son of Mahārāja Uttānapāda; agninā-by the fire-god; indreṇa-by the heavenly King, Indra; prajāpatinā-by the Prajāpati; kaśyapena-by Kaśyapa; dharmeṇa-by Dharmarāja; ca-also; samakāla-yugbhiḥ-who are engaged at the time; sa-bahu-mānam-always respectfully; dakṣiṇataḥ-on the right side; kriyamāṇaḥ-being circumambulated; idānīm-now; api-even; kalpa-jīvinām-of the living entities who exist at the end of the creation; ājīvyaḥ-the source of life; upāste-remains; tasya-his; iha-here; anubhāvaḥ-greatness in discharging devotional service; upavarṇitaḥ-already described (in the Fourth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam).





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, 1,300,000 yojanas [10,400,000 miles] above the planets of the seven sages is the place that learned scholars describe as the abode of Lord Viṣṇu. There the son of Mahārāja Uttānapāda, the great devotee Mahārāja Dhruva, still resides as the life source of all the living entities who live until the end of the creation. Agni, Indra, Prajāpati, Kaśyapa and Dharma all assemble there to offer him honor and respectful obeisances. They circumambulate him with their right sides toward him. I have already described the glorious activities of Mahārāja Dhruva [in the Fourth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam].





TEXT 2



sa hi sarveṣāṁ jyotir-gaṇānāṁ graha-nakṣatrādīnām animiṣeṇāvyakta-raṁhasā bhagavatā kālena bhrāmyamāṇānāṁ sthāṇur ivāvaṣṭambha īśvareṇa vihitaḥ śaśvad avabhāsate.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that planet of Dhruva Mahārāja; hi-indeed; sarveṣām-of all; jyotiḥ-gaṇānām-the luminaries; graha-nakṣatra-ādīnām-such as the planets and stars; animiṣeṇa-who does not rest; avyakta-inconceivable; raṁhasā-whose force; bhagavatā-the most powerful; kālena-by the time factor; bhrāmyamāṇānām-being caused to revolve; sthāṇuḥ iva-like a post; avaṣṭambhaḥ-the pivot; īśvareṇa-by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vihitaḥ-established; śaśvat-constantly; avabhāsate-shines.





Established by the supreme will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the polestar, which is the planet of Mahārāja Dhruva, constantly shines as the central pivot for all the stars and planets. The unsleeping, invisible, most powerful time factor causes these luminaries to revolve around the polestar without cessation.





It is distinctly stated herein that all the luminaries, the planets and stars, revolve by the influence of the supreme time factor. The time factor is another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone is under the influence of the time factor, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind and loves His devotee Mahārāja Dhruva so much that He has placed all the luminaries under the control of Dhruva's planet and has arranged for the time factor to work under him or with his cooperation. Everything is actually done according to the will and direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but to make His devotee Dhruva the most important individual within the universe, the Lord has placed the activities of the time factor under his control.





TEXT 3



yathā meḍhīstambha ākramaṇa-paśavaḥ saṁyojitās tribhis tribhiḥ savanair yathā-sthānaṁ maṇḍalāni caranty evaṁ bhagaṇā grahādaya etasminn antar-bahir-yogena kāla-cakra āyojitā dhruvam evāvalambya vāyunodīryamāṇā ākalpāntaṁ paricaṅ kramanti nabhasi yathā meghāḥ śyenādayo vāyu-vaśāḥ karma-sārathayaḥ parivartante evaṁ jyotirgaṇāḥ prakṛti-puruṣa-saṁyogānugṛhītāḥ karma-nirmita-gatayo bhuvi na patanti.



SYNONYMS



yathā-exactly like; meḍhīstambhe-to the pivot post; ākramaṇa-paśavaḥ-bulls for threshing rice; saṁyojitāḥ-being yoked; tribhiḥ tribhiḥ-by three; savanaiḥ-movements; yathā-sthānam-in their proper places; maṇḍalāni-orbits; caranti-traverse; evam-in the same way; bha-gaṇāḥ-the luminaries, like the sun, the moon, Venus, Mercury, Mars and Jupiter; graha-ādayaḥ-the different planets; etasmin-in this; antaḥ-bahiḥ-yogena-by connection with the inner or outer circles; kāla-cakre-in the wheel of eternal time; āyojitāḥ-fixed; dhruvam-Dhruvaloka; eva-certainly; avalambya-taking support of; vāyunā-by the wind; udīryamāṇāḥ-being propelled; ā-kalpa-antam-until the end of the creation; paricaṅ kramanti-revolve all around; nabhasi-in the sky; yathā-exactly like; meghāḥ-heavy clouds; śyena-ādayaḥ-birds such as the big eagle; vāyu-vaśāḥ-controlled by the air; karma-sārathayaḥ-whose chariot drivers are the results of their own past activities; parivartante-move around; evam-in this way; jyotiḥ-gaṇāḥ-the luminaries, the planets and stars in the sky; prakṛti-of material nature; puruṣa-and of the Supreme Personality, Kṛṣṇa; saṁyoga-anugṛhītāḥ-supported by the combined efforts; karma-nirmita-caused by their own past fruitive activities; gatayaḥ-whose movements; bhuvi-on the ground; na-not; patanti-fall down.





When bulls are yoked together and tied to a central post to thresh rice, they tread around that pivot without deviating from their proper positions-one bull being closest to the post, another in the middle, and a third on the outside. Similarly, all the planets and all the hundreds and thousands of stars revolve around the polestar, the planet of Mahārāja Dhruva, in their respective orbits, some higher and some lower. Fastened by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to the machine of material nature according to the results of their fruitive acts, they are driven around the polestar by the wind and will continue to be so until the end of creation. These planets float in the air within the vast sky, just as clouds with hundreds of tons of water float in the air or as the great śyena eagles, due to the results of past activities, fly high in the sky and have no chance of falling to the ground.





According to the description of this verse, the hundreds and thousands of stars and the great planets such as the sun, the moon, Venus, Mercury, Mars and Jupiter are not clustered together because of the law of gravity or any similar idea of the modern scientists. These planets and stars are all servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda or Kṛṣṇa, and according to His order they sit in their chariots and travel in their respective orbits. The orbits in which they move are compared to machines given by material nature to the operating deities of the stars and planets, who carry out the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by revolving around Dhruvaloka, which is occupied by the great devotee Mahārāja Dhruva. This is confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52) as follows:



yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye of the Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time. The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency in heat and light." This verse from Brahma-saṁhitā confirms that even the largest and most powerful planet, the sun, rotates within a fixed orbit, or kāla-cakra, in obedience to the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This has nothing to do with gravity or any other imaginary laws created by the material scientists.



Material scientists want to avoid the ruling government of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore they imagine different conditions under which they suppose the planets move. The only condition, however, is the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All the various predominating deities of the planets are persons, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is also a person. The Supreme Personality orders the subordinate persons, the demigods of various names, to carry out His supreme will. This fact is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10), wherein Kṛṣṇa says:



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again."



The orbits of the planets resemble the bodies in which all living entities are seated because they are both machines controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61):



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā





"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy." The machine given by material nature-whether the machine of the body or the machine of the orbit, or kāla-cakra-works according to the orders given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead and material nature work together to maintain this great universe, and not only this universe but also the millions of other universes beyond this one.



The question of how the planets and stars are floating is also answered in this verse. It is not because of the laws of gravity. Rather, the planets and stars are enabled to float by manipulations of the air. It is due to such manipulations that big, heavy clouds float and big eagles fly in the sky. Modern airplanes like the 747 jet aircraft work in a similar way: by controlling the air, they float high in the sky, resisting the tendency to fall to earth. Such adjustments of the air are all made possible by the cooperation of the principles of puruṣa (male) and prakṛti (female). By the cooperation of material nature, which is considered to be prakṛti, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is considered the puruṣa, all the affairs of the universe are going on nicely in their proper order. prakṛti, material nature, is also described in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.44) as follows:



sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"The external potency, māyā, who is of the nature of the shadow of the cit [spiritual] potency, is worshiped by all people as Durgā, the creating, preserving and destroying agency of this mundane world. I adore the primeval Lord Govinda, in accordance with whose will Durgā conducts herself." Material nature, the external energy of the Supreme Lord, is also known as Durgā, or the female energy that protects the great fort of this universe. The word Durgā also means fort. This universe is just like a great fort in which all the conditioned souls are kept, and they cannot leave it unless they are liberated by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself declares in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Thus simply by Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can be liberated, or, in other words, one can be released from the great fort of this universe and go outside it to the spiritual world.



It is also significant that the predominating deities of even the greatest planets have been offered their exalted posts because of the very valuable pious activities they performed in previous births. This is indicated herein by the words karma-nirmita-gatayaḥ. For example, as we have previously discussed, the moon is called jīva, which means that he is a living entity like us, but because of his pious activities he has been appointed to his post as the moon-god. Similarly, all the demigods are living entities who have been appointed to their various posts as the masters of the moon, the earth, Venus and so on because of their great service and pious acts. Only the predominating deity of the sun, Sūrya Nārāyaṇa, is an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mahārāja Dhruva, the predominating deity of Dhruvaloka, is also a living entity. Thus there are two kinds of entities-the supreme entity, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the ordinary living entity, the jīva (nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām). All the demigods are engaged in the service of the Lord, and only by such an arrangement are the affairs of the universe going on.



Regarding the great eagles mentioned in this verse, it is understood that there are eagles so big that they can prey on big elephants. They fly so high that they can travel from one planet to another. They start flying in one planet and land in another, and while in flight they lay eggs that hatch into other birds while falling through the air. In Sanskrit such eagles are called śyena. Under the present circumstances, of course, we cannot see such huge birds, but at least we know of eagles that can capture monkeys and then throw them down to kill and eat them. Similarly, it is understood that there are gigantic birds that can carry off elephants, kill them and eat them.



The two examples of the eagle and the cloud are sufficient to prove that flying and floating can be made possible through adjustments of the air. The planets, in a similar way, are floating because material nature adjusts the air according to the orders of the Supreme Lord. It could be said that these adjustments constitute the law of gravity, but in any case, one must accept that these laws are made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The so-called scientists have no control over them. The scientists can falsely, improperly declare that there is no God, but this is not a fact.





TEXT 4



kecanaitaj jyotir-anīkaṁ śiśumāra-saṁsthānena bhagavato vāsudevasya yoga-dhāraṇāyām anuvarṇayanti.



SYNONYMS



kecana-some yogīs or learned scholars of astronomy; etat-this; jyotiḥ-anīkam-great wheel of planets and stars; śiśumāra-saṁsthānena-imagine this wheel to be a śiśumāra (dolphin); bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevasya-Lord Vāsudeva (the son of Vasudeva), Kṛṣṇa; yoga-dhāraṇāyām-in absorption in worship; anuvarṇayanti-describe.





This great machine, consisting of the stars and planets, resembles the form of a śiśumāra [dolphin] in the water. It is sometimes considered an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. Great yogīs meditate upon Vāsudeva in this form because it is actually visible.





Transcendentalists such as yogīs whose minds cannot accommodate the form of the Lord prefer to visualize something very great, such as the virāṭ-puruṣa. Therefore some yogīs contemplate this imaginary śiśumāra to be swimming in the sky the way a dolphin swims in water. They meditate upon it as the virāṭ-rūpa, the gigantic form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 5



yasya pucchāgre 'vākśirasaḥ kuṇḍalī-bhūta-dehasya dhruva upakalpitas tasya lāṅgūle prajāpatir agnir indro dharma iti puccha-mūle dhātā vidhātā ca kaṭyāṁ saptarṣayaḥ; tasya dakṣiṇāvarta-kuṇḍalī-bhūta-śarīrasya yāny udagayanāni dakṣiṇa-pārśve tu nakṣatrāṇy upakalpayanti dakṣiṇāyanāni tu savye; yathā śiśumārasya kuṇḍalā-bhoga-sanniveśasya pārśvayor ubhayor apy avayavāḥ samasaṅkhyā bhavanti; pṛṣṭhe tv ajavīthī ākāśa-gaṅgā codarataḥ.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of which; puccha-agre-at the end of the tail; avākśirasaḥ-whose head is downward; kuṇḍalī-bhūta-dehasya-whose body, which is coiled; dhruvaḥ-Mahārāja Dhruva on his planet, the polestar; upakalpitaḥ-is situated; tasya-of that; lāṅgūle-on the tail; prajāpatiḥ-of the name Prajāpati; agniḥ-Agni; indraḥ-Indra; dharmaḥ-Dharma; iti-thus; puccha-mūle-at the base of the tail; dhātā vidhātā-the demigods known as Dhātā and Vidhātā; ca-also; kaṭyām-on the hip; sapta-ṛṣayaḥ-the seven saintly sages; tasya-of that; dakṣiṇa-āvarta-kuṇḍalī-bhūta-śarīrasya-whose body is like a coil turning toward the right side; yāni-which; udagayanāni-marking the northern courses; dakṣiṇa-pārśve-on the right side; tu-but; nakṣatrāṇi-constellations; upakalpayanti-are situated; dakṣiṇa-āyanāni-the fourteen stars, from Puṣyā to Uttarāṣāḍhā, marking the northern course; tu-but; savye-on the left side; yathā-just like; śiśumārasya-of the dolphin; kuṇḍalā-bhoga-sanniveśasya-whose body appears like a coil; pārśvayoḥ-on the sides; ubhayoḥ-both; api-certainly; avayavāḥ-the limbs; samasaṅkhyāḥ-of equal number (fourteen); bhavanti-are; pṛṣṭhe-on the back; tu-of course; ajavīthī-the first three stars marking the southern route (Mūlā, Pūrvaṣāḍhā and Uttarāṣāḍhā); ākāśa-gaṅgā-the Ganges in the sky (the Milky Way); ca-also; udarataḥ-on the abdomen.





This form of the śiśumāra has its head downward and its body coiled. On the end of its tail is the planet of Dhruva, on the body of its tail are the planets of the demigods Prajāpati, Agni, Indra and Dharma, and at the base of its tail are the planets of the demigods Dhātā and Vidhātā. Where the hips might be on the śiśumāra are the seven saintly sages like Vasiṣṭha and Aṅgirā. The coiled body of the Śiśumāra-cakra turns toward its right side, on which the fourteen constellations from Abhijit to Punarvasu are located. On its left side are the fourteen stars from Puṣyā to Uttarāṣāḍhā. Thus its body is balanced because its sides are occupied by an equal number of stars. On the back of the śiśumāra is the group of stars known as Ajavīthī, and on its abdomen is the Ganges that flows in the sky [the Milky Way].





TEXT 6



punarvasu-puṣyau dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ śroṇyor ārdrāśleṣe ca dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ paścimayoḥ pādayor abhijid-uttarāṣāḍhe dakṣiṇa-vāmayor nāsikayor yathā-saṅkhyaṁ śravaṇa-pūrvāṣāḍhe dakṣiṇa-vāmayor locanayor dhaniṣṭhā mūlaṁ ca dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ karṇayor maghādīny aṣṭa nakṣatrāṇi dakṣiṇāyanāni vāma-pārśva-vaṅkriṣu yuñjīta tathaiva mṛga-śīrṣādīny udagayanāni dakṣiṇa-pārśva-vaṅkriṣu prātilomyena prayuñjīta śatabhiṣā-jyeṣṭhe skandhayor dakṣiṇa-vāmayor nyaset.



SYNONYMS



punarvasu-the star named Punarvasu; puṣyau-and the star named Puṣyā; dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ-on the right and left; śroṇyoḥ-loins; ārdrā-the star named Ārdrā; aśleṣe-the star named Aśleṣā; ca-also; dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ-at the right and left; paścimayoḥ-behind; pādayoḥ-feet; abhijit-uttarāṣāḍhe-the stars named Abhijit and Uttarāṣāḍhā; dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ-on the right and left; nāsikayoḥ-nostrils; yathā-saṅkhyam-according to numerical order; śravaṇa-pūrvāṣāḍhe-the stars named Śravaṇā and Pūrvāṣāḍhā; dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ-at the right and left; locanayoḥ-eyes; dhaniṣṭhā mūlam ca-and the stars named Dhaniṣṭhā and Mūlā; dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ-at the right and left; karṇayoḥ-ears; maghā-ādīni-the stars such as Maghā; aṣṭa nakṣatrāṇi-eight stars; dakṣiṇa-āyanāni-which mark the southern course; vāma-pārśva-of the left side; vaṅkriṣu-at the ribs; yuñjīta-may place; tathā eva-similarly; mṛga-śīrṣā-ādīni-such as Mṛgaśīrṣā; udagayanāni-marking the northern course; dakṣiṇa-pārśva-vaṅkriṣu-on the right side; prātilomyena-in the reverse order; prayuñjīta-may place; śatabhiṣā-Śatabhiṣā; jyeṣṭhe-Jyeṣṭhā; skandhayoḥ-on the two shoulders; dakṣiṇa-vāmayoḥ-right and left; nyaset-should place.





On the right and left sides of where the loins might be on the Śiśumāra-cakra are the stars named Punarvasu and Puṣyā. Ārdrā and Aśleṣā are on its right and left feet, Abhijit and Uttarāṣāḍhā are on its right and left nostrils, Śravaṇā and Pūrvāṣāḍhā are at its right and left eyes, and Dhaniṣṭhā and Mūlā are on its right and left ears. The eight stars from Maghā to Anurādhā, which mark the southern course, are on the ribs of the left of its body, and the eight stars from Mṛgaśīrṣā to Pūrvabhādra, which mark the northern course, are on the ribs on the right side. Śatabhiṣā and Jyeṣṭhā are on the right and left shoulders.





TEXT 7



uttarā-hanāv agastir adharā-hanau yamo mukheṣu cāṅgārakaḥ śanaiścara upasthe bṛhaspatiḥ kakudi vakṣasy ādityo hṛdaye nārāyaṇo manasi candro nābhyām uśanā stanayor aśvinau budhaḥ prāṇāpānayo rāhur gale ketavaḥ sarvāṅgeṣu romasu sarve tārā-gaṇāḥ.



SYNONYMS



uttarā-hanau-on the upper jaw; agastiḥ-the star named Agasti; adharā-hanau-on the lower jaw; yamaḥ-Yamarāja; mukheṣu-on the mouth; ca-also; aṅgārakaḥ-Mars; śanaiścaraḥ-Saturn; upasthe-on the genitals; bṛhaspatiḥ-Jupiter; kakudi-on the back of the neck; vakṣasi-on the chest; ādityaḥ-the sun; hṛdaye-within the heart; nārāyaṇaḥ-Lord Nārāyaṇa; manasi-in the mind; candraḥ-the moon; nābhyām-on the navel; uśanā-Venus; stanayoḥ-on the two breasts; aśvinau-the two stars named Aśvin; budhaḥ-Mercury; prāṇāpānayoḥ-in the inner airs known as prāṇa and apāna; rāhuḥ-the planet Rāhu; gale-on the neck; ketavaḥ-comets; sarva-aṅgeṣu-all over the body; romasu-in the pores of the body; sarve-all; tārā-gaṇāḥ-the numerous stars.





On the upper chin of the śiśumāra is Agasti; on its lower chin, Yamarāja; on its mouth, Mars; on its genitals, Saturn; on the back of its neck, Jupiter; on its chest, the sun; and within the core of its heart, Nārāyaṇa. Within its mind is the moon; on its navel, Venus; and on its breasts, the Aśvinī-kumāras. Within its life air, which is known as prāṇāpāna, is Mercury, on its neck is Rāhu, all over its body are comets, and in its pores are the numerous stars.





TEXT 8



etad u haiva bhagavato viṣṇoḥ sarva-devatāmayaṁ rūpam aharahaḥ sandhyāyāṁ prayato vāgyato nirīkṣamāṇa upatiṣṭheta namo jyotir-lokāya kālāyanāyānimiṣāṁ pataye mahā-puruṣāyābhidhīmahīti.



SYNONYMS



etat-this; u ha-indeed; eva-certainly; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; sarva-devatā-mayam-consisting of all the demigods; rūpam-form; ahaḥ-ahaḥ-always; sandhyāyām-in the morning, noon and evening; prayataḥ-meditating upon; vāgyataḥ-controlling the words; nirīkṣamāṇaḥ-observing; upatiṣṭheta-one should worship; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; jyotiḥ-lokāya-unto the resting place of all the planetary systems; kālāyanāya-in the form of supreme time; animiṣām-of the demigods; pataye-unto the master; mahā-puruṣāya-unto the Supreme person; abhidhīmahi-let us meditate; iti-thus.





My dear King, the body of the śiśumāra, as thus described, should be considered the external form of Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Morning, noon and evening, one should silently observe the form of the Lord as the Śiśumāra-cakra and worship Him with this mantra: "O Lord who has assumed the form of time! O resting place of all the planets moving in different orbits! O master of all demigods, O Supreme Person, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You and meditate upon You."





TEXT 9



graharkṣatārāmayam ādhidaivikaṁ

pāpāpahaṁ mantra-kṛtāṁ tri-kālam

namasyataḥ smarato vā tri-kālaṁ

naśyeta tat-kālajam āśu pāpam

SYNONYMS



graha-ṛkṣa-tārā-mayam-consisting of all the planets and stars; ādhidaivikam-the leader of all the demigods; pāpa-apaham-the killer of sinful reactions; mantra-kṛtām-of those who chant the mantra mentioned above; tri-kālam-three times; namasyataḥ-offering obeisances; smarataḥ-meditating; vā-or; tri-kālam-three times; naśyeta-destroys; tat-kāla-jam-born at that time; āśu-very quickly; pāpam-all sinful reactions.





The body of the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, which forms the Śiśumāra-cakra, is the resting place of all the demigods and all the stars and planets. One who chants this mantra to worship that Supreme Person three times a day-morning, noon and evening-will surely be freed from all sinful reactions. If one simply offers his obeisances to this form or remembers this form three times a day, all his recent sinful activities will be destroyed.





Summarizing the entire description of the planetary systems of the universe, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that one who is able to meditate upon this arrangement as the virāṭ-rūpa, or viśva-rūpa, the external body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and worship Him three times a day by meditation will always be free from all sinful reactions. Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura estimates that Dhruvaloka, the polestar, is 3,800,000 yojanas above the sun. Above Dhruvaloka by 10,000,000 yojanas is Maharloka, above Maharloka by 20,000,000 yojanas is Janaloka, above Janaloka by 80,000,000 yojanas is Tapoloka, and above Tapoloka by 120,000,000 yojanas is Satyaloka. Thus the distance from the sun to Satyaloka is 233,800,000 yojanas, or 1,870,400,000 miles. The Vaikuṇṭha planets begin 26,200,000 yojanas (209,600,000 miles) above Satyaloka. Thus the Viṣṇu Purāṇa describes that the covering of the universe is 260,000,000 yojanas (2,080,000,000 miles) away from the sun. The distance from the sun to the earth is lower planetary systems called Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talātala, Mahātala, Rasātala and Pātāla. Below these lower planets by 30,000 yojanas, Śeṣa Nāga is lying on the Garbhodaka Ocean. That ocean is 249,800,000 yojanas deep. Thus the total diameter of the universe is approximately 500,000,000 yojanas, or 4,000,000,000 miles.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Fifth Canto, Twenty-third Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Śiśumāra planetary System."



Chapter Twenty-four



The Subterranean Heavenly Planets





This chapter describes the planet Rāhu, which is 10,000 yojanas (80,000 miles) below the sun, and it also describes Atala and the other lower planetary systems. Rāhu is situated below the sun and moon. It is between these two planets and the earth. When Rāhu conceals the sun and moon, eclipses occur, either total or partial, depending on whether Rāhu moves in a straight or curving way.





Below Rāhu by another 1,000,000 yojanas are the planets of the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Vidyādharas, and below these are planets such as Yakṣaloka and Rakṣaloka. Below these planets is the earth, and 70,000 yojanas below the earth are the lower planetary systems-Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talātala, Mahātala, Rasātala and Pātāla. Demons and Rakṣasas live in these lower planetary systems with their wives and children, always engaged in sense gratification and not fearing their next births. The sunshine does not reach these planets, but they are illuminated by jewels fixed upon the hoods of snakes. Because of these shining gems there is practically no darkness. Those living in these planets do not become old or diseased, and they are not afraid of death from any cause but the time factor, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





In the planet Atala, the yawning of a demon has produced three kinds of women, called svairiṇī (independent), kāmiṇī (lusty) and puṁścalī (very easily subdued by men). Below Atala is the planet Vitala, wherein Lord Śiva and his wife Gaurī reside. Because of their presence, a kind of gold is produced called hāṭaka. Below Vitala is the planet Sutala, the abode of Bali Mahārāja, the most fortunate king. Bali Mahārāja was favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāmanadeva, because of his intense devotional service. The Lord went to the sacrificial arena of Bali Mahārāja and begged him for three paces of land, and on this plea the Lord took from him all his possessions. When Bali Mahārāja agreed to all this, the Lord was very pleased, and therefore the Lord serves as his doorkeeper. The description of Bali Mahārāja appears in the Eighth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.





When the Supreme Personality of Godhead offers a devotee material happiness, this is not His real favor. The demigods, who are very puffed up by their material opulence, pray to the Lord only for material happiness, not knowing anything better. Devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja, however, do not want material happiness. Not to speak of material happiness, they do not want even liberation from material bondage, although one can achieve this liberation simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, even with improper pronunciation.





Below Sutala is the planet Talātala, the abode of the demon Maya. This demon is always materially happy because he is favored by Lord Śiva, but he cannot achieve spiritual happiness at any time. Below Talātala is the planet Mahātala, where there are many snakes with hundreds and thousands of hoods. Below Mahātala is Rasātala, and below that is Pātāla, where the serpent Vasukī lives with his associates.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

adhastāt savitur yojanāyute svarbhānur nakṣatravac caratīty eke yo 'sāv amaratvaṁ grahatvaṁ cālabhata bhagavad-anukampayā svayam asurāpasadaḥ saiṁhikeyo hy atad-arhas tasya tāta janma karmāṇi copariṣṭād vakṣyāmaḥ.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; adhastāt-below; savituḥ-the sun globe; yojana-a measurement equal to eight miles; ayute-ten thousand; svarbhānuḥ-the planet known as Rāhu; nakṣatra-vat-like one of the stars; carati-is rotating; iti-thus; eke-some who are learned in the Purāṇas; yaḥ-which; asau-that; amaratvam-a lifetime like those of the demigods; grahatvam-a position as one of the chief planets; ca-and; alabhata-obtained; bhagavat-anukampayā-by the compassion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam-personally; asura-apasadaḥ-the lowest of the asuras; saiṁhikeyaḥ-being the son of Siṁhikā; hi-indeed; a-tat-arhaḥ-not qualified for that position; tasya-his; tāta-O my dear King; janma-birth; karmāṇi-activities; ca-also; upariṣṭāt-later; vakṣyāmaḥ-I shall explain.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, some historians, the speakers of the Purāṇas, say that 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] below the sun is the planet known as Rāhu, which moves like one of the stars. The presiding deity of that planet, who is the son of Siṁhikā, is the most abominable of all asuras, but although he is completely unfit to assume the position of a demigod or planetary deity, he has achieved that position by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Later I shall speak further about him.





TEXT 2



yad adas taraṇer maṇḍalaṁ pratapatas tad vistarato yojanāyutam ācakṣate dvādaśa-sahasraṁ somasya trayodaśa-sahasraṁ rāhor yaḥ parvaṇi tad-vyavadhāna-kṛd vairānubandhaḥ sūryā-candramasāv abhidhāvati.



SYNONYMS



yat-which; adaḥ-that; taraṇeḥ-of the sun; maṇḍalam-globe; pratapataḥ-which is always distributing heat; tat-that; vistarataḥ-in terms of width; yojana-a distance of eight miles; ayutam-ten thousand; ācakṣate-they estimate; dvādaśa-sahasram-20,000 yojanas (160,000 miles); somasya-of the moon; trayodaśa-thirty; sahasram-one thousand; rāhoḥ-of the planet Rāhu; yaḥ-which; parvaṇi-on occasion; tat-vyavadhāna-kṛt-who created an obstruction to the sun and moon at the time of the distribution of nectar; vaira-anubandhaḥ-whose intentions are inimical; sūryā-the sun; candramasau-and the moon; abhidhāvati-runs after them on the full-moon night and the dark-moon day.





The sun globe, which is a source of heat, extends for 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles]. The moon extends for 20,000 yojanas [160,000 miles], and Rāhu extends for 30,000 yojanas [240,000 miles]. Formerly, when nectar was being distributed, Rāhu tried to create dissension between the sun and moon by interposing himself between them. Rāhu is inimical toward both the sun and the moon, and therefore he always tries to cover the sunshine and moonshine on the dark-moon day and full-moon night.





As stated herein, the sun extends for 10,000 yojanas, and the moon extends for twice that, or 20,000 yojanas. The word dvādaśa should be understood to mean twice as much as ten, or twenty. In the opinion of Vijayadhvaja, the extent of Rāhu should be twice that of the moon, or text of the Bhāgavatam, Vijayadhvaja cites the following quotation concerning Rāhu; rāhu-soma-ravīṇāṁ tu maṇḍalā dvi-guṇoktitām. This means that Rāhu is twice as large as the moon, which is twice as large as the sun. This is the conclusion of the commentator Vijayadhvaja.





TEXT 3



tan niśamyobhayatrāpi bhagavatā rakṣaṇāya prayuktaṁ sudarśanaṁ nāma bhāgavataṁ dayitam astraṁ tat tejasā durviṣahaṁ muhuḥ parivartamānam abhyavasthito muhūrtam udvijamānaś cakita-hṛdaya ārād eva nivartate tad uparāgam iti vadanti lokāḥ.



SYNONYMS



tat-that situation; niśamya-hearing; ubhayatra-around both the sun and moon; api-indeed; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rakṣaṇāya-for their protection; prayuktam-engaged; sudarśanam-the wheel of Kṛṣṇa; nāma-named; bhāgavatam-the most confidential devotee; dayitam-the most favorite; astram-weapon; tat-that; tejasā-by its effulgence; durviṣaham-unbearable heat; muhuḥ-repeatedly; parivartamānam-moving around the sun and moon; abhyavasthitaḥ-situated; muhūrtam-for a muhūrta (forty-eight minutes); udvijamānaḥ-whose mind was full of anxieties; cakita-frightened; hṛdayaḥ-the core of whose heart; ārāt-to a distant place; eva-certainly; nivartate-flees; tat-that situation; uparāgam-an eclipse; iti-thus; vadanti-they say; lokāḥ-the people.





After hearing from the sun and moon demigods about Rāhu's attack, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, engages His disc, known as the Sudarśana cakra, to protect them. The Sudarśana cakra is the Lord's most beloved devotee and is favored by the Lord. The intense heat of its effulgence, meant for killing non-Vaiṣṇavas, is unbearable to Rāhu, and he therefore flees in fear of it. During the time Rāhu disturbs the sun or moon, there occurs what people commonly know as an eclipse.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is always the protector of His devotees, who are also known as demigods. The controlling demigods are most obedient to Lord Viṣṇu, although they also want material sense enjoyment, and that is why they are called demigods, or almost godly. Although Rāhu attempts to attack both the sun and the moon, they are protected by Lord Viṣṇu. Being very afraid of Lord Viṣṇu's cakra, Rāhu cannot stay in front of the sun or moon for more than a muhūrta (forty-eight minutes). The phenomenon that occurs when Rāhu blocks the light of the sun or moon is called an eclipse. The attempt of the scientists of this earth to go to the moon is as demoniac as Rāhu's attack. Of course. their attempts will be failures because no one can enter the moon or sun so easily. Like the attack of Rāhu, such attempts will certainly be failures.





TEXT 4



tato 'dhastāt siddha-cāraṇa-vidyādharāṇāṁ sadanāni tāvan mātra eva.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-the planet Rāhu; adhastāt-below; siddha-cāraṇa-of the planets known as Siddhaloka and Cāraṇaloka; vidyādharāṇām-and the planets of the Vidyādharas; sadanāni-the residential places; tāvat mātra-only that much distance (eighty thousand miles); eva-indeed.





Below Rāhu by 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] are the planets known as Siddhaloka, Cāraṇaloka and Vidyādhara-loka.





It is said that the residents of Siddhaloka, being naturally endowed with the powers of yogīs, can go from one planet to another by their natural mystic powers without using airplanes or similar machines.





TEXT 5



tato 'dhastād yakṣa-rakṣaḥ-piśāca-preta-bhūta-gaṇānāṁ vihārājiram antarikṣaṁ yāvad vāyuḥ pravāti yāvan meghā upalabhyante.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ adhastāt-beneath the planets occupied by the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Vidyādharas; yakṣa-rakṣaḥ-piśāca-preta-bhūta-gaṇānām-of Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Piśācas, ghosts and so on; vihāra-ajiram-the place of sense gratification; antarikṣam-in the sky or outer space; yāvat-as far as; vāyuḥ-the wind; pravāti-blows; yāvat-as far as; meghāḥ-the clouds; upalabhyante-are seen.





Beneath Vidyādhara-loka, Cāraṇaloka and Siddhaloka, in the sky called antarikṣa, are the places of enjoyment for the Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Piśācas, ghosts and so on. Antarikṣa extends as far as the wind blows and the clouds float in the sky. Above this there is no more air.





TEXT 6



tato 'dhastāc chata-yojanāntara iyaṁ pṛthivī yāvad dhaṁsa-bhāsa-śyena-suparṇādayaḥ patattri-pravarā utpatantīti.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ adhastāt-beneath that; śata-yojana-of one hundred yojanas; antare-by an interval; iyam-this; pṛthivī-planet earth; yāvat-as high as; haṁsa-swans; bhāsa-vultures; śyena-eagles; suparṇa-ādayaḥ-and other birds; patattri-pravarāḥ-the chief among birds; utpatanti-can fly; iti-thus.





Below the abodes of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas by a distance of 100 yojanas [800 miles] is the planet earth. Its upper limits extend as high as swans, hawks, eagles and similar large birds can fly.





TEXT 7



upavarṇitaṁ bhūmer yathā-sanniveśāvasthānam avaner apy adhastāt sapta bhū-vivarā ekaikaśo yojanāyutāntareṇāyāma-vistāreṇopakḷptā atalaṁ vitalaṁ sutalaṁ talātalaṁ mahātalaṁ rasātalaṁ pātālam iti.



SYNONYMS



upavarṇitam-stated previously; bhūmeḥ-of the planet earth; yathā-sanniveśa-avasthānam-according to the arrangement of the different places; avaneḥ-the earth; api-certainly; adhastāt-beneath; sapta-seven; bhū-vivarāḥ-other planets; eka-ekaśaḥ-in succession, up to the outer limit of the universe; yojana-ayuta-antareṇa-with an interval of ten thousand yojanas (eighty thousand miles); āyāma-vistāreṇa-by width and length; upakḷptāḥ-situated; atalam-named Atala; vitalam-Vitala; sutalam-Sutala; talātalam-Talātala; mahātalam-Mahātala; rasātalam-Rasātala; pātālam-Pātāla; iti-thus.





My dear King, beneath this earth are seven other planets, known as Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talātala, Mahātala, Rasātala and Pātāla. I have already explained the situation of the planetary systems of earth. The width and length of the seven lower planetary systems are calculated to be exactly the same as those of earth.





TEXT 8



eteṣu hi bila-svargeṣu svargād apy adhika-kāma-bhogaiśvaryānanda-bhūti-vibhūtibhiḥ susamṛddha-bhavanodyānākrīḍa-vihāreṣu daitya-dānava-kādraveyā nitya-pramuditānurakta-kalatrāpatya-bandhu-suhṛd-anucarā gṛha-pataya īśvarād apy apratihata-kāmā māyā-vinodā nivasanti.



SYNONYMS



eteṣu-in these; hi-certainly; bila-svargeṣu-known as the heavenly subterranean worlds; svargāt-than the heavenly planets; api-even; adhika-a greater quantity; kāma-bhoga-enjoyment of sense gratification; aiśvarya-ānanda-bliss due to opulence; bhūti-influence; vibhūtibhiḥ-by those things and wealth; su-samṛddha-improved; bhavana-houses; udyāna-gardens; ākrīḍa-vihāreṣu-in places for different types of sense gratification; daitya-the demons; dānava-ghosts; kādraveyāḥ-snakes; nitya-who are always; pramudita-overjoyed; anurakta-because of attachment; kalatra-to wife; apatya-children; bandhu-family relations; suhṛt-friends; anucarāḥ-followers; gṛha-patayaḥ-the heads of the households; īśvarāt-than those more capable, like the demigods; api-even; apratihata-kāmāḥ-whose fulfillment of lusty desires is unimpeded; māyā-illusory; vinodāḥ-who feel happiness; nivasanti-live.





In these seven planetary systems, which are also known as the subterranean heavens [bila-svarga], there are very beautiful houses, gardens and places of sense enjoyment, which are even more opulent than those in the higher planets because the demons have a very high standard of sensual pleasure, wealth and influence. Most of the residents of these planets, who are known as Daityas, Dānavas and Nāgas, live as householders. Their wives, children, friends and society are all fully engaged in illusory, material happiness. The sense enjoyment of the demigods is sometimes disturbed, but the residents of these planets enjoy life without disturbances. Thus they are understood to be very attached to illusory happiness.





According to the statements of Prahlāda Mahārāja, material enjoyment is māyā-sukha, illusory enjoyment. A Vaiṣṇava is full of anxieties for the deliverance of all living entities from such false enjoyment. Prahlāda Mahārāja says, māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān: [SB 7.9.43] these fools (vimūḍhas) are engaged in material happiness, which is surely temporary. Whether in the heavenly planets, the lower planets or the earthly planets, people are engrossed in temporary, material happiness, forgetting that in due course of time they have to change their bodies according to the material laws and suffer the repetition of birth, death, old age and disease. Not caring what will happen in the next birth, gross materialists are simply busy enjoying during the present short span of life. A Vaiṣṇava is always anxious to give all such bewildered materialists the real happiness of spiritual bliss.





TEXT 9



yeṣu mahārāja mayena māyāvinā vinirmitāḥ puro nānā-maṇi-pravara-praveka-viracita-vicitra-bhavana-prākāra-gopura-sabhā-caitya-catvarāyatanādibhir nāgāsura-mithuna-pārāvata-śuka-sārikākīrṇa-kṛtrima-bhūmibhir vivareśvara-gṛhottamaiḥ samalaṅkṛtāś cakāsati.



SYNONYMS



yeṣu-in those lower planetary systems; mahā-rāja-O my dear King; mayena-by the demon named Maya; māyā-vinā-possessing advanced knowledge in the construction of material comforts; vinirmitāḥ-constructed; puraḥ-cities; nānā-maṇi-pravara-of valuable gems; praveka-with excellent; viracita-constructed; vicitra-wonderful; bhavana-houses; prākāra-walls; gopura-gates; sabhā-legislative meeting rooms; caitya-temples; catvara-schools; āyatana-ādibhiḥ-with hotels or recreation halls and so on; nāga-of living entities with snakelike bodies; asura-of demons, or godless persons; mithuna-by couples; pārāvata-pigeons; śuka-parrots; sārikā-mynas; ākīrṇa-crowded; kṛtrima-artificial; bhūmibhiḥ-possessing areas; vivara-īśvara-of the leaders of the planets; gṛha-uttamaiḥ-with first-class houses; samalaṅkṛtāḥ-decorated; cakāsati-shine magnificently.





My dear King, in the imitation heavens known as bila-svarga there is a great demon named Maya Dānava, who is an expert artist and architect. He has constructed many brilliantly decorated cities. There are many wonderful houses, walls, gates, assembly houses, temples, yards and temple compounds, as well as many hotels serving as residential quarters for foreigners. The houses for the leaders of these planets are constructed with the most valuable jewels, and they are always crowded with living entities known as Nāgas and Asuras, as well as many pigeons, parrots and similar birds. All in all, these imitation heavenly cities are most beautifully situated and attractively decorated.





TEXT 10



udyānāni cātitarāṁ mana-indriyānandibhiḥ kusuma-phala-stabaka-subhaga-kisalayāvanata-rucira-viṭapa-viṭapināṁ latāṅgāliṅgitānāṁ śrībhiḥ samithuna-vividha-vihaṅgama-jalāśayānām amala-jala-pūrṇānāṁ jhaṣakulollaṅghana-kṣubhita-nīra-nīraja-kumuda-kuva-laya-kahlāra-nīlotpala-lohita-śatapatrādi-vaneṣu kṛta-niketanānām eka-vihārākula-madhura-vividha-svanādibhir indriyotsavair amara-loka-śriyam atiśayitāni.



SYNONYMS



udyānāni-the gardens and parks; ca-also; atitarām-greatly; manaḥ-to the mind; indriya-and to the senses; ānandibhiḥ-which cause pleasure; kusuma-by flowers; phala-of fruits; stabaka-bunches; subhaga-very beautiful; kisalaya-new twigs; avanata-bent low; rucira-attractive; viṭapa-possessing branches; viṭapinām-of trees; latā-aṅga-āliṅgitānām-which are embraced by the limbs of creepers; śrībhiḥ-by the beauty; sa-mithuna-in pairs; vividha-varieties; vihaṅgama-frequented by birds; jala-āśayānām-of reservoirs of water; amala-jala-pūrṇānām-full of clear and transparent water; jhaṣa-kula-ullaṅghana-by the jumping of different fish; kṣubhita-agitated; nīra-in the water; nīraja-of lotus flowers; kumuda-lilies; kuvalaya-flowers named kuvalaya; kahlāra-kahlāra flowers; nīla-utpala-blue lotus flowers; lohita-red; śata-patra-ādi-lotus flowers with a hundred petals and so on; vaneṣu-in forests; kṛta-niketanānām-of birds that have made their nests; eka-vihāra-ākula-full of uninterrupted enjoyment; madhura-very sweet; vividha-varieties; svana-ādibhiḥ-by vibrations; indriya-utsavaiḥ-invoking sense enjoyment; amara-loka-śriyam-the beauty of the residential places of the demigods; atiśayitāni-surpassing.





The parks and gardens in the artificial heavens surpass in beauty those of the upper heavenly planets. The trees in those gardens, embraced by creepers, bend with a heavy burden of twigs with fruits and flowers, and therefore they appear extraordinarily beautiful. That beauty could attract anyone and make his mind fully blossom in the pleasure of sense gratification. There are many lakes and reservoirs with clear, transparent water, agitated by jumping fish and decorated with many flowers such as lilies, kuvalayas, kahlāras and blue and red lotuses. Pairs of cakravākas and many other water birds nest in the lakes and always enjoy in a happy mood, making sweet, pleasing vibrations that are very satisfying and conducive to enjoyment of the senses.





TEXT 11



yatra ha vāva na bhayam aho-rātrādibhiḥ kāla-vibhāgair upalakṣyate.



SYNONYMS



yatra-where; ha vāva-certainly; na-not; bhayam-fearfulness; ahaḥ-rātra-ādibhiḥ-because of days and nights; kāla-vibhāgaiḥ-the divisions of time; upalakṣyate-is experienced.





Since there is no sunshine in those subterranean planets, time is not divided into days and nights, and consequently fear produced by time does not exist.





TEXT 12



yatra hi mahāhi-pravara-śiro-maṇayaḥ sarvaṁ tamaḥ prabādhante.



SYNONYMS



yatra-where; hi-indeed; mahā-ahi-of great serpents; pravara-of the best; śiraḥ-maṇayaḥ-the gems on the hoods; sarvam-all; tamaḥ-darkness; prabādhante-drive away.





Many great serpents reside there with gems on their hoods, and the effulgence of these gems dissipates the darkness in all directions.





TEXT 13



na vā eteṣu vasatāṁ divyauṣadhi-rasa-rasāyanānna-pāna-snānādibhir ādhayo vyādhayo valī-palita-jarādayaś ca deha-vaivarṇya-daurgandhya-sveda-klama-glānir iti vayo 'vasthāś ca bhavanti.



SYNONYMS



na-not; vā-either; eteṣu-in these planets; vasatām-of those residing; divya-wonderful; auṣadhi-of herbs; rasa-the juices; rasāyana-and elixirs; anna-by eating; pāna-drinking; snāna-ādibhiḥ-by bathing in and so on; ādhayaḥ-mental troubles; vyādhayaḥ-diseases; valī-wrinkles; palita-grey hair; jarā-old age; ādayaḥ-and so on; ca-and; deha-vaivarṇya-the fading of bodily luster; daurgandhya-bad odor; sveda-perspiration; klama-fatigue; glāniḥ-lack of energy; iti-thus; vayaḥ avasthāḥ-miserable conditions due to increasing age; ca-and; bhavanti-are.





Since the residents of these planets drink and bathe in juices and elixirs made from wonderful herbs, they are freed from all anxieties and physical diseases. They have no experience of grey hair, wrinkles or invalidity, their bodily lusters do not fade, their perspiration does not cause a bad smell, and they are not troubled by fatigue or by lack of energy or enthusiasm due to old age.





TEXT 14



na hi teṣāṁ kalyāṇānāṁ prabhavati kutaścana mṛtyur vinā bhagavat-tejasaś cakrāpadeśāt.



SYNONYMS



na hi-not; teṣām-of them; kalyāṇānām-who are by nature auspicious; prabhavati-able to influence; kutaścana-from anywhere; mṛtyuḥ-death; vinā-except; bhagavat-tejasaḥ-of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; cakra-apadeśāt-from that weapon named the Sudarśana cakra.





They live very auspiciously and do not fear death from anything but death's established time, which is the effulgence of the Sudarśana cakra of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





This is the defect of material existence. Everything in the subterranean heavens is very nicely arranged. There are well situated residential quarters, there is a pleasing atmosphere, and there are no bodily inconveniences or mental anxieties, but nevertheless those who live there have to take another birth according to karma. Persons whose minds are dull cannot understand this defect of a materialistic civilization aiming at material comforts. One may make his living conditions very pleasing for the senses, but despite all favorable conditions, one must in due course of time meet death. The members of a demoniac civilization endeavor to make their living conditions very comfortable, but they cannot check death. The influence of the Sudarśana cakra will not allow their so-called material happiness to endure.





TEXT 15



yasmin praviṣṭe 'sura-vadhūnāṁ prāyaḥ puṁsavanāni bhayād eva sravanti patanti ca.



SYNONYMS



yasmin-where; praviṣṭe-when entered; asura-vadhūnām-of the wives of those demons; prāyaḥ-almost always; puṁsavanāni-fetuses; bhayāt-because of fear; eva-certainly; sravanti-slip out; patanti-fall down; ca-and.





When the Sudarśana disc enters those provinces, the pregnant wives of the demons all have miscarriages due to fear of its effulgence.





TEXT 16



athātale maya-putro 'suro balo nivasati yena ha vā iha sṛṣṭāḥ ṣaṇ-ṇavatir māyāḥ kāścanādyāpi māyāvino dhārayanti yasya ca jṛmbhamāṇasya mukhatas trayaḥ strī-gaṇā udapadyanta svairiṇyaḥ kāminyaḥ puṁścalya iti yā vai bilāyanaṁ praviṣṭaṁ puruṣaṁ rasena hāṭakākhyena sādhayitvā sva-vilāsāvalokanānurāga-smita-saṁlāpopagūhanādibhiḥ svairaṁ kila ramayanti yasminn upayukte puruṣa īśvaro 'haṁ siddho 'ham ity ayuta-mahā-gaja-balam ātmānam abhimanyamānaḥ katthate madāndha iva.



SYNONYMS



atha-now; atale-on the planet named Atala; maya-putraḥ asuraḥ-the demon son of Maya; balaḥ-Bala; nivasati-resides; yena-by whom; ha vā-indeed; iha-in this; sṛṣṭāḥ-propagated; ṣaṭ-ṇavatiḥ-ninety-six; māyāḥ-varieties of illusion; kāścana-some; adya api-even today; māyā-vinaḥ-those who know the art of magical feats (like manufacturing gold); dhārayanti-utilize; yasya-of whom; ca-also; jṛmbhamāṇasya-while yawning; mukhataḥ-from the mouth; trayaḥ-three; strī-gaṇāḥ-varieties of women; udapadyanta-were generated; svairiṇyaḥ-svairiṇī (one who only marries in her same class); kāminyaḥ-kāmiṇī (one who, being lusty, marries men from any group); puṁścalyaḥ-puṁścalī (one who wants to go from one husband to another); iti-thus; yāḥ-who; vai-certainly; bila-ayanam-the subterranean planets; praviṣṭam-entering; puruṣam-a male; rasena-by a juice; hāṭaka-ākhyena-made from an intoxicating herb known as hāṭaka; sādhayitvā-making sexually fit; sva-vilāsa-for their personal sense gratification; avalokana-by glances; anurāga-lustful; smita-by smiling; saṁlāpa-by talking; upagūhana-ādibhiḥ-and by embracing; svairam-according to their own desire; kila-indeed; ramayanti-enjoy sex pleasure; yasmin-which; upayukte-when used; puruṣaḥ-a man; īśvaraḥ aham-I am the most powerful person; siddhaḥ aham-I am the greatest and most elevated person; iti-thus; ayuta-ten thousand; mahā-gaja-of big elephants; balam-the strength; ātmānam-himself; abhimanyamānaḥ-being full of pride; katthate-they say; mada-andhaḥ-blinded by false prestige; iva-like.





My dear King, now I shall describe to you the lower planetary systems, one by one, beginning from Atala. In Atala there is a demon, the son of Maya Dānava named Bala, who created ninety-six kinds of mystic power. Some so-called yogīs and svāmīs take advantage of this mystic power to cheat people even today. Simply by yawning, the demon Bala created three kinds of women, known as svairiṇī, kāmiṇī and puṁścalī. The svairiṇīs like to marry men from their own group, the kāmiṇīs marry men from any group, and the puṁścalīs change husbands one after another. If a man enters the planet of Atala, these women immediately capture him and induce him to drink an intoxicating beverage made with a drug known as hāṭaka [cannabis indica]. This intoxicant endows the man with great sexual prowess, of which the women take advantage for enjoyment. A woman will enchant him with attractive glances, intimate words, smiles of love and then embraces. In this way she induces him to enjoy sex with her to her full satisfaction. Because of his increased sexual power, the man thinks himself stronger than ten thousand elephants and considers himself most perfect. Indeed, illusioned and intoxicated by false pride, he thinks himself God, ignoring impending death.





TEXT 17



tato 'dhastād vitale haro bhagavān hāṭakeśvaraḥ sva-pārṣada-bhūta-gaṇāvṛtaḥ prajāpati-sargopabṛṁhaṇāya bhavo bhavānyā saha mithunī-bhūta āste yataḥ pravṛttā sarit-pravarā hāṭakī nāma bhavayor vīryeṇa yatra citrabhānur mātariśvanā samidhyamāna ojasā pibati tan niṣṭhyūtaṁ hāṭakākhyaṁ suvarṇaṁ bhūṣaṇenāsurendrāvarodheṣu puruṣāḥ saha puruṣībhir dhārayanti.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-the planet Atala; adhastāt-beneath; vitale-on the planet; haraḥ-Lord Śiva; bhagavān-the most powerful personality; hāṭakeśvaraḥ-the master of gold; sva-pārṣada-by his own associates; bhūta-gaṇa-who are ghostly living beings; āvṛtaḥ-surrounded; prajāpati-sarga-of the creation of Lord Brahmā; upabṛṁhaṇāya-to increase the population; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; bhavānyā saha-with his wife, Bhavānī; mithunī-bhūtaḥ-being united in sex; āste-remains; yataḥ-from that planet (Vitala); pravṛttā-being emanated; sarit-pravarā-the great river; hāṭakī-Hāṭakī; nāma-named; bhavayoḥ vīryeṇa-due to the semina and ovum of Lord Śiva and Bhavānī; yatra-where; citra-bhānuḥ-the fire-god; mātariśvanā-by the wind; samidhyamānaḥ-being brightly inflamed; ojasā-with great strength; pibati-drinks; tat-that; niṣṭhyūtam-spit out with a hissing sound; hāṭaka-ākhyam-named Hāṭaka; suvarṇam-gold; bhūṣaṇena-by different types of ornaments; asura-indra-of the great asuras; avarodheṣu-in the homes; puruṣāḥ-the males; saha-with; puruṣībhiḥ-their wives and women; dhārayanti-wear.





The next planet below Atala is Vitala, wherein Lord Śiva, who is known as the master of gold mines, lives with his personal associates, the ghosts and similar living entities. Lord Śiva, as the progenitor, engages in sex with Bhavānī, the progenitress, to produce living entities, and from the mixture of their vital fluid the river named Hāṭakī is generated. When fire, being made to blaze by the wind, drinks of this river and then sizzles and spits it out, it produces gold called Hāṭaka. The demons who live on that planet with their wives decorate themselves with various ornaments made from that gold, and thus they live there very happily.





It appears that when Bhava and Bhavānī, Lord Śiva and his wife, unite sexually, the emulsification of their secretions creates a chemical which when heated by fire can produce gold. It is said that the alchemists of the medieval age tried to prepare gold from base metal, and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī also states that when bell metal is treated with mercury, it can produce gold. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī mentions this in regard to the initiation of low-class men to turn them into brāhmaṇas. Sanātana Gosvāmī said:



yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāti

kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena

dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām





"As one can transform kaṁsa, or bell metal, into gold by treating it with mercury, one can also turn a lowborn man into a brāhmaṇa by initiating him properly into Vaiṣṇava activities." The International Society for Krishna Consciousness is trying to turn mlecchas and yavanas into real brāhmaṇas by properly initiating them and stopping them from engaging in meat-eating, intoxication, illicit sex and gambling. One who stops these four principles of sinful activity and chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra can certainly become a pure brāhmaṇa through the process of bona fide initiation, as suggested by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.



Apart from this, if one takes a hint from this verse and learns how to mix mercury with bell metal by properly heating and melting them, one can get gold very cheaply. The alchemists of the medieval age tried to manufacture gold, but they were unsuccessful, perhaps because they did not follow the right instructions.





TEXT 18



tato 'dhastāt sutale udāra-śravāḥ puṇya-śloko virocanātmajo balir bhagavatā mahendrasya priyaṁ cikīrṣamāṇenāditer labdha-kāyo bhūtvā vaṭu-vāmana-rūpeṇa parākṣipta-loka-trayo bhagavad-anukampayaiva punaḥ praveśita indrādiṣv avidyamānayā susamṛddhayā śriyābhijuṣṭaḥ sva-dharmeṇārādhayaṁs tam eva bhagavantam ārādhanīyam apagata-sādhvasa āste 'dhunāpi.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ adhastāt-beneath the planet known as Vitala; sutale-on the planet known as Sutala; udāra-śravāḥ-very greatly celebrated; puṇya-ślokaḥ-very pious and advanced in spiritual consciousness; virocana-ātmajaḥ-the son of Virocana; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-indrasya-of the King of heaven, Indra; priyam-the welfare; cikīrṣamāṇena-desiring to perform; āditeḥ-from Aditi; labdha-kāyaḥ-having obtained His body; bhūtvā-appearing; vaṭu-brahmacāri; vāmana-rūpeṇa-in the form of a dwarf; parākṣipta-wrested away; loka-trayaḥ-the three worlds; bhagavat-anukampayā-by the causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva-certainly; punaḥ-again; praveśitaḥ-caused to enter; indra-ādiṣu-even among the demigods like the King of heaven; avidyamānayā-not existing; susamṛddhayā-much enriched by such exalted opulence; śriyā-by good fortune; abhijuṣṭaḥ-being blessed; sva-dharmeṇa-by discharging devotional service; ārādhayan-worshiping; tam-Him; eva-certainly; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ārādhanīyam-who is most worshipable; apagata-sādhvasaḥ-without fear; āste-remains; adhunā api-even today.





Below the planet Vitala is another planet, known as Sutala, where the great son of Mahārāja Virocana, Bali Mahārāja, who is celebrated as the most pious king, resides even now. For the welfare of Indra, the King of heaven, Lord Viṣṇu appeared in the form of a dwarf brahmacārī as the son of Aditi and tricked Bali Mahārāja by begging for only three paces of land but taking all the three worlds. Being very pleased with Bali Mahārāja for giving all his possessions, the Lord returned his kingdom and made him richer than the opulent King Indra. Even now, Bali Mahārāja engages in devotional service by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the planet of Sutala.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as Uttamaśloka, "He who is worshiped by the best of selected Sanskrit verses," and His devotees such as Bali Mahārāja are also worshiped by puṇya-śloka, verses that increase one's piety. Bali Mahārāja offered everything to the Lord-his wealth, his kingdom and even his own body (sarvātma-nivedane baliḥ). The Lord appeared before Bali Mahārāja as a brāhmaṇa beggar, and Bali Mahārāja gave Him everything he had. However, Bali Mahārāja did not become poor; by donating all his possessions to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became a successful devotee and got everything back again with the blessings of the Lord. Similarly, those who give contributions to expand the activities of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and to accomplish its objectives will never be losers; they will get their wealth back with the blessings of Lord Kṛṣṇa. On the other side, those who collect contributions on behalf of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness should be very careful not to use even a farthing of the collection for any purpose other than the transcendental loving service of the Lord.





TEXT 19



no evaitat sākṣātkāro bhūmi-dānasya yat tad bhagavaty aśeṣa-jīva-nikāyānāṁ jīva-bhūtātma-bhūte paramātmani vāsudeve tīrthatame pātra upapanne parayā śraddhayā paramādara-samāhita-manasā sampratipāditasya sākṣād apavarga-dvārasya yad bila-nilayaiśvaryam.



SYNONYMS



no-not; eva-indeed; etat-this; sākṣātkāraḥ-the direct result; bhūmi-dānasya-of contribution of land; yat-which; tat-that; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aśeṣa-jīva-nikāyānām-of unlimited numbers of living entities; jīva-bhūta-ātma-bhūte-who is the life and the Supersoul; parama-ātmani-the supreme regulator; vāsudeve-Lord Vāsudeva (Kṛṣṇa); tīrtha-tame-who is the best of all places of pilgrimage; pātre-the most worthy recipient; upapanne-having approached; parayā-by the topmost; śraddhayā-faith; parama-ādara-with great respect; samāhita-manasā-with an attentive mind; sampratipāditasya-which was given; sākṣāt-directly; apavarga-dvārasya-the gate of liberation; yat-which; bila-nilaya-of bila-svarga, the imitation heavenly planets; aiśvaryam-the opulence.





My dear King, Bali Mahārāja donated all his possessions to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāmanadeva, but one should certainly not conclude that he achieved his great worldly opulence in bila-svarga as a result of his charitable disposition. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the source of life for all living entities, lives within everyone as the friendly Supersoul, and under His direction a living entity enjoys or suffers in the material world. Greatly appreciating the transcendental qualities of the Lord, Bali Mahārāja offered everything at His lotus feet. His purpose, however, was not to gain anything material, but to become a pure devotee. For a pure devotee, the door of liberation is automatically opened. One should not think that Bali Mahārāja was given so much material opulence merely because of his charity. When one becomes a pure devotee in love, he may also be blessed with a good material position by the will of the Supreme Lord. However, one should not mistakenly think that the material opulence of a devotee is the result of his devotional service. The real result of devotional service is the awakening of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which continues under all circumstances.





TEXT 20



yasya ha vāva kṣuta-patana-praskhalanādiṣu vivaśaḥ sakṛn nāmābhigṛṇan puruṣaḥ karma-bandhanam añjasā vidhunoti yasya haiva pratibādhanaṁ mumukṣavo 'nyathaivopalabhante.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; ha vāva-indeed; kṣuta-when in hunger; patana-falling down; praskhalana-ādiṣu-stumbling and so on; vivaśaḥ-being helpless; sakṛt-once; nāma abhigṛṇan-chanting the holy name of the Lord; puruṣaḥ-a person; karma-bandhanam-the bondage of fruitive activity; añjasā-completely; vidhunoti-washes away; yasya-of which; ha-certainly; eva-in this way; pratibādhanam-the repulsion; mumukṣavaḥ-persons desiring liberation; anyathā-otherwise; eva-certainly; upalabhante-are trying to realize.





If one who is embarrassed by hunger or who falls down or stumbles chants the holy name of the Lord even once, willingly or unwillingly, he is immediately freed from the reactions of his past deeds. Karmīs entangled in material activities face many difficulties in the practice of mystic yoga and other endeavors to achieve that same freedom.





It is not a fact that one has to offer his material possessions to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and be liberated before he can engage in devotional service. A devotee automatically attains liberation without separate endeavors. Bali Mahārāja did not get back all his material possessions merely because of his charity to the Lord. One who becomes a devotee, free from material desires and motives, regards all opportunities, both material and spiritual, as benedictions from the Lord, and in this way his service to the Lord is never hampered. Bhukti, material enjoyment, and mukti, liberation, are only by-products of devotional service. A devotee need not work separately to attain mukti. Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura said, muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate 'smān: a pure devotee of the Lord does not have to endeavor separately for mukti, because mukti is always ready to serve him.



In this regard, Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya 3.177–188) describes Haridāsa Ṭhākura's confirmation of the effect of chanting the holy name of the Lord.



keha bale--'nāma haite haya pāpa-kṣaya'

keha bale--'nāma haite jīvera mokṣa haya'





Some say that by chanting the holy name of the Lord one is freed from all the reactions of sinful life, and others say that by chanting the holy name of the Lord one attains liberation from material bondage.



haridāsa kahena,--"nāmera ei dui phala naya

nāmera phale kṛṣṇa-pade prema upajaya





Haridāsa Ṭhākura, however, said that the desired result of chanting the holy name of the Lord is not that one is liberated from material bondage or freed from the reactions of sinful life. The actual result of chanting the holy name of the Lord is that one awakens his dormant Kṛṣṇa consciousness, his loving service to the Lord.



ānuṣaṅgika phala nāmera--'mukti', 'pāpa-nāśa'

tāhāra dṛṣṭānta yaiche sūryera prakāśa





Haridāsa Ṭhākura said that liberation and freedom from the reactions of sinful activities are only by-products of chanting the holy name of the Lord. If one chants the holy name of the Lord purely, he attains the platform of loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard Haridāsa Ṭhākura gave an example comparing the power of the holy name to sunshine.



ei ślokera artha kara paṇḍitera gaṇa"

sabe kahe,--'tumi kaha artha-vivaraṇa'





He placed a verse before all the learned scholars present, but the learned scholars asked him to state the purport of the verse.



haridāsa kahena,--"yaiche sūryera udaya

udaya nā haite ārambhe tamera haya kṣaya





Haridāsa Ṭhākura said that as the sun begins to rise, it dissipates the darkness of night, even before the sunshine is visible.



caura-preta-rākṣasādira bhaya haya nāśa

udaya haile dharma-karma-ādi parakāśa





Before the sunrise even takes place, the light of dawn destroys the fear of the dangers of the night, such as disturbances by thieves, ghosts and Rākṣasas, and when the sunshine actually appears, one engages in his duties.



aiche nāmodayārambhe pāpa-ādira kṣaya

udaya kaile kṛṣṇa-pade haya premodaya





Similarly, even before one's chanting of the holy name is pure, one is freed from all sinful reactions, and when he chants purely he becomes a lover of Kṛṣṇa.



'mukti' tuccha-phala haya nāmābhāsa haite

ye mukti bhakta nā laya, se kṛṣṇa cāhe dite"





A devotee never accepts mukti, even if Kṛṣṇa offers it. Mukti, freedom from all sinful reactions, is obtained even by nāmābhāsa, or a glimpse of the light of the holy name before its full light is perfectly visible.



The nāmābhāsa stage is between that of nāma-aparādha, or chanting of the holy name with offenses, and pure chanting. There are three stages in chanting the holy name of the Lord. In the first stage, one commits ten kinds of offenses while chanting. In the next stage, nāmābhāsa, the offenses have almost stopped, and one is coming to the platform of pure chanting. In the third stage, when one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without offenses, his dormant love for Kṛṣṇa immediately awakens. This is the perfection.





TEXT 21



tad bhaktānām ātmavatāṁ sarveṣām ātmany ātmada ātmatayaiva.



SYNONYMS



tat-that; bhaktānām-of great devotees; ātma-vatām-of self-realized persons like Sanaka and Sanātana; sarveṣām-of all; ātmani-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the soul; ātma-de-who gives Himself without hesitation; ātmatayā-who is the Supreme Soul, Paramātmā; eva-indeed.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul, sells Himself to His devotees such as Nārada Muni. In other words, the Lord gives pure love to such devotees and gives Himself to those who love Him purely. Great, self-realized mystic yogīs such as the four Kumāras also derive great transcendental bliss from realizing the Supersoul within themselves.





The Lord became Bali Mahārāja's doorkeeper not because of his giving everything to the Lord, but because of his exalted position as a lover of the Lord.





TEXT 22



na vai bhagavān nūnam amuṣyānujagrāha yad uta punar ātmānusmṛti-moṣaṇaṁ māyāmaya-bhogaiśvaryam evātanuteti.



SYNONYMS



na-not; vai-indeed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nūnam-certainly; amuṣya-unto Bali Mahārāja; anujagrāha-showed His favor; yat-because; uta-certainly; punaḥ-again; ātma-anusmṛti-of remembrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; moṣaṇam-which robs one; māyā-maya-an attribute of Māyā; bhoga-aiśvaryam-the material opulence; eva-certainly; ātanuta-extended; iti-thus.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead did not award His mercy to Bali Mahārāja by giving him material happiness and opulence, for these make one forget loving service to the Lord. The result of material opulence is that one can no longer absorb his mind in the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





There are two kinds of opulence. One, which results from one's karma, is material, whereas the other is spiritual. A surrendered soul who fully depends upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not want material opulence for sense gratification. Therefore when a pure devotee is seen to possess exalted material opulence, it is not due to his karma. Rather, it is due to his bhakti. In other words, he is in that position because the Supreme Lord wants him to execute service to Him very easily and opulently. The special mercy of the Lord for the neophyte devotee is that he becomes materially poor. This is the Lord's mercy because if a neophyte devotee becomes materially opulent, he forgets the service of the Lord. However, if an advanced devotee is favored by the Lord with opulence, it is not material opulence but a spiritual opportunity. Material opulence offered to the demigods causes forgetfulness of the Lord, but opulence was given to Bali Mahārāja for continuing service to the Lord, which was free from any touch of māyā.





TEXT 23



yat tad bhagavatānadhigatānyopāyena yācñā-cchalenāpahṛta-sva-śarīrāvaśeṣita-loka-trayo varuṇa-pāśaiś ca sampratimukto giri-daryāṁ cāpaviddha iti hovāca.



SYNONYMS



yat-which; tat-that; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anadhigata-anya-upāyena-who is not perceived by other means; yācñā-chalena-by a trick of begging; apahṛta-taken away; sva-śarīra-avaśeṣita-with only his own body remaining; loka-trayaḥ-the three worlds; varuṇa-pāśaiḥ-by the ropes of Varuṇa; ca-and; sampratimuktaḥ-completely bound; giri-daryām-in a cave in a mountain; ca-and; apaviddhaḥ-being detained; iti-thus; ha-indeed; uvāca-said.





When the Supreme Personality of Godhead could see no other means of taking everything away from Bali Mahārāja, He adopted the trick of begging from him and took away all the three worlds. Thus only his body was left, but the Lord was still not satisfied. He arrested Bali Mahārāja, bound him with the ropes of Varuṇa and threw him in a cave in a mountain. Nevertheless, although all his property was taken and he was thrown into a cave, Bali Mahārāja was such a great devotee that he spoke as follows.





TEXT 24



nūnaṁ batāyaṁ bhagavān artheṣu na niṣṇāto yo 'sāv indro yasya sacivo mantrāya vṛta ekāntato bṛhaspatis tam atihāya svayam upendreṇātmānam ayācatātmanaś cāśiṣo no eva tad-dāsyam ati-gambhīra-vayasaḥ kālasya manvantara-parivṛttaṁ kiyal loka-trayam idam.



SYNONYMS



nūnam-certainly; bata-alas; ayam-this; bhagavān-very learned; artheṣu-in self-interest; na-not; niṣṇātaḥ-very experienced; yaḥ-who; asau-the King of heaven; indraḥ-Indra; yasya-of whom; sacivaḥ-the prime minister; mantrāya-for giving instructions; vṛtaḥ-chosen; ekāntataḥ-alone; bṛhaspatiḥ-named Bṛhaspati; tam-him; atihāya-ignoring; svayam-personally; upendreṇa-by means of Upendra (Lord Vāmanadeva); ātmānam-myself; ayācata-requested; ātmanaḥ-for himself; ca-and; āśiṣaḥ-blessings (the three worlds); no-not; eva-certainly; tat-dāsyam-the loving service of the Lord; ati-very; gambhīra-vayasaḥ-having an insurmountable duration; kālasya-of time; manvantara-parivṛttam-changed by the end of a life of a Manu; kiyat-what is the value of; loka-trayam-three worlds; idam-these.





Alas, how pitiable it is for Indra, the King of heaven, that although he is very learned and powerful and although he chose Bṛhaspati as his prime minister to instruct him, he is completely ignorant concerning spiritual advancement. Bṛhaspati is also unintelligent because he did not properly instruct his disciple Indra. Lord Vāmanadeva was standing at Indra's door, but King Indra, instead of begging Him for an opportunity to render transcendental loving service, engaged Him in asking me for alms to gain the three worlds for his sense gratification. Sovereignty over the three worlds is very insignificant because whatever material opulence one may possess lasts only for an age of Manu, which is but a tiny fraction of endless time.





Bali Mahārāja was so powerful that he fought with Indra and took possession of the three worlds. Indra was certainly very advanced in knowledge, but instead of asking Vāmanadeva for engagement in His service, he used the Lord to beg for material possessions that would lie finished at the end of one age of Manu. An age of Manu, which is the duration of Manu's life, is calculated to last seventy-two yugas. One yuga consists of 4,300,000 years, and therefore the duration of Manu's life is 309,600,000 years. The demigods possess their material opulence only until the end of the life of Manu. Time is insurmountable. The time one is allotted, even if it be millions of years, is quickly gone. The demigods own their material possessions only within the limits of time. Therefore Bali Mahārāja lamented that although Indra was very learned, he did not know how to use his intelligence properly, for instead of asking Vāmanadeva to allow him to engage in His service, Indra used Him to beg Bali Mahārāja for material wealth. Although Indra was learned and his prime minister, Bṛhaspati, was also learned, neither of them begged to be able to render loving service to Lord Vāmanadeva. Therefore Bali Mahārāja lamented for Indra.





TEXT 25



yasyānudāsyam evāsmat-pitāmahaḥ kila vavre na tu sva-pitryaṁ yad utākutobhayaṁ padaṁ dīyamānaṁ bhagavataḥ param iti bhagavatoparate khalu sva-pitari.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); anudāsyam-the service; eva-certainly; asmat-our; pitā-mahaḥ-grandfather; kila-indeed; vavre-accepted; na-not; tu-but; sva-own; pitryam-paternal property; yat-which; uta-certainly; akutaḥ-bhayam-fearlessness; padam-position; dīyamānam-being offered; bhagavataḥ-than the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param-other; iti-thus; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uparate-when killed; khalu-indeed; sva-pitari-his own father.





Bali Mahārāja said: My grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja is the only person who understood his own self-interest. Upon the death of Prahlāda's father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva wanted to offer Prahlāda his father's kingdom and even wanted to grant him liberation from material bondage, but Prahlāda accepted neither. Liberation and material opulence, he thought, are obstacles to devotional service, and therefore such gifts from the Supreme Personality of Godhead are not His actual mercy. Consequently, instead of accepting the results of karma and jñāna, Prahlāda Mahārāja simply begged the Lord for engagement in the service of His servant.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed that an unalloyed devotee should consider himself a servant of the servant of the servant of the Supreme Lord (gopī-bhartuḥ pāda-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ). In Vaiṣṇava philosophy, one should not even become a direct servant. Prahlāda Mahārāja was offered all the blessings of an opulent position in the material world and even the liberation of merging into Brahman, but he refused all this. He simply wanted to engage in the service of the servant of the servant of the Lord. Therefore Bali Mahārāja said that because his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja had rejected the blessings of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in terms of material opulence and liberation from material bondage, he truly understood his self-interest.





TEXT 26



tasya mahānubhāvasyānupatham amṛjita-kaṣāyaḥ ko vāsmad-vidhaḥ parihīṇa-bhagavad-anugraha upajigamiṣatīti.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of Prahlāda Mahārāja; mahā-anubhāvasya-who was an exalted devotee; anupatham-the path; amṛjita-kaṣāyaḥ-a person who is materially contaminated; kaḥ-what; vā-or; asmat-vidhaḥ-like us; parihīṇa-bhagavat-anugrahaḥ-being without the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upajigamiṣati-desires to follow; iti-thus.





Bali Mahārāja said: Persons like us, who are still attached to material enjoyment, who are contaminated by the modes of material nature and who lack the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, cannot follow the supreme path of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the exalted devotee of the Lord.





It is said that for spiritual realization one must follow great personalities like Lord Brahmā, Devarṣi Nārada, Lord Śiva and Prahlāda Mahārāja. The path of bhakti is not at all difficult if we follow in the footsteps of previous ācāryas and authorities, but those who are too materially contaminated by the modes of material nature cannot follow them. Although Bali Mahārāja was actually following the path of his grandfather, because of his great humility he thought that he was not. It is characteristic of advanced Vaiṣṇavas following the principles of bhakti that they think themselves ordinary human beings. This is not an artificial exhibition of humility; a Vaiṣṇava sincerely thinks this way and therefore never admits his exalted position.





TEXT 27



tasyānucaritam upariṣṭād vistariṣyate yasya bhagavān svayam akhila-jagad-gurur nārāyaṇo dvāri gadā-pāṇir avatiṣṭhate nija-janānukampita-hṛdayo yenāṅguṣṭhena padā daśa-kandharo yojanāyutāyutaṁ dig-vijaya uccāṭitaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tasya-of Bali Mahārāja; anucaritam-the narration; upariṣṭāt-later (in the Eighth Canto); vistariṣyate-will be explained; yasya-of whom; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svayam-personally; akhila-jagat-guruḥ-the master of all the three worlds; nārāyaṇaḥ-the Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa Himself; dvāri-at the gate; gadā-pāṇiḥ-bearing the club in His hand; avatiṣṭhate-stands; nija-jana-anukampita-hṛdayaḥ-whose heart is always filled with mercy for His devotees; yena-by whom; aṅguṣṭhena-by the big toe; padā-of His foot; daśa-kandharaḥ-Rāvaṇa, who had ten heads; yojana-ayuta-ayutam-a distance of eighty thousand miles; dik-vijaye-for the purpose of gaining victory over Bali Mahārāja; uccāṭitaḥ-driven away.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, how shall I glorify the character of Bali Mahārāja? The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of the three worlds, who is most compassionate to His own devotee, stands with club in hand at Bali Mahārāja's door. When Rāvaṇa, the powerful demon, came to gain victory over Bali Mahārāja, Vāmanadeva kicked him a distance of eighty thousand miles with His big toe. I shall explain the character and activities of Bali Mahārāja later [in the Eighth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam].





TEXT 28



tato 'dhastāt talātale mayo nāma dānavendras tri-purādhipatir bhagavatā purāriṇā tri-lokī-śaṁ cikīrṣuṇā nirdagdha-sva-pura-trayas tat-prasādāl labdha-pado māyāvinām ācāryo mahādevena parirakṣito vigata-sudarśana-bhayo mahīyate.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-the planet known as Sutala; adhastāt-below; talātale-in the planet known as Talātala; mayaḥ-Maya; nāma-named; dānava-indraḥ-the king of the Dānava demons; tri-pura-adhipatiḥ-the Lord of the three cities; bhagavatā-by the most powerful; purāriṇā-Lord Śiva, who is known as Tripurāri; tri-lokī-of the three worlds; śam-the good fortune; cikīrṣuṇā-who was desiring; nirdagdha-burned; sva-pura-trayaḥ-whose three cities; tat-prasādāt-by Lord Śiva's mercy; labdha-obtained; padaḥ-a kingdom; māyā-vinām ācāryaḥ-who is the ācārya, or master, of all the conjurers; mahā-devena-by Lord Śiva; parirakṣitaḥ-protected; vigata-sudarśana-bhayaḥ-who is not afraid of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His Sudarśana cakra; mahīyate-is worshiped.





Beneath the planet known as Sutala is another planet, called Talātala, which is ruled by the Dānava demon named Maya. Maya is known as the ācārya [master] of all the māyāvīs, who can invoke the powers of sorcery. For the benefit of the three worlds, Lord Śiva, who is known as Tripurāri, once set fire to the three kingdoms of Maya, but later, being pleased with him, he returned his kingdom. Since that time, Maya Dānava has been protected by Lord Śiva, and therefore he falsely thinks that he need not fear the Sudarśana cakra of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 29



tato 'dhastān mahātale kādraveyāṇāṁ sarpāṇāṁ naika-śirasāṁ krodhavaśo nāma gaṇaḥ kuhaka-takṣaka-kāliya-suṣeṇādi-pradhānā mahā-bhogavantaḥ patattri-rājādhipateḥ puruṣa-vāhād anavaratam udvijamānāḥ sva-kalatrāpatya-suhṛt-kuṭumba-saṅgena kvacit pramattā viharanti.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ-the planet Talātala; adhastāt-beneath; mahātale-in the planet known as Mahātala; kādraveyāṇām-of the descendants of Kadrū; sarpāṇām-who are big snakes; na eka-śirasām-who have many hoods; krodha-vaśaḥ-always subject to anger; nāma-named; gaṇaḥ-the group; kuhaka-Kuhaka; takṣaka-Takṣaka; kāliya-Kāliya; suṣeṇa-Suṣeṇa; ādi-and so on; pradhānāḥ-who are the prominent ones; mahā-bhogavantaḥ-addicted to all kinds of material enjoyment; patattri-rāja-adhipateḥ-from the king of all birds, Garuḍa; puruṣa-vāhāt-who carries the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anavaratam-constantly; udvijamānāḥ-afraid; sva-of their own; kalatra-apatya-wives and children; suhṛt-friends; kuṭumba-relatives; saṅgena-in the association; kvacit-sometimes; pramattāḥ-infuriated; viharanti-they sport.





The planetary system below Talātala is known as Mahātala. It is the abode of many-hooded snakes, descendants of Kadrū, who are always very angry. The great snakes who are prominent are Kuhaka, Takṣaka, Kāliya and Suṣeṇa. The snakes in Mahātala are always disturbed by fear of Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, but although they are full of anxiety, some of them nevertheless sport with their wives, children, friends and relatives.





It is stated here that the snakes who live in the planetary system known as Mahātala are very powerful and have many hoods. They live with their wives and children and consider themselves very happy, although they are always full of anxiety because of Garuḍa, who comes there to destroy them. This is the way of material life. Even if one lives in the most abominable condition, he still thinks himself happy with his wife, children, friends and relatives.





TEXT 30



tato 'dhastād rasātale daiteyā dānavāḥ paṇayo nāma nivāta-kavacāḥ kāleyā hiraṇya-puravāsina iti vibudha-pratyanīkā utpattyā mahaujaso mahā-sāhasino bhagavataḥ sakala-lokānubhāvasya harer eva tejasā pratihata-balāvalepā bileśayā iva vasanti ye vai saramayendra-dūtyā vāgbhir mantra-varṇābhir indrād bibhyati.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ adhastāt-below the planetary system Mahātala; rasātale-on the planet called Rasātala; daiteyāḥ-the sons of Diti; dānavāḥ-the sons of Danu; paṇayaḥ nāma-named Paṇis; nivāta-kavacāḥ-Nivāta-kavacas; kāleyāḥ-Kāleyas; hiraṇya-puravāsinaḥ-Hiraṇya-puravāsīs; iti-thus; vibudha-pratyanīkāḥ-enemies of the demigods; utpattyāḥ-from birth; mahā-ojasaḥ-very powerful; mahā-sāhasinaḥ-very cruel; bhagavataḥ-of the Personality of Godhead; sakala-loka-anubhāvasya-who is auspicious for all planetary systems; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva-certainly; tejasā-by the Sudarśana cakra; pratihata-defeated; bala-strength; avalepāḥ-and pride (because of bodily strength); bila-īśayāḥ-the snakes; iva-like; vasanti-they live; ye-who; vai-indeed; saramayā-by Saramā; indra-dūtyā-the messenger of Indra; vāgbhiḥ-by the words; mantra-varṇābhiḥ-in the form of a mantra; indrāt-from King Indra; bibhyati-are afraid.





Beneath Mahātala is the planetary system known as Rasātala, which is the abode of the demoniac sons of Diti and Danu. They are called Paṇis, Nivāta-kavacas, Kāleyas and Hiraṇya-puravāsīs [those living in Hiraṇya-pura]. They are all enemies of the demigods, and they reside in holes like snakes. From birth they are extremely powerful and cruel, and although they are proud of their strength, they are always defeated by the Sudarśana cakra of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who rules all the planetary systems. When a female messenger from Indra named Saramā chants a particular curse, the serpentine demons of Mahātala become very afraid of Indra.





It is said that there was a great fight between these serpentine demons and Indra, the King of heaven. When the defeated demons met the female messenger Saramā, who was chanting a mantra, they became afraid, and therefore they are living in the planet called Rasātala.





TEXT 31



tato 'dhastāt pātāle nāga-loka-patayo vāsuki-pramukhāḥ śaṅkha-kulika-mahāśaṅkha-śveta-dhanañjaya-dhṛtarāṣṭra-śaṅkhacūḍa-kambalāśvatara-devadattādayo mahā-bhogino mahāmarṣā nivasanti yeṣām u ha vai pañca-sapta-daśa-śata-sahasra-śīrṣāṇāṁ phaṇāsu viracitā mahā-maṇayo rociṣṇavaḥ pātāla-vivara-timira-nikaraṁ sva-rociṣā vidhamanti.



SYNONYMS



tataḥ adhastāt-beneath that planet Rasātala; pātāle-on the planet known as Pātāla; nāga-loka-patayaḥ-the masters of the Nāgalokas; vāsuki-by Vāsuki; pramukhāḥ-headed; śaṅkha-Śaṅkha; kulika-Kulika; mahā-śaṅkha-Mahāśaṅkha; śveta-Śveta; dhanañjaya-Dhanañjaya; dhṛtarāṣṭra-Dhṛtarāṣṭra; śaṅkha-cūḍa-Śaṅkhacūḍa; kambala-Kambala; aśvatara-Aśvatara; deva-datta-Devadatta; ādayaḥ-and so on; mahā-bhoginaḥ-very addicted to material happiness; mahā-amarṣāḥ-greatly envious by nature; nivasanti-live; yeṣām-of all of them; u ha-certainly; vai-indeed; pañca-five; sapta-seven; daśa-ten; śata-one hundred; sahasra-one thousand; śīrṣāṇām-of those possessing hoods; phaṇāsu-on those hoods; viracitāḥ-fixed; mahā-maṇayaḥ-very valuable gems; rociṣṇavaḥ-full of effulgence; pātāla-vivara-the caves of the Pātāla planetary system; timira-nikaram-the mass of darkness; sva-rociṣā-by the effulgence of their hoods; vidhamanti-disperse.





Beneath Rasātala is another planetary system, known as Pātāla or Nāgaloka, where there are many demoniac serpents, the masters of Nāgaloka, such as Śaṅkha, Kulika, Mahāśaṅkha, Śveta, Dhanañjaya, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Śaṅkhacūḍa, Kambala, Aśvatara and Devadatta. The chief among them is Vāsuki. They are all extremely angry, and they have many, many hoods-some snakes five hoods, some seven, some ten, others a hundred and others a thousand. These hoods are bedecked with valuable gems, and the light emanating from the gems illuminates the entire planetary system of bila-svarga.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Subterranean Heavenly Planets."



Chapter Twenty-five



The Glories of Lord Ananta





In this chapter, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes Ananta, the source of Lord Śiva. Lord Ananta, whose body is completely spiritual, resides at the root of the planet Pātāla. He always lives in the core of Lord Śiva's heart, and He helps him destroy the universe. Ananta instructs Lord Śiva how to destroy the cosmos, and thus He is sometimes called tāmasī, or "one who is in the mode of darkness." He is the original Deity of material consciousness, and because He attracts all living entities, He is sometimes known as Saṅkarṣaṇa. The entire material world is situated on the hoods of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. From His forehead He transmits to Lord Śiva the power to destroy this material world. Because Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, many devotees offer Him prayers, and in the planetary system of Pātāla, all the suras, asuras, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas and learned sages offer Him their respectful obeisances. The Lord talks with them in a sweet voice. His bodily construction is completely spiritual and very, very beautiful. Anyone who hears about Him from a proper spiritual master becomes free from all material conceptions of life. The entire material energy is working according to the plans of Anantadeva. Therefore we should regard Him as the root cause of the material creation. There is no end to His strength, and no one can fully describe Him, even with countless mouths. Therefore He is called Ananta (unlimited). Being very merciful toward all living entities, He has exhibited His spiritual body. Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes the glories of Anantadeva to Mahārāja Parīkṣit in this way.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tasya mūla-deśe triṁśad-yojana-sahasrāntara āste yā vai kalā bhagavatas tāmasī samākhyātānanta iti sātvatīyā draṣṭṛ-dṛśyayoḥ saṅkarṣaṇam aham ity abhimāna-lakṣaṇaṁ yaṁ saṅkarṣaṇam ity ācakṣate.



SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasya-of the planet Pātāla; mūla-deśe-in the region beneath the base; triṁśat-thirty; yojana-eight-mile units of measurement; sahasra-antare-at an interval of one thousand; āste-remains; yā-which; vai-indeed; kalā-an expansion of an expansion; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tāmasī-related to darkness; samākhyātā-called; anantaḥ-Ananta; iti-thus; sātvatīyāḥ-the devotees; draṣṭṛ-dṛśyayoḥ-of matter and spirit; saṅkarṣaṇam-the drawing together; aham-I; iti-thus; abhimāna-by self-conception; lakṣaṇam-symptomized; yam-whom; saṅkarṣaṇam-Saṅkarṣaṇa; iti-thus; ācakṣate-learned scholars describe.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, approximately 240,000 miles beneath the planet Pātāla lives another incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the expansion of Lord Viṣṇu known as Lord Ananta or Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. He is always in the transcendental position, but because He is worshiped by Lord Śiva, the deity of tamo-guṇa or darkness, He is sometimes called tāmasī. Lord Ananta is the predominating Deity of the material mode of ignorance as well as the false ego of all conditioned souls. When a conditioned living being thinks, "I am the enjoyer, and this world is meant to be enjoyed by me," this conception of life is dictated to him by Saṅkarṣaṇa. Thus the mundane conditioned soul thinks himself the Supreme Lord.





There is a class of men akin to Māyāvādī philosophers who misinterpret the and so'ham Vedic mantras to mean, "I am the Supreme Brahman" and "I am identical with the Lord." This kind of false conception, in which one thinks himself the supreme enjoyer, is a kind of illusion. It is described elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.8): janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti. As explained in the above verse, Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa is the predominating Deity of this false conception. Kṛṣṇa confirms this in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15):

sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca





"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." The Lord is situated in everyone's heart as Saṅkarṣaṇa, and when a demon thinks himself one with the Supreme Lord, the Lord keeps him in that darkness. Although such a demoniac living entity is only an insignificant part of the Supreme Lord, he forgets his true position and thinks he is the Supreme Lord. Because this forgetfulness is created by Saṅkarṣaṇa, He is sometimes called tāmasī. The name tāmasī does not indicate that He has a material body. He is always transcendental, but because He is the Supersoul of Lord Śiva, who must perform tamasic activities, Saṅkarṣaṇa is sometimes called tāmasī.





TEXT 2



yasyedaṁ kṣiti-maṇḍalaṁ bhagavato 'nanta-mūrteḥ sahasra-śirasa ekasminn eva śīrṣaṇi dhriyamāṇaṁ siddhārtha iva lakṣyate.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; idam-this; kṣiti-maṇḍalam-universe; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ananta-mūrteḥ-in the form of Anantadeva; sahasra-śirasaḥ-who has thousands of hoods; ekasmin-on one; eva-only; śīrṣaṇi-hood; dhriyamāṇam-is being sustained; siddhārthaḥ iva-and like a white mustard seed; lakṣyate-is seen.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: This great universe, situated on one of Lord Anantadeva's thousands of hoods, appears just like a white mustard seed. It is infinitesimal compared to the hood of Lord Ananta.





TEXT 3



yasya ha vā idaṁ kālenopasañjihīrṣato 'marṣa-viracita-rucira-bhramad-bhruvor antareṇa sāṅkarṣaṇo nāma rudra ekādaśa-vyūhas try-akṣas tri-śikhaṁ śūlam uttambhayann udatiṣṭhat.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; ha vā-indeed; idam-this (material world); kālena-in due course of time; upasañjihīrṣataḥ-desiring to destroy; amarṣa-by anger; viracita-formed; rucira-very beautiful; bhramat-moving; bhruvoḥ-the two eyebrows; antareṇa-from between; sāṅkarṣaṇaḥ nāma-named Sāṅkarṣaṇa; rudraḥ-an incarnation of Lord Śiva; ekādaśa-vyūhaḥ-who has eleven expansions; tri-akṣaḥ-three eyes; tri-śikham-having three points; śūlam-a trident; uttambhayan-raising; udatiṣṭhat-arose.





At the time of devastation, when Lord Anantadeva desires to destroy the entire creation, He becomes slightly angry. Then from between His two eyebrows appears three-eyed Rudra, carrying a trident. This Rudra, who is known as Sāṅkarṣaṇa, is the embodiment of the eleven Rudras, or incarnations of Lord Śiva. He appears in order to devastate the entire creation.





In each creation, the living entities are given a chance to close their business as conditioned souls. When they misuse this opportunity and do not go back home, back to Godhead, Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa becomes angry. The eleven Rudras, expansions of Lord Śiva, come out of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa's eyebrows due to His angry mood, and all of them together devastate the entire creation.





TEXT 4



yasyāṅghri-kamala-yugalāruṇa-viśada-nakha-maṇi-ṣaṇḍa-maṇḍaleṣv ahi-patayaḥ saha sātvatarṣabhair ekānta-bhakti-yogenāvanamantaḥ sva-vadanāni parisphurat-kuṇḍala-prabhā-maṇḍita-gaṇḍa-sthalāny ati-manoharāṇi pramudita-manasaḥ khalu vilokayanti.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; aṅghri-kamala-of lotus feet; yugala-of the pair; aruṇa-viśada-brilliant pink; nakha-of the nails; maṇi-ṣaṇḍa-like gems; maṇḍaleṣu-on the round surfaces; ahi-patayaḥ-the leaders of the snakes; saha-with; sātvata-ṛṣabhaiḥ-the best devotees; ekānta-bhakti-yogena-with unalloyed devotional service; avanamantaḥ-offering obeisances; sva-vadanāni-their own faces; parisphurat-glittering; kuṇḍala-of the earrings; prabhā-by the effulgence; maṇḍita-decorated; gaṇḍa-sthalāni-whose cheeks; ati-manoharāṇi-very beautiful; pramudita-manasaḥ-their minds refreshed; khalu-indeed; vilokayanti-they see.





The pink, transparent toenails on the Lord's lotus feet are exactly like valuable gems polished to a mirror finish. When the unalloyed devotees and the leaders of the snakes offer their obeisances to Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa with great devotion, they become very joyful upon seeing their own beautiful faces reflected in His toenails. Their cheeks are decorated with glittering earrings, and the beauty of their faces is extremely pleasing to see.





TEXT 5



yasyaiva hi nāga-rāja-kumārya āśiṣa āśāsānāś cārv-aṅga-valaya-vilasita-viśada-vipula-dhavala-subhaga-rucira-bhuja-rajata-stambheṣv aguru-candana-kuṅkuma-paṅkānulepenāvalimpamānās tad-abhimarśanonmathita-hṛdaya-makara-dhvajāveśa-rucira-lalita-smitās tad-anurāgamada-mudita-mada-vighūrṇitāruṇa-karuṇāvaloka-nayana-vadanāravindaṁ savrīḍaṁ kila vilokayanti.



SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; eva-certainly; hi-indeed; nāga-rāja-kumāryaḥ-the unmarried princesses of the serpent kings; āśiṣaḥ-blessings; āśāsānāḥ-hoping for; cāru-beautiful; aṅga-valaya-on the sphere of His body; vilasita-gleaming; viśada-spotless; vipula-long; dhavala-white; subhaga-indicating good fortune; rucira-beautiful; bhuja-on His arms; rajata-stambheṣu-like columns of silver; aguru-of aloe; candana-of sandalwood; kuṅkuma-of saffron; paṅka-from the pulp; anulepena-with an ointment; avalimpamānāḥ-smearing; tat-abhimarśana-by contact with His limbs; unmathita-agitated; hṛdaya-in their hearts; makara-dhvaja-of Cupid; āveśa-due to the entrance; rucira-very beautiful; lalita-delicate; smitāḥ-whose smiling; tat-of Him; anurāga-of attachment; mada-by the intoxication; mudita-delighted; mada-due to intoxication with kindness; vighūrṇita-rolling; aruṇa-pink; karuṇa-avaloka-glancing with kindness; nayana-eyes; vadana-and face; aravindam-like lotus flowers; sa-vrīḍam-with bashfulness; kila-indeed; vilokayanti-they see.





Lord Ananta's arms are attractively long, beautifully decorated with bangles and completely spiritual. They are white, and so they appear like silver columns. When the beautiful princesses of the serpent kings, hoping for the Lord's auspicious blessing, smear His arms with aguru pulp, sandalwood pulp and kuṅkuma, the touch of His limbs awakens lusty desires within them. Understanding their minds, the Lord looks at the princesses with a merciful smile, and they become bashful, realizing that He knows their desires. Then they smile beautifully and look upon the Lord's lotus face, which is beautified by reddish eyes rolling slightly from intoxication and delighted by love for His devotees.





When males and females touch each other's bodies, their lusty desires naturally awaken. It appears from this verse that there are similar sensations in spiritual bodies. Both Lord Ananta and the women giving Him pleasure had spiritual bodies. Thus all sensations originally exist in the spiritual body. This is confirmed in the Vedānta-sūtra: janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has commented in this connection that the word ādi means ādi-rasa, the original lusty feeling, which is born from the Supreme. However, spiritual lust and material lust are as completely different as gold and iron. Only one who is very highly elevated in spiritual realization can understand the lusty feelings exchanged between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, or between Kṛṣṇa and the damsels of Vraja. Therefore, unless one is very experienced and advanced in spiritual realization, he is forbidden to discuss the lusty feelings of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. However, if one is a sincere and pure devotee, the material lust in his heart is completely vanquished as he discusses the lusty feelings between the gopīs and Kṛṣṇa, and he makes quick progress in spiritual life.





TEXT 6



sa eva bhagavān ananto 'nanta-guṇārṇava ādi-deva upasaṁhṛtāmarṣa-roṣa-vego lokānāṁ svastaya āste.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-that; eva-certainly; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantaḥ-Anantadeva; ananta-guṇa-arṇavaḥ-the reservoir of unlimited transcendental qualities; ādi-devaḥ-the original Lord, or nondifferent from the original Supreme Personality of Godhead; upasaṁhṛta-who has restrained; amarṣa-of His intolerance; roṣa-and wrath; vegaḥ-the force; lokānām-of all people on all planets; svastaye-for the welfare; āste-remains.





Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa is the ocean of unlimited spiritual qualities, and thus He is known as Anantadeva. He is nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the welfare of all living entities within this material world, He resides in His abode, restraining His anger and intolerance.





Anantadeva's main mission is to dissolve this material creation, but He checks His anger and intolerance. This material world is created to give the conditioned souls another chance to go back home, back to Godhead, but most of them do not take advantage of this facility. After the creation, they again exercise their old propensity for lording it over the material world. These activities of the conditioned souls anger Anantadeva, and He desires to destroy the entire material world. Yet, because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is kind toward us and checks His anger and intolerance. Only at certain times does He express His anger and destroy the material world.





TEXT 7



dhyāyamānaḥ surāsuroraga-siddha-gandharva-vidyādhara-muni-gaṇair anavarata-mada-mudita-vikṛta-vihvala-locanaḥ sulalita-mukharikāmṛtenāpyāyamānaḥ sva-pārṣada-vibudha-yūtha-patīn aparimlāna-rāga-nava-tulasikāmoda-madhv-āsavena mādyan madhukara-vrāta-madhura-gīta-śriyaṁ vaijayantīṁ svāṁ vanamālāṁ nīla-vāsā eka-kuṇḍalo hala-kakudi kṛta-subhaga-sundara-bhujo bhagavān mahendro vāraṇendra iva kāñcanīṁ kakṣām udāra-līlo bibharti.



SYNONYMS



dhyāyamānaḥ-being meditated upon; sura-of demigods; asura-demons; uraga-snakes; siddha-inhabitants of Siddhaloka; gandharva-inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; vidyādhara-Vidyādharas; muni-and of great sages; gaṇaiḥ-by groups; anavarata-constantly; mada-mudita-delighted by intoxication; vikṛta-moving to and fro; vihvala-rolling; locanaḥ-whose eyes; su-lalita-excellently composed; mukharika-of speech; amṛtena-by the nectar; āpyāyamānaḥ-pleasing; sva-pārṣada-His own associates; vibudha-yūtha-patīn-the heads of the different groups of demigods; aparimlāna-never faded; rāga-whose luster; nava-ever fresh; tulasikā-of the tulasī blossoms; āmoda-by the fragrance; madhu-āsavena-and the honey; mādyan-being intoxicated; madhukara-vrāta-of the bees; madhura-gīta-by the sweet singing; śrīyam-which is made more beautiful; vaijayantīm-the garland named vaijayantī; svām-His own; vanamālām-garland; nīla-vāsāḥ-covered with blue garments; eka-kuṇḍalaḥ-wearing only one earring; hala-kakudi-on the handle of a plow; kṛta-placed; subhaga-auspicious; sundara-beautiful; bhujaḥ-hands; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-indraḥ-the King of heaven; vāraṇa-indraḥ-the elephant; iva-like; kāñcanīm-golden; kakṣām-belt; udāra-līlaḥ-engaged in transcendental pastimes; bibharti-wears.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The demigods, the demons, the Uragas [serpentine demigods], the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Vidyādharas and many highly elevated sages constantly offer prayers to the Lord. Because He is intoxicated, the Lord looks bewildered, and His eyes, appearing like flowers in full bloom, move to and fro. He pleases His personal associates, the heads of the demigods, by the sweet vibrations emanating from His mouth. Dressed in bluish garments and wearing a single earring, He holds a plow on His back with His two beautiful and well-constructed hands. Appearing as white as the heavenly King Indra, He wears a golden belt around His waist and a vaijayantī garland of ever-fresh tulasī blossoms around His neck. Bees intoxicated by the honeylike fragrance of the tulasī flowers hum very sweetly around the garland, which thus becomes more and more beautiful. In this way, the Lord enjoys His very magnanimous pastimes.





TEXT 8



ya eṣa evam anuśruto dhyāyamāno mumukṣūṇām anādi-kāla-karma-vāsanā-grathitam avidyāmayaṁ hṛdaya-granthiṁ sattva-rajas-tamomayam antar-hṛdayaṁ gata āśu nirbhinatti tasyānubhāvān bhagavān svāyambhuvo nāradaḥ saha tumburuṇā sabhāyāṁ brahmaṇaḥ saṁślokayām āsa.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-who; eṣaḥ-this one; evam-thus; anuśrutaḥ-being heard from a bona fide spiritual master; dhyāyamānaḥ-being meditated upon; mumukṣūṇām-of persons desiring liberation from conditioned life; anādi-from immemorial; kāla-time; karma-vāsanā-by the desire for fruitive activities; grathitam-tied tightly; avidyā-mayam-consisting of the illusory energy; hṛdaya-granthim-the knot within the heart; sattva-rajaḥ-tamaḥ-mayam-made of the three modes of material nature; antaḥ-hṛdayam-in the core of the heart; gataḥ-situated; āśu-very soon; nirbhinatti-cuts; tasya-of Saṅkarṣaṇa; anubhāvān-the glories; bhagavān-the greatly powerful; svāyambhuvaḥ-the son of Lord Brahmā; nāradaḥ-the sage Nārada; saha-along with; tumburuṇā-the stringed instrument called a Tumburu; sabhāyām-in the assembly; brahmaṇaḥ-of Lord Brahmā; saṁślokayām āsa-described in verses.





If persons who are very serious about being liberated from material life hear the glories of Anantadeva from the mouth of a spiritual master in the chain of disciplic succession, and if they always meditate upon Saṅkarṣaṇa, the Lord enters the cores of their hearts, vanquishes all the dirty contamination of the material modes of nature, and cuts to pieces the hard knot within the heart, which has been tied tightly since time immemorial by the desire to dominate material nature through fruitive activities. Nārada Muni, the son of Lord Brahmā, always glorifies Anantadeva in his father's assembly. There he sings blissful verses of his own composition, accompanied by his stringed instrument [or a celestial singer] known as Tumburu.





None of these descriptions of Lord Anantadeva are imaginary. They are all transcendentally blissful and full of actual knowledge. However, unless one hears them directly from a bona fide spiritual master in the line of disciplic succession, one cannot understand them. This knowledge is delivered to Nārada by Lord Brahmā, and the great saint Nārada, along with his companion, Tumburu, distributes it all over the universe. Sometimes the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as Uttamaśloka, one who is praised by beautiful poetry. Nārada composes various poems to glorify Lord Ananta, and therefore the word saṁślokayām āsa (praised by selected poetry) is used in this verse.



The Vaiṣṇavas in the Gauḍīya-sampradāya belong to the disciplic succession stemming from Lord Brahmā. Lord Brahmā is the spiritual master of Nārada, Nārada is the spiritual master of Vyāsadeva, and Vyāsadeva wrote the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as a commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra. Therefore all devotees in the Gauḍīya-sampradāya accept the activities of Lord Ananta related in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as authentic, and they are thus benefited by going back home, back to Godhead. The contamination in the heart of a conditioned soul is like a huge accumulation of garbage created by the three modes of material nature, especially the modes of rajas (passion) and tamas (ignorance). This contamination becomes manifest in the form of lusty desires and greed for material possessions. As confirmed herein, unless one receives transcendental knowledge in disciplic succession, there is no question of his becoming purified of this contamination.





TEXT 9



utpatti-sthiti-laya-hetavo 'sya kalpāḥ

sattvādyāḥ prakṛti-guṇā yad-īkṣayāsan

yad-rūpaṁ dhruvam akṛtaṁ yad ekam ātman

nānādhāt katham u ha veda tasya vartma

SYNONYMS



utpatti-of creation; sthiti-maintenance; laya-and dissolution; hetavaḥ-the original causes; asya-of this material world; kalpāḥ-capable of acting; sattva-ādyāḥ-headed by the sattva-guṇa; prakṛti-guṇāḥ-the modes of material nature; yat-of whom; īkṣayā-by the glance; āsan-became; yat-rūpam-the form of whom; dhruvam-unlimited; akṛtam-uncreated; yat-who; ekam-one; ātman-in Himself; nānā-variously; adhāt-has manifested; katham-how; u ha-certainly; veda-can understand; tasya-His; vartma-path.





By His glance, the Supreme Personality of Godhead enables the modes of material nature to act as the causes of universal creation, maintenance and destruction. The Supreme Soul is unlimited and beginningless, and although He is one, He has manifested Himself in many forms. How can human society understand the ways of the Supreme?





From Vedic literature we learn that when the Supreme Lord glances (sa aikṣata) over the material energy, the three modes of material nature become manifest and create material variety. Before He glances over the material energy, there is no possibility of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material world. The Lord existed before the creation, and consequently He is eternal and unchanging. Therefore how can any human being, however great a scientist or philosopher he may be, understand the ways of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?



The following quotations from Caitanya-bhāgavata (Ādi-khaṇḍa, 1.48–52 and 1.58–69) tell of the glories of Lord Ananta:



ki brahmā, ki śiva, ki sanakādi 'kumāra'

vyāsa, śuka, nāradādi, 'bhakta' nāma yāṅra





"Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, the four Kumāras [Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanāt-kumāra], Vyāsadeva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Nārada are all pure devotees, eternal servants of the Lord.



sabāra pūjita śrī-ananta-mahāśaya

sahasra-vadana prabhu--bhakti-rasamaya





"Lord Śrī Ananta is worshiped by all the uncontaminated devotees mentioned above. He has thousands of hoods and is the reservoir of all devotional service.



ādideva, mahā-yogī, 'īśvara', 'vaiṣṇava'

mahimāra anta iṅhā nā jānaye saba





"Lord Ananta is the original person and the great mystic controller. At the same time, He is a servant of God, a Vaiṣṇava. Since there is no end to His glories, no one can understand Him fully.



sevana śunilā, ebe śuna ṭhākurāla

ātma-tantre yena-mate vaisena pātāla





"I have already spoken to you of His service to the Lord. Now hear how the self-sufficient Anantadeva exists in the lower planetary system of Pātāla.



śrī-nārada-gosāñi 'tumburu' kari' saṅge

se yaśa gāyena brahmā-sthāne śloka-vandhe





"Bearing his stringed instrument, the tumburu, on his shoulders, the great sage Nārada Muni always glorifies Lord Ananta. Nārada Muni has composed many transcendental verses in praise of the Lord."



sṛṣṭi, sthiti, pralaya, sattvādi yata guṇa

yāṅra dṛṣṭi-pāte haya, yāya punaḥ punaḥ





"Simply due to the glance of Lord Ananta, the three material modes of nature interact and produce creation, maintenance and annihilation. These modes of nature appear again and again.



advitīya-rūpa, satya anādi mahattva

tathāpi 'ananta' haya, ke bujhe se tattva?





"The Lord is glorified as one without a second and as the supreme truth who has no beginning. Therefore He is called Anantadeva [unlimited]. Who can understand Him?



śuddha-sattva-mūrti prabhu dharena karuṇāya

ye-vigrahe sabāra prakāśa sulīlāya





"His form is completely spiritual, and He manifests it only by His mercy. All the activities in this material world are conducted only in His form.



yāṅhāra taraṅga śikhi' siṁha mahāvalī

nija-jana-mano rañje hañā kutūhalī





"He is very powerful and always prepared to please His personal associates and devotees.



ye ananta-nāmera śravaṇa-saṅkīrtane

ye-te mate kene nāhi bole ye-te jane





aśeṣa-janmera bandha chiṇḍe sei-kṣaṇe

ataeva vaiṣṇava nā chāḍe kabhu tāne





"If we simply try to engage in the congregational chanting of the glories of Lord Anantadeva, the dirty things in our hearts, accumulated during many births, will immediately be washed away. Therefore a Vaiṣṇava never loses an opportunity to glorify Anantadeva.



'śeṣa' ba-i saṁsārera gati nāhi āra

anantera nāme sarva-jīvera uddhāra





"Lord Anantadeva is known as Śeṣa [the unlimited end] because He ends our passage through this material world. Simply by chanting His glories, everyone can be liberated.



ananta pṛthivī-giri samudra-sahite

ye-prabhu dharena gire pālana karite





"On His head, Anantadeva sustains the entire universe, with its millions of planets containing enormous oceans and mountains.



sahasra phaṇāra eka-phaṇe 'bindu' yena

ananta vikrama, nā jānena, 'āche' hena





"He is so large and powerful that this universe rests on one of His hoods just like a drop of water. He does not know where it is.



sahasra-vadane kṛṣṇa-yaśa nirantara

gāite āchena ādi-deva mahī-dhara





"While bearing the universe on one of His hoods, Anantadeva chants the glories of Kṛṣṇa with each of His thousands of mouths.



gāyena ananta, śrī-yaśera nāhi anta

jaya-bhaṅga nāhi kāru, doṅhe--balavanta





"Although He has been chanting the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa since time immemorial, He has still not come to their end.



adyāpiha 'śeṣa'-deva sahasra-śrī-mukhe

gāyena caitanya-yaśa anta nāhi dekhe





"To this very day, Lord Ananta continues to chant the glories of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and still He finds no end to them."





TEXT 10



mūrtiṁ naḥ puru-kṛpayā babhāra sattvaṁ

saṁśuddhaṁ sad-asad idaṁ vibhāti tatra

yal-līlāṁ mṛga-patir ādade 'navadyām

ādātuṁ svajana-manāṁsy udāra-vīryaḥ

SYNONYMS



mūrtim-different forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; naḥ-unto us; puru-kṛpayā-because of great mercy; babhāra-exhibited; sattvam-existence; saṁśuddham-completely transcendental; sat-asat idam-this material manifestation of cause and effect; vibhāti-shines; tatra-in whom; yat-līlām-the pastimes of whom; mṛga-patiḥ-the master of all living beings, who is exactly like a lion (the master of all other animals); ādade-taught; anavadyām-without material contamination; ādātum-to conquer; sva-jana-manāṁsi-the minds of His devotees; udāra-vīryaḥ-who is most liberal and powerful.





This manifestation of subtle and gross matter exists within the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Out of causeless mercy toward His devotees, He exhibits various forms, which are all transcendental. The Supreme Lord is most liberal, and He possesses all mystic power. To conquer the minds of His devotees and give pleasure to their hearts, He appears in different incarnations and manifests many pastimes.





Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has translated this verse as follows. "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all causes. It is by His will that gross and subtle ingredients interact. He appears in various incarnations just to please the hearts of His pure devotees." For example, the Supreme Lord appeared in the transcendental incarnation of Lord Varāha (the boar) just to please His devotees by lifting the planet earth from the Garbhodaka Ocean.





TEXT 11



yan-nāma śrutam anukīrtayed akasmād

ārto vā yadi patitaḥ pralambhanād vā

hanty aṁhaḥ sapadi nṛṇām aśeṣam anyaṁ

kaṁ śeṣād bhagavata āśrayen mumukṣuḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-of whom; nāma-the holy name; śrutam-heard; anukīrtayet-may chant or repeat; akasmāt-by accident; ārtaḥ-a distressed person; vā-or; yadi-if; patitaḥ-a fallen person; pralambhanāt-out of joking; vā-or; hanti-destroys; aṁhaḥ-sinful; sapadi-that instant; nṛṇām-of human society; aśeṣam-unlimited; anyam-of other; kam-what; śeṣāt-than Lord Śeṣa; bhagavataḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āśrayet-should take shelter of; mumukṣuḥ-anyone desiring liberation.





Even if he be distressed or degraded, any person who chants the holy name of the Lord, having heard it from a bona fide spiritual master, is immediately purified. Even if he chants the Lord's name jokingly or by chance, he and anyone who hears him are freed from all sins. Therefore how can anyone seeking disentanglement from the material clutches avoid chanting the name of Lord Śeṣa? Of whom else should one take shelter?





TEXT 12



mūrdhany arpitam aṇuvat sahasra-mūrdhno

bhū-golaṁ sagiri-sarit-samudra-sattvam

ānantyād animita-vikramasya bhūmnaḥ

ko vīryāṇy adhi gaṇayet sahasra-jihvaḥ

SYNONYMS



mūrdhani-on a hood or head; arpitam-fixed; aṇu-vat-just like an atom; sahasra-mūrdhnaḥ-of Ananta, who has thousands of hoods; bhū-golam-this universe; sa-giri-sarit-samudra-sattvam-with many mountains, trees, oceans and living entities; ānantyāt-due to being unlimited; animita-vikramasya-whose power is immeasurable; bhūmnaḥ-the Supreme Lord; kaḥ-who; vīryāṇi-potencies; adhi-indeed; gaṇayet-can count; sahasra-jihvaḥ-although having thousands of tongues.





Because the Lord is unlimited, no one can estimate His power. This entire universe, filled with its many great mountains, rivers, oceans, trees and living entities, is resting just like an atom on one of His many thousands of hoods. Is there anyone, even with thousands of tongues, who can describe His glories?





TEXT 13



evam-prabhāvo bhagavān ananto

duranta-vīryoru-guṇānubhāvaḥ

mūle rasāyāḥ sthita ātma-tantro

yo līlayā kṣmāṁ sthitaye bibharti

SYNONYMS



evam-prabhāvaḥ-who is so powerful; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantaḥ-Ananta; duranta-vīrya-insurmountable prowess; uru-great; guṇa-anubhāvaḥ-possessing transcendental qualities and glories; mūle-at the base; rasāyāḥ-of the lower planetary systems; sthitaḥ-existing; ātma-tantraḥ-completely self-sufficient; yaḥ-who; līlayā-easily; kṣmām-the universe; sthitaye-for its maintenance; bibharti-sustains.





There is no end to the great and glorious qualities of that powerful Lord Anantadeva. Indeed, His prowess is unlimited. Though self-sufficient, He Himself is the support of everything. He resides beneath the lower planetary systems and easily sustains the entire universe.





TEXT 14



etā hy eveha nṛbhir upagantavyā gatayo yathā-karma-vinirmitā yathopadeśam anuvarṇitāḥ kāmān kāmayamānaiḥ.



SYNONYMS



etāḥ-all these; hi-indeed; eva-certainly; iha-in this universe; nṛbhiḥ-by all living entities; upagantavyāḥ-achievable; gatayaḥ-destinations; yathā-karma-according to one's past activities; vinirmitāḥ-created; yathā-upadeśam-as instructed; anuvarṇitāḥ-described accordingly; kāmān-material enjoyment; kāmayamānaiḥ-by those who are desiring.





My dear King, as I heard of it from my spiritual master, I have fully described to you the creation of this material world according to the fruitive activities and desires of the conditioned souls. Those conditioned souls, who are full of material desires, achieve various situations in different planetary systems, and in this way they live within this material creation.





In this regard, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings,



anādi karama-phale, paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale,

taribāre nā dekhi upāya

"My Lord, I do not know when I commenced my material life, but I can certainly experience that I have fallen in the deep ocean of nescience. Now I can also see that there is no other way to get out of it than to take shelter of Your lotus feet." Similarly, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu offers the following prayer:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





"My dear Lord, son of Nanda Mahārāja, I am Your eternal servant. Somehow or other, I have fallen into this ocean of nescience. Kindly, therefore, save me from this horrible condition of materialistic life."





TEXT 15



etāvatīr hi rājan puṁsaḥ pravṛtti-lakṣaṇasya dharmasya vipāka-gataya uccāvacā visadṛśā yathā-praśnaṁ vyācakhye kim anyat kathayāma iti.



SYNONYMS



etāvatīḥ-of such a kind; hi-certainly; rājan-O King; puṁsaḥ-of the human being; pravṛtti-lakṣaṇasya-symptomized by inclinations; dharmasya-of the execution of duties; vipāka-gatayaḥ-the resultant destinations; ucca-avacāḥ-high and low; visadṛśāḥ-different; yathā-praśnam-as you inquired; vyācakhye-I have described; kim anyat-what else; kathayāma-shall I speak; iti-thus.





My dear King, I have thus described how people generally act according to their different desires and, as a result, get different types of bodies in higher or lower planets. You inquired of these things from me, and I have explained to you whatever I have heard from authorities. What shall I speak of now?



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Glories of Lord Ananta."



Chapter Twenty-six



A Description of the Hellish Planets





The Twenty-sixth Chapter describes how a sinful man goes to different hells, where he is punished in various ways by the assistants of Yamarāja. As stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (3.27):



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality carried out by nature." The foolish person thinks he is independent of any law. He thinks there is no God or regulative principle and that he can do whatever he likes. Thus he engages in different sinful activities, and as a result, he is put into different hellish conditions life after life, to be punished by the laws of nature. The basic principle of his suffering is that he foolishly thinks himself independent, although he is strictly under the control of the laws of material nature. These laws act due to the influence of the three modes of nature, and therefore each human being also works under three different types of influence. According to how he acts, he suffers different reactions in his next life or in this life. Religious persons act differently from atheists, and therefore they suffer different reactions.



Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes the following twenty-eight hells: Tāmisra, Andhatāmisra, Raurava, Mahāraurava, Kumbhīpāka. Kālasūtra, Asi-patravana, Sūkaramukha, Andhakūpa, Kṛmibhojana. Sandaṁśa, Taptasūrmi, Vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī, Vaitaraṇī, Pūyoda, Prāṇarodha, Viśasana, Lālābhakṣa, Sārameyādana, Avīci, Ayaḥpāna. Kṣārakardama, Rakṣogaṇa-bhojana, Śūlaprota, Dandaśūka. Avaṭa-nirodhana, Paryāvartana and Sūcīmukha.



A person who steals another's money, wife or possessions is put into the hell known as Tāmisra. A man who tricks someone and enjoys his wife is put into the extremely hellish condition known as Andhatāmisra. A foolish person absorbed in the bodily concept of life, who on the basis of this principle maintains himself or his wife and children by committing violence against other living entities, is put into the hell known as Raurava. There the animals he killed take birth as creatures called rurus and cause great suffering for him. Those who kill different animals and birds and then cook them are put by the agents of Yamarāja into the hell known as Kumbhīpāka, where they are boiled in oil. A person who kills a brāhmaṇa is put into the hell known as Kālasūtra, where the land, perfectly level and made of copper, is as hot as an oven. The killer of a brāhmaṇa burns in that land for many years. One who does not follow scriptural injunctions but who does everything whimsically or follows some rascal is put into the hell known as Asi-patravana. A government official who poorly administers justice, or who punishes an innocent man, is taken by the assistants of Yamarāja to the hell known as Sūkaramukha, where he is mercilessly beaten.



God has given advanced consciousness to the human being. Therefore he can feel the suffering and happiness of other living beings. The human being bereft of his conscience, however, is prone to cause suffering for other living beings. The assistants of Yamarāja put such a person into the hell known as Andhakūpa, where he receives proper punishment from his victims. Any person who does not receive or feed a guest properly but who personally enjoys eating is put into the hell known as Kṛmibhojana. There an unlimited number of worms and insects continuously bite him.



A thief is put into the hell known as Sandaṁśa. A person who has sexual relations with a woman who is not to be enjoyed is put into the hell known as Taptasūrmi. A person who enjoys sexual relations with animals is put into the hell known as Vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī. A person born into an aristocratic or highly placed family but who does not act accordingly is put into the hellish trench of blood, pus and urine called the Vaitaraṇī River. One who lives like an animal is put into the hell called Pūyoda. A person who mercilessly kills animals in the forest without sanction is put into the hell called Prāṇarodha. A person who kills animals in the name of religious sacrifice is put into the hell named Viśasana. A man who forces his wife to drink his semen is put into the hell called Lālābhakṣa. One who sets a fire or administers poison to kill someone is put into the hell known as Sārameyādana. A man who earns his livelihood by bearing false witness is put into the hell known as Avīci.



A person addicted to drinking wine is put into the hell named Ayaḥpāna. One who violates etiquette by not showing proper respect to superiors is put into the hell known as Kṣārakardama. A person who sacrifices human beings to Bhairava is put into the hell called Rakṣogaṇa-bhojana. A person who kills pet animals is put into the hell called Śūlaprota. A person who gives trouble to others is put into the hell known as Dandaśūka. One who imprisons a living entity within a cave is put into the hell known as Avaṭa-nirodhana. A person who shows unwarranted wrath toward a guest in his house is put into the hell called Paryāvartana. A person maddened by possessing riches and thus deeply absorbed in thinking of how to collect money is put into the hell known as Sūcīmukha.



After describing the hellish planets, Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes how pious persons are elevated to the highest planetary system, where the demigods live, and how they then come back again to this earth when the results of their pious activities are finished. Finally he describes the universal form of the Lord and glorifies the Lord's activities.





TEXT 1



rājovāca

maharṣa etad vaicitryaṁ lokasya katham iti.



SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-the King said; maharṣe-O great saint (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); etat-this; vaicitryam-variegatedness; lokasya-of the living entities; katham-how; iti-thus.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My dear sir, why are the living entities put into different material situations? Kindly explain this to me.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the different hellish planets within this universe are held slightly above the Garbhodaka Ocean and remain situated there. This chapter describes how all sinful persons go to these hellish planets and how they are punished there by the assistants of Yamarāja. Different individuals with different bodily features enjoy or suffer various reactions according to their past deeds.





TEXT 2



ṛṣir uvāca

tri-guṇatvāt kartuḥ śraddhayā karma-gatayaḥ pṛthag-vidhāḥ sarvā eva sarvasya tāratamyena bhavanti.



SYNONYMS



ṛṣiḥ uvāca-the great saint (Śukadeva Gosvāmī) said; tri-guṇatvāt-because of the three modes of material nature; kartuḥ-of the worker; śraddhayā-because of the attitudes; karma-gatayaḥ-destinations resulting from activity; pṛthak-different; vidhāḥ-varieties; sarvāḥ-all; eva-thus; sarvasya-of all of them; tāratamyena-in different degrees; bhavanti-become possible.





The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, in this material world there are three kinds of activities-those in the mode of goodness, the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Because all people are influenced by the three modes of material nature, the results of their activities are also divided into three. One who acts in the mode of goodness is religious and happy, one who acts in passion achieves mixed misery and happiness, and one who acts under the influence of ignorance is always unhappy and lives like an animal. Because of the varying degrees to which the living entities are influenced by the different modes of nature, their destinations are also of different varieties.





TEXT 3



athedānīṁ pratiṣiddha-lakṣaṇasyādharmasya tathaiva kartuḥ śraddhāyā vaisādṛśyāt karma-phalaṁ visadṛśaṁ bhavati yā hy anādy-avidyayā kṛta-kāmānāṁ tat-pariṇāma-lakṣaṇāḥ sṛtayaḥ sahasraśaḥ pravṛttās tāsāṁ prācuryeṇānuvarṇayiṣyāmaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-thus; idānīm-now; pratiṣiddha-by what is forbidden; lakṣaṇasya-symptomized; adharmasya-of impious activities; tathā-so also; eva-certainly; kartuḥ-of the performer; śraddhāyāḥ-of faith; vaisādṛśyāt-by the difference; karma-phalam-the reaction of fruitive activities; visadṛśam-different; bhavati-is; yā-which; hi-indeed; anādi-from time immemorial; avidyayā-by ignorance; kṛta-performed; kāmānām-of persons possessing many lusty desires; tat-pariṇāma-lakṣaṇāḥ-the symptoms of the results of such impious desires; sṛtayaḥ-hellish conditions of life; sahasraśaḥ-by thousands upon thousands; pravṛttāḥ-resulted; tāsām-them; prācuryeṇa-very widely; anuvarṇayiṣyāmaḥ-I shall explain.





Just as by executing various pious activities one achieves different positions in heavenly life, by acting impiously one achieves different positions in hellish life. Those who are activated by the material mode of ignorance engage in impious activities, and according to the extent of their ignorance, they are placed in different grades of hellish life. If one acts in the mode of ignorance because of madness, his resulting misery is the least severe. One who acts impiously but knows the distinction between pious and impious activities is placed in a hell of intermediate severity. And for one who acts impiously and ignorantly because of atheism, the resultant hellish life is the worst. Because of ignorance, every living entity has been carried by various desires into thousands of different hellish planets since time immemorial. I shall try to describe them as far as possible.





TEXT 4



rājovāca

narakā nāma bhagavan kiṁ deśa-viśeṣā athavā bahis tri-lokyā āhosvid antarāla iti.



SYNONYMS



rājā uvāca-the King said; narakāḥ-the hellish regions; nāma-named; bhagavan-O my Lord; kim-whether; deśa-viśeṣāḥ-a particular country; athavā-or; bahiḥ-outside; tri-lokyāḥ-the three worlds (the universe); āhosvit-or; antarāle-in the intermediate spaces within the universe; iti-thus.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My dear lord, are the hellish regions outside the universe, within the covering of the universe, or in different places on this planet?





TEXT 5



ṛṣir uvāca

antarāla eva tri-jagatyās tu diśi dakṣiṇasyām adhastād bhūmer upariṣṭāc ca jalād yasyām agniṣvāttādayaḥ pitṛ-gaṇā diśi svānāṁ gotrāṇāṁ parameṇa samādhinā satyā evāśiṣa āśāsānā nivasanti.



SYNONYMS



ṛṣiḥ uvāca-the great sage replied; antarāle-in the intermediate space; eva-certainly; tri-jagatyāḥ-of the three worlds; tu-but; diśi-in the direction; dakṣiṇasyām-southern; adhastāt-beneath; bhūmeḥ-on the earth; upariṣṭāt-a little above; ca-and; jalāt-the Garbhodaka Ocean; yasyām-in which; agniṣvāttā-ādayaḥ-headed by Agniṣvāttā; pitṛ-gaṇāḥ-the persons known as pitās; diśi-direction; svānām-their own; gotrāṇām-of the families; parameṇa-with great; samādhinā-absorption in thoughts of the Lord; satyāḥ-in truth; eva-certainly; āśiṣaḥ-blessings; āśāsānāḥ-desiring; nivasanti-they live.





The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī answered: All the hellish planets are situated in the intermediate space between the three worlds and the Garbhodaka Ocean. They lie on the southern side of the universe, beneath Bhū-maṇḍala, and slightly above the water of the Garbhodaka Ocean. Pitṛloka is also located in this region between the Garbhodaka Ocean and the lower planetary systems. All the residents of Pitṛloka, headed by Agniṣvāttā, meditate in great samādhi on the Supreme Personality of Godhead and always wish their families well.





As previously explained, below our planetary system are seven lower planetary systems, the lowest of which is called Pātālaloka. Beneath Pātālaloka are other planets, known as Narakaloka, or the hellish planets. At the bottom of the universe lies the Garbhodaka Ocean. Therefore the hellish planets lie between Pātālaloka and the Garbhodaka Ocean.





TEXT 6



yatra ha vāva bhagavān pitṛ-rājo vaivasvataḥ sva-viṣayaṁ prāpiteṣu sva-puruṣair jantuṣu sampareteṣu yathā-karmāvadyaṁ doṣam evānullaṅghita-bhagavac-chāsanaḥ sagaṇo damaṁ dhārayati.



SYNONYMS



yatra-where; ha vāva-indeed; bhagavān-the most powerful; pitṛ-rājaḥ-Yamarāja, the king of the pitās; vaivasvataḥ-the son of the sun-god; sva-viṣayam-his own kingdom; prāpiteṣu-when caused to reach; sva-puruṣaiḥ-by his own messengers; jantuṣu-the human beings; sampareteṣu-dead; yathā-karma-avadyam-according to how much they have violated the rules and regulations of conditional life; doṣam-the fault; eva-certainly; anullaṅghita-bhagavat-śāsanaḥ-who never oversteps the Supreme Personality of Godhead's order; sagaṇaḥ-along with his followers; damam-punishment; dhārayati-executes.





The King of the pitās is Yamarāja, the very powerful son of the sun-god. He resides in Pitṛloka with his personal assistants and, while abiding by the rules and regulations set down by the Supreme Lord, has his agents, the Yamadūtas, bring all the sinful men to him immediately upon their death. After bringing them within his jurisdiction, he properly judges them according to their specific sinful activities and sends them to one of the many hellish planets for suitable punishments.





Yamarāja is not a fictitious or mythological character; he has his own abode, Pitṛloka, of which he is king. Agnostics may not believe in hell, but Śukadeva Gosvāmī affirms the existence of the Naraka planets, which lie between the Garbhodaka Ocean and Pātālaloka. Yamarāja is appointed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to see that the human beings do not violate His rules and regulations. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.17):



karmaṇo hy api boddhavyaṁ

boddhavyaṁ ca vikarmaṇaḥ

akarmaṇaś ca boddhavyaṁ

gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ





"The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what inaction is. "One should understand the nature of karma, vikarma and akarma, and one must act accordingly. This is the law of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The conditioned souls, who have come to this material world for sense gratification, are allowed to enjoy their senses under certain regulative principles. If they violate these regulations, they are judged and punished by Yamarāja. He brings them to the hellish planets and properly chastises them to bring them back to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. By the influence of māyā, however, the conditioned souls remain infatuated with the mode of ignorance. Thus in spite of repeated punishment by Yamarāja, they do not come to their senses, but continue to live within the material condition, committing sinful activities again and again.





TEXT 7



tatra haike narakān eka-viṁśatiṁ gaṇayanti atha tāṁs te rājan nāma-rūpa-lakṣaṇato 'nukramiṣyāmas tāmisro 'ndhatāmisro rauravo mahārauravaḥ kumbhīpākaḥ kālasūtram asipatravanaṁ sūkaramukham andhakūpaḥ kṛmibhojanaḥ sandaṁśas taptasūrmir vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī vaitaraṇī pūyodaḥ prāṇarodho viśasanaṁ lālābhakṣaḥ sārameyādanam avīcir ayaḥpānam iti; kiñca kṣārakardamo rakṣogaṇa-bhojanaḥ śūlaproto dandaśūko 'vaṭa-nirodhanaḥ paryāvartanaḥ sūcīmukham ity aṣṭā-viṁśatir narakā vividha-yātanā-bhūmayaḥ.



SYNONYMS



tatra-there; ha-certainly; eke-some; narakān-the hellish planets; eka-viṁśatim-twenty-one; gaṇayanti-count; atha-therefore; tān-them; te-unto you; rājan-O King; nāma-rūpa-lakṣaṇataḥ-according to their names, forms and symptoms; anukramiṣyāmaḥ-we shall outline one after another; tāmisraḥ-Tāmisra; andha-tāmisraḥ-Andhatāmisra; rauravaḥ-Raurava; mahā-rauravaḥ-Mahāraurava; kumbhī-pākaḥ-Kumbhīpāka; kāla-sūtram-Kālasūtra; asi-patravanam-Asi-patravana; sūkara-mukham-Sūkaramukha; andha-kūpaḥ-Andhakūpa; kṛmi-bhojanaḥ-Kṛmibhojana; sandaṁśaḥ-Sandaṁśa; tapta-sūrmiḥ-Taptasūrmi; vajra-kaṇṭaka-śālmalī-Vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī; vaitaraṇī-Vaitaraṇī; pūyodaḥ-Pūyoda; prāṇa-rodhaḥ-Prāṇarodha; viśasanam-Viśasana; lālā-bhakṣaḥ-Lālābhakṣa; sārameyādanam-Sārameyādana; avīciḥ-Avīci; ayaḥ-pānam-Ayaḥpāna; iti-thus; kiñca-some more; kṣāra-kardamaḥ-Kṣārakardama; rakṣaḥ-gaṇa-bhojanaḥ-Rakṣogaṇa-bhojana; śūla-protaḥ-Śūlaprota; danda-śūkaḥ-Dandaśūka; avaṭa-nirodhanaḥ-Avaṭa-nirodhana; paryāvartanaḥ-Paryāvartana; sūcī-mukham-Sūcīmukha; iti-in this way; aṣṭā-viṁśatiḥ-twenty-eight; narakāḥ-hellish planets; vividha-various; yātanā-bhūmayaḥ-lands of suffering in hellish conditions.





Some authorities say that there is a total of twenty-one hellish planets, and some say twenty-eight. My dear King, I shall outline all of them according to their names, forms and symptoms. The names of the different hells are as follows: Tāmisra, Andhatāmisra, Raurava, Mahāraurava, Kumbhīpāka, Kālasūtra, Asi-patravana, Sūkaramukha, Andhakūpa, Kṛmibhojana, Sandaṁśa, Taptasūrmi, Vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī, Vaitaraṇī, Pūyoda, Prāṇarodha, Viśasana, Lālābhakṣa, Sārameyādana, Avīci, Ayaḥpāna, Kṣārakardama, Rakṣogaṇa-bhojana, Śūlaprota, Dandaśūka, Avaṭa-nirodhana, Paryāvartana and Sūcīmukha. All these planets are meant for punishing the living entities.





TEXT 8



tatra yas tu para-vittāpatya-kalatrāṇy apaharati sa hi kāla-pāśa-baddho yama-puruṣair ati-bhayānakais tāmisre narake balān nipātyate anaśanānudapāna-daṇḍa-tāḍana-santarjanādibhir yātanābhir yātyamāno jantur yatra kaśmalam āsādita ekadaiva mūrcchām upayāti tāmisra-prāye.



SYNONYMS



tatra-in those hellish planets; yaḥ-a person who; tu-but; para-vitta-apatya-kalatrāṇi-the money, wife and children of another; apaharati-takes away; saḥ-that person; hi-certainly; kāla-pāśa-baddhaḥ-being bound by the ropes of time or Yamarāja; yama-puruṣaiḥ-by the assistants of Yamarāja; ati-bhayānakaiḥ-who are very fearful; tāmisre narake-into the hell known as Tāmisra; balāt-by force; nipātyate-is thrown; anaśana-starvation; anudapāna-without water; daṇḍa-tāḍana-beaten with rods; santarjana-ādibhiḥ-by scolding and so on; yātanābhiḥ-by severe punishments; yātyamānaḥ-being punished; jantuḥ-the living entity; yatra-where; kaśmalam-misery; āsāditaḥ-obtained; ekadā-sometimes; eva-certainly; mūrcchām-fainting; upayāti-obtains; tāmisra-prāye-in that condition, which is almost entirely dark.





My dear King, a person who appropriates another's legitimate wife, children or money is arrested at the time of death by the fierce Yamadūtas, who bind him with the rope of time and forcibly throw him into the hellish planet known as Tāmisra. On this very dark planet, the sinful man is chastised by the Yamadūtas, who beat and rebuke him. He is starved, and he is given no water to drink. Thus the wrathful assistants of Yamarāja cause him severe suffering, and sometimes he faints from their chastisement.





TEXT 9



evam evāndhatāmisre yas tu vañcayitvā puruṣaṁ dārādīn upayuṅkte yatra śarīrī nipātyamāno yātanā-stho vedanayā naṣṭa-matir naṣṭa-dṛṣṭiś ca bhavati yathā vanaspatir vṛścyamāna-mūlas tasmād andhatāmisraṁ tam upadiśanti.



SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; eva-certainly; andhatāmisre-in the hellish planet known as Andhatāmisra; yaḥ-the person who; tu-but; vañcayitvā-cheating; puruṣam-another person; dāra-ādīn-the wife and children; upayuṅkte-enjoys; yatra-where; śarīrī-the embodied person; nipātyamānaḥ-being forcibly thrown; yātanā-sthaḥ-always situated in extremely miserable conditions; vedanayā-by such suffering; naṣṭa-lost; matiḥ-whose consciousness; naṣṭa-lost; dṛṣṭiḥ-whose sight; ca-also; bhavati-becomes; yathā-as much as; vanaspatiḥ-the trees; vṛścyamāna-being cut; mūlaḥ-whose root; tasmāt-because of this; andhatāmisram-Andhatāmisra; tam-that; upadiśanti-they call.





The destination of a person who slyly cheats another man and enjoys his wife and children is the hell known as Andhatāmisra. There his condition is exactly like that of a tree being chopped at its roots. Even before reaching Andhatāmisra, the sinful living being is subjected to various extreme miseries. These afflictions are so severe that he loses his intelligence and sight. It is for this reason that learned sages call this hell Andhatāmisra.





TEXT 10



yas tv iha vā etad aham iti mamedam iti bhūta-droheṇa kevalaṁ sva-kuṭumbam evānudinaṁ prapuṣṇāti sa tad iha vihāya svayam eva tad-aśubhena raurave nipatati.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-one who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; etat-this body; aham-I; iti-thus; mama-mine; idam-this; iti-thus; bhūta-droheṇa-by envy of other living entities; kevalam-alone; sva-kuṭumbam-his family members; eva-only; anudinam-day to day; prapuṣṇāti-supports; saḥ-such a person; tat-that; iha-here; vihāya-giving up; svayam-personally; eva-certainly; tat-of that; aśubhena-by the sin; raurave-in Raurava; nipatati-he falls down.





A person who accepts his body as his self works very hard day and night for money to maintain his own body and the bodies of his wife and children. While working to maintain himself and his family, he may commit violence against other living entities. Such a person is forced to give up his body and his family at the time of death, when he suffers the reaction for his envy of other creatures by being thrown into the hell called Raurava.





In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said:



yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma-ijya-dhīḥ

yat-tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ





"One who accepts this bodily bag of three elements [bile, mucus and air] as his self, who has an affinity for an intimate relationship with his wife and children, who considers his land worshipable, who takes bath in the waters of the holy places of pilgrimage but never takes advantage of those persons who are in actual knowledge-he is no better than an ass or a cow." (Bhāg. 10.84.13) There are two classes of men absorbed in the material concept of life. Out of ignorance, a man in the first class thinks his body to be his self, and therefore he is certainly like an animal (sa eva go-kharaḥ). The person in the second class, however, not only thinks his material body to be his self, but also commits all kinds of sinful activities to maintain his body. He cheats everyone to acquire money for his family and his self, and he becomes envious of others without reason. Such a person is thrown into the hell known as Raurava. If one simply considers his body to be his self, as do the animals, he is not very sinful. However, if one needlessly commits sins to maintain his body, he is put into the hell known as Raurava. This is the opinion of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Although animals are certainly in the bodily concept of life, they do not commit any sins to maintain their bodies, mates or offspring. Therefore animals do not go to hell. However, when a human being acts enviously and cheats others to maintain his body, he is put into a hellish condition.





TEXT 11



ye tv iha yathaivāmunā vihiṁsitā jantavaḥ paratra yama-yātanām upagataṁ ta eva ruravo bhūtvā tathā tam eva vihiṁsanti tasmād rauravam ity āhū rurur iti sarpād ati-krūra-sattvasyāpadeśaḥ.



SYNONYMS



ye-those who; tu-but; iha-in this life; yathā-as much as; eva-certainly; amunā-by him; vihiṁsitāḥ-who were hurt; jantavaḥ-the living entities; paratra-in the next life; yama-yātanām upagatam-being subjected to miserable conditions by Yamarāja; te-those living entities; eva-indeed; ruravaḥ-rurus (a kind of envious animal); bhūtvā-becoming; tathā-that much; tam-him; eva-certainly; vihiṁsanti-they hurt; tasmāt-because of this; rauravam-Raurava; iti-thus; āhuḥ-learned scholars say; ruruḥ-the animal known as ruru; iti-thus; sarpāt-than the snake; ati-krūra-much more cruel and envious; sattvasya-of the entity; apadeśaḥ-the name.





In this life, an envious person commits violent acts against many living entities. Therefore after his death, when he is taken to hell by Yamarāja, those living entities who were hurt by him appear as animals called rurus to inflict very severe pain upon him. Learned scholars call this hell Raurava. Not generally seen in this world, the ruru is more envious than a snake.





According to Śrīdhara Svāmī, the ruru is also known as the bhāra-śṛṅga (ati-krūrasya bhāra-śṛṅgākhya-sattvasya apadeśaḥ saṁjñā). Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī confirms this in his Sandarbha: ruru-śabdasya svayaṁ muninaiva ṭīkā-vidhānāl lokeṣv aprasiddha evāyaṁ jantu-viśeṣaḥ. Thus although rurus are not seen in this world, their existence is confirmed in the śāstras.





TEXT 12



evam eva mahārauravo yatra nipatitaṁ puruṣaṁ kravyādā nāma ruravas taṁ kravyeṇa ghātayanti yaḥ kevalaṁ dehambharaḥ.



SYNONYMS



evam-thus; eva-certainly; mahā-rauravaḥ-the hell known as Mahāraurava; yatra-where; nipatitam-being thrown; puruṣam-a person; kravyādāḥ nāma-named kravyāda; ruravaḥ-the ruru animals; tam-him (the condemned person); kravyeṇa-for eating his flesh; ghātayanti-kill; yaḥ-who; kevalam-only; dehambharaḥ-intent upon maintaining his own body.





Punishment in the hell called Mahāraurava is compulsory for a person who maintains his own body by hurting others. In this hell, ruru animals known as kravyāda torment him and eat his flesh.





The animalistic person who lives simply in the bodily concept of life is not excused. He is put into the hell known as Mahāraurava and attacked by ruru animals known as kravyādas.





TEXT 13



yas tv iha vā ugraḥ paśūn pakṣiṇo vā prāṇata uparandhayati tam apakaruṇaṁ puruṣādair api vigarhitam amutra yamānucarāḥ kumbhīpāke tapta-taile uparandhayanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-a person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; ugraḥ-very cruel; paśūn-animals; pakṣiṇaḥ-birds; vā-or; prāṇataḥ-in a live condition; uparandhayati-cooks; tam-him; apakaruṇam-very cruel-hearted; puruṣa-ādaiḥ-by those who eat human flesh; api-even; vigarhitam-condemned; amutra-in the next life; yama-anucarāḥ-the servants of Yamarāja; kumbhīpāke-in the hell known as Kumbhīpāka; tapta-taile-in boiling oil; uparandhayanti-cook.





For the maintenance of their bodies and the satisfaction of their tongues, cruel persons cook poor animals and birds alive. Such persons are condemned even by man-eaters. In their next lives they are carried by the Yamadūtas to the hell known as Kumbhīpāka, where they are cooked in boiling oil.





TEXT 14



yas tv iha brahma-dhruk sa kālasūtra-saṁjñake narake ayuta-yojana-parimaṇḍale tāmramaye tapta-khale upary-adhastād agny-arkābhyām ati-tapyamāne 'bhiniveśitaḥ kṣut-pipāsābhyāṁ ca dahyamānāntar-bahiḥ-śarīra āste śete ceṣṭate 'vatiṣṭhati paridhāvati ca yāvanti paśu-romāṇi tāvad varṣa-sahasrāṇi.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; brahma-dhruk-the killer of a brāhmaṇa; saḥ-such a person; kālasūtra-saṁjñake-named Kālasūtra; narake-in the hell; ayuta-yojana-parimaṇḍale-having a circumference of eighty thousand miles; tāmra-maye-made of copper; tapta-heated; khale-in a level place; upari-adhastāt-above and beneath; agni-by fire; arkābhyām-and by the sun; ati-tapyamāne-which is being heated; abhiniveśitaḥ-being made to enter; kṣut-pipāsābhyām-by hunger and thirst; ca-and; dahyamāna-being burned; antaḥ-internally; bahiḥ-externally; śarīraḥ-whose body; āste-remains; śete-sometimes lies; ceṣṭate-sometimes moves his limbs; avatiṣṭhati-sometimes stands; paridhāvati-sometimes runs here and there; ca-also; yāvanti-as many; paśu-romāṇi-hairs on the body of an animal; tāvat-that long; varṣa-sahasrāṇi-thousands of years.





The killer of a brāhmaṇa is put into the hell known as Kālasūtra, which has a circumference of eighty thousand miles and which is made entirely of copper. Heated from below by fire and from above by the scorching sun, the copper surface of this planet is extremely hot. Thus the murderer of a brāhmaṇa suffers from being burned both internally and externally. Internally he is burning with hunger and thirst, and externally he is burning from the scorching heat of the sun and the fire beneath the copper surface. Therefore he sometimes lies down, sometimes sits, sometimes stands up and sometimes runs here and there. He must suffer in this way for as many thousands of years as there are hairs on the body of an animal.





TEXT 15



yas tv iha vai nija-veda-pathād anāpady apagataḥ pākhaṇḍaṁ copagatas tam asi-patravanaṁ praveśya kaśayā praharanti tatra hāsāv itas tato dhāvamāna ubhayato dhārais tāla-vanāsi-patraiś chidyamāna-sarvāṅgo hā hato 'smīti paramayā vedanayā mūrcchitaḥ pade pade nipatati sva-dharmahā pākhaṇḍānugataṁ phalaṁ bhuṅkte.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; nija-veda-pathāt-from his own path, recommended by the Vedas; anāpadi-even without an emergency; apagataḥ-deviated; pākhaṇḍam-a concocted, atheistic system; ca-and; upagataḥ-gone to; tam-him; asi-patravanam-the hell known as Asi-patravana; praveśya-making enter; kaśayā-with a whip; praharanti-they beat; tatra-there; ha-certainly; asau-that; itaḥ tataḥ-here and there; dhāvamānaḥ-running; ubhayataḥ-on both sides; dhāraiḥ-by the edges; tāla-vana-asi-patraiḥ-by the swordlike leaves of palm trees; chidyamāna-being cut; sarva-aṅgaḥ-whose entire body; hā-alas; hataḥ-killed; asmi-I am; iti-thus; paramayā-with severe; vedanayā-pain; mūrcchitaḥ-fainted; pade pade-at every step; nipatati-falls down; sva-dharma-hā-the killer of his own principles of religion; pākhaṇḍa-anugatam phalam-the result of accepting an atheistic path; bhuṅkte-he suffers.





If a person deviates from the path of the Vedas in the absence of an emergency, the servants of Yamarāja put him into the hell called Asi-patravana, where they beat him with whips. When he runs hither and thither, fleeing from the extreme pain, on all sides he runs into palm trees with leaves like sharpened swords. Thus injured all over his body and fainting at every step, he cries out, "Oh, what shall I do now! How shall I be saved!" This is how one suffers who deviates from the accepted religious principles.





There is actually only one religious principle: dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam [SB 6.3.19]. The only religious principle is to follow the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, especially in this age of Kali, everyone is an atheist, people do not even believe in God, what to speak of following His words. The words nija-veda-patha can also mean "one's own set of religious principles." Formerly there was only one veda-patha, or set of religious principles. Now there are many. It doesn't matter which set of religious principles one follows: the only injunction is that he must follow them strictly. An atheist, or nāstika, is one who does not believe in the Vedas. However, even if one takes up a different system of religion, according to this verse he must follow the religious principles he has accepted. Whether one is a Hindu, or a Mohammedan or a Christian, he should follow his own religious principles. However, if one concocts his own religious path within his mind, or if one follows no religious principles at all, he is punished in the hell known as Asi-patravana. In other words, a human being must follow some religious principles. If he does not follow any religious principles, he is no better than an animal. As Kali-yuga advances, people are becoming godless and taking up so-called secularism. They do not know the punishment awaiting them in Asi-patravana, as described in this verse.





TEXT 16



yas tv iha vai rājā rāja-puruṣo vā adaṇḍye daṇḍaṁ praṇayati brāhmaṇe vā śarīra-daṇḍaṁ sa pāpīyān narake 'mutra sūkaramukhe nipatati tatrātibalair viniṣpiṣyamāṇāvayavo yathaivehekṣukhaṇḍa ārta-svareṇa svanayan kvacin mūrcchitaḥ kaśmalam upagato yathaivehā-dṛṣṭa-doṣā uparuddhāḥ.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; rājā-a king; rāja-puruṣaḥ-a king's man; vā-or; adaṇḍye-unto one not punishable; daṇḍam-punishment; praṇayati-inflicts; brāhmaṇe-unto a brāhmaṇa; vā-or; śarīra-daṇḍam-corporal punishment; saḥ-that person, king or government officer; pāpīyān-the most sinful; narake-in the hell; amutra-in the next life; sūkaramukhe-named Sūkaramukha; nipatati-falls down; tatra-there; ati-balaiḥ-by very strong assistants of Yamarāja; viniṣpiṣyamāṇa-being crushed; avayavaḥ-the different parts of whose body; yathā-like; eva-certainly; iha-here; ikṣu-khaṇḍaḥ-sugarcane; ārta-svareṇa-with a pitiable sound; svanayan-crying; kvacit-sometimes; mūrcchitaḥ-fainted; kaśmalam upagataḥ-becoming illusioned; yathā-just like; eva-indeed; iha-here; adṛṣṭa-doṣāḥ-who is not at fault; uparuddhāḥ-arrested for punishment.





In his next life, a sinful king or governmental representative who punishes an innocent person, or who inflicts corporal punishment upon a brāhmaṇa, is taken by the Yamadūtas to the hell named Sūkaramukha, where the most powerful assistants of Yamarāja crush him exactly as one crushes sugarcane to squeeze out the juice. The sinful living entity cries very pitiably and faints, just like an innocent man undergoing punishments. This is the result of punishing a faultless person.





TEXT 17



yas tv iha vai bhūtānām īśvaropakalpita-vṛttīnām avivikta-para-vyathānāṁ svayaṁ puruṣopakalpita-vṛttir vivikta-para-vyatho vyathām ācarati sa paratrāndhakūpe tad-abhidroheṇa nipatati tatra hāsau tair jantubhiḥ paśu-mṛga-pakṣi-sarīsṛpair maśaka-yūkā-matkuṇa-makṣikādibhir ye ke cābhidrugdhās taiḥ sarvato 'bhidruhyamāṇas tamasi vihata-nidrā-nirvṛtir alabdhāvasthānaḥ parikrāmati yathā kuśarīre jīvaḥ.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-any person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; bhūtānām-to some living entities; īśvara-by the supreme controller; upakalpita-designed; vṛttīnām-whose means of livelihood; avivikta-not understanding; para-vyathānām-the pain of others; svayam-himself; puruṣa-upakalpita-designed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vṛttiḥ-whose livelihood; vivikta-understanding; para-vyathaḥ-the painful conditions of others; vyathām ācarati-but still causes pain; saḥ-such a person; paratra-in his next life; andhakūpe-to the hell named Andhakūpa; tat-to them; abhidroheṇa-by the sin of malice; nipatati-falls down; tatra-there; ha-indeed; asau-that person; taiḥ jantubhiḥ-by those respective living entities; paśu-animals; mṛga-wild beasts; pakṣi-birds; sarīsṛpaiḥ-snakes; maśaka-mosquitoes; yūkā-lice; matkuṇa-worms; makṣika-ādibhiḥ-flies and so on; ye ke-whoever else; ca-and; abhidrugdhāḥ-persecuted; taiḥ-by them; sarvataḥ-everywhere; abhidruhyamāṇaḥ-being injured; tamasi-in the darkness; vihata-disturbed; nidrā-nirvṛtiḥ-whose resting place; alabdha-not being able to obtain; avasthānaḥ-a resting place; parikrāmati-wanders; yathā-just as; ku-śarīre-in a low-grade body; jīvaḥ-a living entity.





By the arrangement of the Supreme Lord, low-grade living beings like bugs and mosquitoes suck the blood of human beings and other animals. Such insignificant creatures are unaware that their bites are painful to the human being. However, first-class human beings-brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas-are developed in consciousness, and therefore they know how painful it is to be killed. A human being endowed with knowledge certainly commits sin if he kills or torments insignificant creatures, who have no discrimination. The Supreme Lord punishes such a man by putting him into the hell known as Andhakūpa, where he is attacked by all the birds and beasts, reptiles, mosquitoes, lice, worms, flies, and any other creatures he tormented during his life. They attack him from all sides, robbing him of the pleasure of sleep. Unable to rest, he constantly wanders about in the darkness. Thus in Andhakūpa his suffering is just like that of a creature in the lower species.





From this very instructive verse we learn that lower animals, created by the laws of nature to disturb the human being, are not subjected to punishment. Because the human being has developed consciousness, however, he cannot do anything against the principles of varṇāśrama-dharma without being condemned. Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gītā (4.13), cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ: "According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me." Thus all men should be divided into four classes-brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras-and they should act according to their ordained regulations. They cannot deviate from their prescribed rules and regulations. One of these states that they should never trouble any animal, even those that disturb human beings. Although a tiger is not sinful if he attacks another animal and eats its flesh, if a man with developed consciousness does so, he must be punished. In other words, a human being who does not use his developed consciousness but instead acts like an animal surely undergoes punishment in many different hells.





TEXT 18



yas tv iha vā asaṁvibhajyāśnāti yat kiñcanopanatam anirmita-pañca-yajño vāyasa-saṁstutaḥ sa paratra kṛmibhojane narakādhame nipatati tatra śata-sahasra-yojane kṛmi-kuṇḍe kṛmi-bhūtaḥ svayaṁ kṛmibhir eva bhakṣyamāṇaḥ kṛmi-bhojano yāvat tad aprattāprahūtādo 'nirveśam ātmānaṁ yātayate.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-any person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; asaṁ-vibhajya-without dividing; aśnāti-eats; yat kiñcana-whatever; upanatam-obtained by Kṛṣṇa's grace; anirmita-not performing; pañca-yajñaḥ-the five kinds of sacrifice; vāyasa-with the crows; saṁstutaḥ-who is described as equal; saḥ-such a person; paratra-in the next life; kṛmibhojane-named Kṛmibhojana; naraka-adhame-into the most abominable of all hells; nipatati-falls down; tatra-there; śata-sahasra-yojane-measuring 100,000 yojanas (800,000 miles); kṛmi-kuṇḍe-in a lake of worms; kṛmi-bhūtaḥ-becoming one of the worms; svayam-he himself; kṛmibhiḥ-by the other worms; eva-certainly; bhakṣyamāṇaḥ-being eaten; kṛmi-bhojanaḥ-eating worms; yāvat-as long as; tat-that lake is wide; apratta-aprahūta-unshared and unoffered food; adaḥ-one who eats; anirveśam-who has not performed atonement; ātmānam-to himself; yātayate-gives pain.





A person is considered no better than a crow if after receiving some food, he does not divide it among guests, old men and children, but simply eats it himself, or if he eats it without performing the five kinds of sacrifice. After death he is put into the most abominable hell, known as Kṛmibhojana. In that hell is a lake 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles] wide and filled with worms. He becomes a worm in that lake and feeds on the other worms there, who also feed on him. Unless he atones for his actions before his death, such a sinful man remains in the hellish lake of Kṛmibhojana for as many years as there are yojanas in the width of the lake.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.13):



yajña-śiṣṭāśinaḥ santo

mucyante sarva-kilbiṣaiḥ

bhuñjate te tv agham pāpā

ya pacanty ātma-kāraṇāt





"The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat food which is first offered for sacrifice. Others, who prepare food for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin." All food is given to us by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān: the Lord supplies everyone with the necessities of life. Therefore we should acknowledge His mercy by performing yajña (sacrifice). This is the duty of everyone. Indeed, the sole purpose of life is to perform yajña. According to Kṛṣṇa (Bg. 3.9):



yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra

loko 'yam karma-bandhanaḥ

tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya

mukta-saṅgaḥ samācara





"Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kuntī, perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached and free from bondage." If we do not perform yajña and distribute prasāda to others, our lives are condemned. Only after performing yajña and distributing the prasāda to all dependents-children, brāhmaṇas and old men-should one eat. However, one who cooks only for himself or his family is condemned, along with everyone he feeds. After death he is put into the hell known as Kṛmibhojana.





TEXT 19



yas tv iha vai steyena balād vā hiraṇya-ratnādīni brāhmaṇasya vāpaharaty anyasya vānāpadi puruṣas tam amutra rājan yama-puruṣā ayasmayair agni-piṇḍaiḥ sandaṁśais tvaci niṣkuṣanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-any person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; steyena-by thievery; balāt-by force; vā-or; hiraṇya-gold; ratna-gems; ādīni-and so on; brāhmaṇasya-of a brāhmaṇa; vā-or; apaharati-steals; anyasya-of others; vā-or; anāpadi-not in a calamity; puruṣaḥ-a person; tam-him; amutra-in the next life; rājan-O King; yama-puruṣāḥ-the agents of Yamarāja; ayaḥ-mayaiḥ-made of iron; agni-piṇḍaiḥ-balls heated in fire; sandaṁśaiḥ-with tongs; tvaci-on the skin; niṣkuṣanti-tear to pieces.





My dear King, a person who in the absence of an emergency robs a brāhmaṇa-or, indeed, anyone else-of his gems and gold is put into a hell known as Sandaṁśa. There his skin is torn and separated by red-hot iron balls and tongs. In this way, his entire body is cut to pieces.





TEXT 20



yas tv iha vā agamyāṁ striyam agamyaṁ vā puruṣaṁ yoṣid abhigacchati tāv amutra kaśayā tāḍayantas tigmayā sūrmyā lohamayyā puruṣam āliṅgayanti striyaṁ ca puruṣa-rūpayā sūrmyā.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-any person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; agamyām-unsuitable; striyam-a woman; agamyam-unsuitable; vā-or; puruṣam-a man; yoṣit-a woman; abhigacchati-approaches for sexual intercourse; tau-both of them; amutra-in the next life; kaśayā-by whips; tāḍayantaḥ-beating; tigmayā-very hot; sūrmyā-by an image; loha-mayyā-made of iron; puruṣam-the man; āliṅgayanti-they embrace; striyam-the woman; ca-also; puruṣa-rūpayā-in the form of a man; sūrmyā-by an image.





A man or woman who indulges in sexual intercourse with an unworthy member of the opposite sex is punished after death by the assistants of Yamarāja in the hell known as Taptasūrmi. There such men and women are beaten with whips. The man is forced to embrace a red-hot iron form of a woman, and the woman is forced to embrace a similar form of a man. Such is the punishment for illicit sex.





Generally a man should not have sexual relations with any woman other than his wife. According to Vedic principles, the wife of another man is considered one's mother, and sexual relations are strictly forbidden with one's mother, sister and daughter. If one indulges in illicit sexual relations with another man's wife, that activity is considered identical with having sex with one's mother. This act is most sinful. The same principle holds for a woman also; if she enjoys sex with a man other than her husband, the act is tantamount to having sexual relations with her father or son. Illicit sex life is always forbidden, and any man or woman who indulges in it is punished in the manner described in this verse.





TEXT 21



yas tv iha vai sarvābhigamas tam amutra niraye vartamānaṁ vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalīm āropya niṣkarṣanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; sarva-abhigamaḥ-indulges in sex life indiscriminately, with both men and animals; tam-him; amutra-in the next life; niraye-in the hell; vartamānam-existing; vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalīm-a silk-cotton tree with thorns like thunderbolts; āropya-mounting him on; niṣkarṣanti-they pull him out.





A person who indulges in sex indiscriminately-even with animals-is taken after death to the hell known as Vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī. In this hell there is a silk-cotton tree full of thorns as strong as thunderbolts. The agents of Yamarāja hang the sinful man on that tree and pull him down forcibly so that the thorns very severely tear his body.





The sexual urge is so strong that sometimes a man indulges in sexual relations with a cow, or a woman indulges in sexual relations with a dog. Such men and women are put into the hell known as Vajrakaṇṭaka-śālmalī. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement forbids illicit sex. From the description of these verses, we can understand what an extremely sinful act illicit sex is. Sometimes people disbelieve these descriptions of hell, but whether one believes or not, everything must be carried out by the laws of nature, which no one can avoid.





TEXT 22



ye tv iha vai rājanyā rāja-puruṣā vā apākhaṇḍā dharma-setūn bhindanti te samparetya vaitaraṇyāṁ nipatanti bhinna-maryādās tasyāṁ niraya-parikhā-bhūtāyāṁ nadyāṁ yādo-gaṇair itas tato bhakṣyamāṇā ātmanā na viyujyamānāś cāsubhir uhyamānāḥ svāghena karma-pākam anusmaranto viṇ-mūtra-pūya-śoṇita-keśa-nakhāsthi-medo-māṁsa-vasā-vāhinyām upatapyante.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; rājanyāḥ-members of the royal family, or kṣatriyas; rāja-puruṣāḥ-government servants; vā-or; apākhaṇḍāḥ-although born in responsible families; dharma-setūn-the bounds of prescribed religious principles; bhindanti-transgress; te-they; samparetya-after dying; vaitaraṇyām-named Vaitaraṇī; nipatanti-fall down; bhinna-maryādāḥ-who have broken the regulative principles; tasyām-in that; niraya-parikhā-bhūtāyām-the moat surrounding hell; nadyām-in the river; yādaḥ-gaṇaiḥ-by ferocious aquatic animals; itaḥ tataḥ-here and there; bhakṣyamāṇāḥ-being eaten; ātmanā-with the body; na-not; viyujyamānāḥ-being separated; ca-and; asubhiḥ-the life airs; uhyamānāḥ-being carried; sva-aghena-by his own sinful activities; karma-pākam-the result of his impious activities; anusmarantaḥ-remembering; viṭ-of stool; mūtra-urine; pūya-pus; śoṇita-blood; keśa-hair; nakha-nails; asthi-bones; medaḥ-marrow; māṁsa-flesh; vasā-fat; vāhinyām-in the river; upatapyante-are afflicted with pain.





A person who is born into a responsible family-such as a kṣatriya, a member of royalty or a government servant-but who neglects to execute his prescribed duties according to religious principles, and who thus becomes degraded, falls down at the time of death into the river of hell known as Vaitaraṇī. This river, which is a moat surrounding hell, is full of ferocious aquatic animals. When a sinful man is thrown into the River Vaitaraṇī, the aquatic animals there immediately begin to eat him, but because of his extremely sinful life, he does not leave his body. He constantly remembers his sinful activities and suffers terribly in that river, which is full of stool, urine, pus, blood, hair, nails, bones, marrow, flesh and fat.





TEXT 23



ye tv iha vai vṛṣalī-patayo naṣṭa-śaucācāra-niyamās tyakta-lajjāḥ paśu-caryāṁ caranti te cāpi pretya pūya-viṇ-mūtra-śleṣma-malā-pūrṇārṇave nipatanti tad evātibībhatsitam aśnanti.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; vṛṣalī-patayaḥ-the husbands of the śūdras; naṣṭa-lost; śauca-ācāra-niyamāḥ-whose cleanliness, good behavior and regulated life; tyakta-lajjāḥ-without shame; paśu-caryām-the behavior of animals; caranti-they execute; te-they; ca-also; api-indeed; pretya-dying; pūya-of pus; viṭ-stool; mūtra-urine; śleṣma-mucus; malā-saliva; pūrṇa-full; arṇave-in an ocean; nipatanti-fall; tat-that; eva-only; atibībhatsitam-extremely disgusting; aśnanti-they eat.





The shameless husbands of lowborn śūdra women live exactly like animals, and therefore they have no good behavior, cleanliness or regulated life. After death, such persons are thrown into the hell called Pūyoda, where they are put into an ocean filled with pus, stool, urine, mucus, saliva and similar things. Śūdras who could not improve themselves fall into that ocean and are forced to eat those disgusting things.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung,



karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa, kevala viṣera bāṇḍa,

amṛta baliyā yebā khāya

nānā yoni sadā phire, kadarya bhakṣaṇa kare,

tāra janma adaḥ-pate yāya

He says that persons following the paths of karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa (fruitive activities and speculative thinking) are missing the opportunities for human birth and gliding down into the cycle of birth and death. Thus there is always the chance that he may be put into the Pūyoda Naraka, the hell named Pūyoda, where one is forced to eat stool, urine, pus, mucus, saliva and other abominable things. It is significant that this verse is spoken especially about śūdras. If one is born a śūdra, he must continually return to the ocean of Pūyoda to eat horrible things. Thus even a born śūdra is expected to become a brāhmaṇa; that is the meaning of human life. Everyone should improve himself. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.13), cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ: "According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to them, four divisions of human society were created by Me." Even if one is by qualification a śūdra, he must try to improve his position and become a brāhmaṇa. No one should try to check a person, no matter what his present position is, from coming to the platform of a brāhmaṇa or a Vaiṣṇava. Actually, one must come to the platform of a Vaiṣṇava. Then he automatically becomes a brāhmaṇa. This can be done only if the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is spread, for we are trying to elevate everyone to the platform of Vaiṣṇava. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66), sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: "Abandon all other duties and simply surrender unto Me." One must give up the occupational duties of a śūdra, kṣatriya or vaiśya and adopt the occupational duties of a Vaiṣṇava, which include the activities of a brāhmaṇa. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad-gītā (9.32):



māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya

ye 'pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās

te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim





"O son of Pṛthā, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower birth-women, vaiśyas [merchants], as well as śūdras [workers]-can approach the supreme destination." Human life is specifically meant for going back home, back to Godhead. That facility should be given to everyone, whether one be a śūdra, a vaiśya, a woman or a kṣatriya. This is the purpose of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. However, if one is satisfied to remain a śūdra, he must suffer as described in this verse: tad evātibībhatsitam aśnanti.





TEXT 24



ye tv iha vai śva-gardabha-patayo brāhmaṇādayo mṛgayā vihārā atīrthe ca mṛgān nighnanti tān api samparetāḹ lakṣya-bhūtān yama-puruṣā iṣubhir vidhyanti.



SYNONYMS



ye-those who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-or; śva-of dogs; gardabha-and asses; patayaḥ-maintainers; brāhmaṇa-ādayaḥ-brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas; mṛgayā vihārāḥ-taking pleasure in hunting animals in the forest; atīrthe-other than prescribed; ca-also; mṛgān-animals; nighnanti-kill; tān-them; api-indeed; samparetān-having died; lakṣya-bhūtān-becoming the targets; yama-puruṣāḥ-the assistants of Yamarāja; iṣubhiḥ-by arrows; vidhyanti-pierce.





If in this life a man of the higher classes [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and vaiśya] is very fond of taking his pet dogs, mules or asses into the forest to hunt and kill animals unnecessarily, he is placed after death into the hell known as Prāṇarodha. There the assistants of Yamarāja make him their targets and pierce him with arrows.





In the Western countries especially, aristocrats keep dogs and horses to hunt animals in the forest. Whether in the West or the East, aristocratic men in the Kali-yuga adopt the fashion of going to the forest and unnecessarily killing animals. Men of the higher classes (the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas) should cultivate knowledge of Brahman, and they should also give the śūdras a chance to come to that platform. If instead they indulge in hunting, they are punished as described in this verse. Not only are they pierced with arrows by the agents of Yamarāja, but they are also put into the ocean of pus, urine and stool described in the previous verse.





TEXT 25



ye tv iha vai dāmbhikā dambha-yajñeṣu paśūn viśasanti tān amuṣmiḹ loke vaiśase narake patitān niraya-patayo yātayitvā viśasanti.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; dāmbhikāḥ-very proud of wealth and a prestigious position; dambha-yajñeṣu-in a sacrifice performed to increase prestige; paśūn-animals; viśasanti-kill; tān-them; amuṣmin loke-in the next world; vaiśase-Vaiśasa or Viśasana; narake-into the hell; patitān-fallen; niraya-patayaḥ-assistants of Yamarāja; yātayitvā-causing sufficient pain; viśasanti-kill.





A person who in this life is proud of his eminent position, and who heedlessly sacrifices animals simply for material prestige, is put into the hell called Viśasana after death. There the assistants of Yamarāja kill him after giving him unlimited pain.





In Bhagavad-gītā (6.41) Kṛṣṇa says, śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate: "Because of his previous connection with bhakti-yoga, a man is born into a prestigious family of brāhmaṇas or aristocrats." Having taken such a birth, one should utilize it to perfect bhakti-yoga. However, due to bad association one often forgets that his prestigious position has been given to him by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he misuses it by performing various kinds of so-called yajñas like kālī-pūjā or durgā-pūjā, in which poor animals are sacrificed. How such a person is punished is described herein. The word dambha-yajñeṣu in this verse is significant. If one violates the Vedic instructions while performing yajña and simply makes a show of sacrifice for the purpose of killing animals, he is punishable after death. In Calcutta there are many slaughterhouses where animal flesh is sold that has supposedly been offered in sacrifice before the goddess Kālī. The śāstras enjoin that one can sacrifice a small goat before the goddess Kālī once a month. Nowhere is it said that one can maintain a slaughterhouse in the name of temple worship and daily kill animals unnecessarily. Those who do so receive the punishments described herein.





TEXT 26



yas tv iha vai savarṇāṁ bhāryāṁ dvijo retaḥ pāyayati kāma-mohitas taṁ pāpa-kṛtam amutra retaḥ-kulyāyāṁ pātayitvā retaḥ sampāyayanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-any person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; savarṇām-of the same caste; bhāryām-his wife; dvijaḥ-a person of a higher caste (such as a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya); retaḥ-the semen; pāyayati-causes to drink; kāma-mohitaḥ-being deluded by lusty desires; tam-him; pāpa-kṛtam-performing sin; amutra-in the next life; retaḥ-kulyāyām-in a river of semen; pātayitvā-throwing; retaḥ-semen; sampāyayanti-force to drink.





If a foolish member of the twice-born classes [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and vaiśya] forces his wife to drink his semen out of a lusty desire to keep her under control, he is put after death into the hell known as Lālābhakṣa. There he is thrown into a flowing river of semen, which he is forced to drink.





The practice of forcing one's wife to drink one's own semen is a black art practiced by extremely lusty persons. Those who practice this very abominable activity say that if a wife is forced to drink her husband's semen, she remains very faithful to him. Generally only low-class men engage in this black art, but if a man born in a higher class does so, after death he is put into the hell known as Lālābhakṣa. There he is immersed in the river known as Śukra-nadī and forced to drink semen.





TEXT 27



ye tv iha vai dasyavo 'gnidā garadā grāmān sārthān vā vilumpanti rājāno rāja-bhaṭā vā tāṁś cāpi hi paretya yamadūtā vajra-daṁṣṭrāḥ śvānaḥ sapta-śatāni viṁśatiś ca sarabhasaṁ khādanti.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; dasyavaḥ-thieves and plunderers; agni-dāḥ-who set fire; garadāḥ-who administer poison; grāmān-villages; sārthān-the mercantile class of men; vā-or; vilumpanti-plunder; rājānaḥ-kings; rāja-bhaṭāḥ-government officials; vā-or; tān-them; ca-also; api-indeed; hi-certainly; paretya-having died; yamadūtāḥ-the assistants of Yamarāja; vajra-daṁṣṭrāḥ-having mighty teeth; śvānaḥ-dogs; sapta-śatāni-seven hundred; viṁśatiḥ-twenty; ca-and; sarabhasam-voraciously; khādanti-devour.





In this world, some persons are professional plunderers who set fire to others' houses or administer poison to them. Also, members of the royalty or government officials sometimes plunder mercantile men by forcing them to pay income tax and by other methods. After death such demons are put into the hell known as Sārameyādana. On that planet there are 720 dogs with teeth as strong as thunderbolts. Under the orders of the agents of Yamarāja, these dogs voraciously devour such sinful people.





In the Twelfth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, it is said that in this age of Kali everyone will be extremely disturbed by three kinds of tribulations: scarcity of rain, famine, and heavy taxation by the government. Because human beings are becoming more and more sinful. there will be a scarcity of rain, and naturally no food grains will be produced. On the plea of relieving the suffering caused by the ensuing famine, the government will impose heavy taxes, especially on the wealthy mercantile community. In this verse, the members of such a government are described as dasyu, thieves. Their main activity will be to plunder the wealth of the people. Whether a highway robber or a government thief, such a man will be punished in his next life by being thrown into the hell known as Sārameyādana, where he will suffer greatly from the bites of ferocious dogs.





TEXT 28



yas tv iha vā anṛtaṁ vadati sākṣye dravya-vinimaye dāne vā kathañcit sa vai pretya narake 'vīcimaty adhaḥ-śirā niravakāśe yojana-śatocchrāyād giri-mūrdhnaḥ sampātyate yatra jalam iva sthalam aśma-pṛṣṭham avabhāsate tad avīcimat tilaśo viśīryamāṇa-śarīro na mriyamāṇaḥ punar āropito nipatati.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; anṛtam-a lie; vadati-speaks; sākṣye-giving witness; dravya-vinimaye-in exchange for goods; dāne-in giving charity; vā-or; kathañcit-somehow; saḥ-that person; vai-indeed; pretya-after dying; narake-in the hell; avīcimati-named Avīcimat (having no water); adhaḥ-śirāḥ-with his head downward; niravakāśe-without support; yojana-śata-of eight hundred miles; ucchrāyāt-having a height; giri-of a mountain; mūrdhnaḥ-from the top; sampātyate-is thrown; yatra-where; jalam iva-like water; sthalam-land; aśma-pṛṣṭham-having a surface of stone; avabhāsate-appears; tat-that; avīcimat-having no water or waves; tilaśaḥ-in pieces as small as seeds; viśīryamāṇa-being broken; śarīraḥ-the body; na mriyamāṇaḥ-not dying; punaḥ-again; āropitaḥ-raised to the top; nipatati-falls down.





A person who in this life bears false witness or lies while transacting business or giving charity is severely punished after death by the agents of Yamarāja. Such a sinful man is taken to the top of a mountain eight hundred miles high and thrown headfirst into the hell known as Avīcimat. This hell has no shelter and is made of strong stone resembling the waves of water. There is no water there, however, and thus it is called Avīcimat [waterless]. Although the sinful man is repeatedly thrown from the mountain and his body broken to tiny pieces, he still does not die but continuously suffers chastisement.





TEXT 29



yas tv iha vai vipro rājanyo vaiśyo vā soma-pīthas tat-kalatraṁ vā surāṁ vrata-stho 'pi vā pibati pramādatas teṣāṁ nirayaṁ nītānām urasi padākramyāsye vahninā dravamāṇaṁ kārṣṇāyasaṁ niṣiñcanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; vipraḥ-a learned brāhmaṇa; rājanyaḥ-a kṣatriya; vaiśyaḥ-a vaiśya; vā-or; soma-pīthaḥ-drink soma-rasa; tat-his; kalatram-wife; vā-or; surām-liquor; vrata-sthaḥ-being situated in a vow; api-certainly; vā-or; pibati-drinks; pramādataḥ-out of illusion; teṣām-of all of them; nirayam-to hell; nītānām-being brought; urasi-on the chest; padā-with the foot; ākramya-stepping; asye-in the mouth; vahninā-by fire; dravamāṇam-melted; kārṣṇāyasam-iron; niṣiñcanti-they pour into.





Any brāhmaṇa or brāhmaṇa's wife who drinks liquor is taken by the agents of Yamarāja to the hell known as Ayaḥpāna. This hell also awaits any kṣatriya, vaiśya, or person under a vow who in illusion drinks soma-rasa. In Ayaḥpāna the agents of Yamarāja stand on their chests and pour hot melted iron into their mouths.





One should not be a brāhmaṇa in name only and engage in all kinds of sinful activities, especially drinking liquor. Brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas must behave according to the principles of their order. If they fall down to the level of śūdras, who are accustomed to drink liquor. they will be punished as described herein.





TEXT 30



atha ca yas tv iha vā ātma-sambhāvanena svayam adhamo janma-tapo-vidyācāra-varṇāśramavato varīyaso na bahu manyeta sa mṛtaka eva mṛtvā kṣārakardame niraye 'vāk-śirā nipātito durantā yātanā hy aśnute.



SYNONYMS



atha-furthermore; ca-also; yaḥ-anyone who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; ātma-sambhāvanena-by false prestige; svayam-himself; adhamaḥ-very degraded; janma-good birth; tapaḥ-austerities; vidyā-knowledge; ācāra-good behavior; varṇa-āśrama-vataḥ-in terms of strictly following the principles of varṇāśrama; varīyasaḥ-of one who is more honorable; na-not; bahu-much; manyeta-respects; saḥ-he; mṛtakaḥ-a dead body; eva-only; mṛtvā-after dying; kṣārakardame-named Kṣārakardama; niraye-in the hell; avāk-śirā-with his head downward; nipātitaḥ-thrown; durantāḥ yātanāḥ-severe painful conditions; hi-indeed; aśnute-suffers.





A lowborn and abominable person who in this life becomes falsely proud, thinking "I am great," and who thus fails to show proper respect to one more elevated than he by birth, austerity, education, behavior, caste or spiritual order, is like a dead man even in this lifetime, and after death he is thrown headfirst into the hell known as Kṣārakardama. There he must great suffer great tribulation at the hands of the agents of Yamarāja.





One should not become falsely proud. One must be respectful toward a person more elevated than he by birth, education, behavior, caste or spiritual order. If one does not show respect to such highly elevated persons but indulges in false pride, he receives punishment in Kṣārakardama.





TEXT 31



ye tv iha vai puruṣāḥ puruṣa-medhena yajante yāś ca striyo nṛ-paśūn khādanti tāṁś ca te paśava iva nihatā yama-sadane yātayanto rakṣo-gaṇāḥ saunikā iva svadhitināvadāyāsṛk pibanti nṛtyanti ca gāyanti ca hṛṣyamāṇā yatheha puruṣādāḥ.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; puruṣāḥ-men; puruṣa-medhena-by sacrifice of a man; yajante-worship (the goddess Kālī or Bhadra Kālī); yāḥ-those who; ca-and; striyaḥ-women; nṛ-paśūn-the men used as sacrifice; khādanti-eat; tān-them; ca-and; te-they; paśavaḥ iva-like the animals; nihatāḥ-being slain; yama-sadane-in the abode of Yamarāja; yātayantaḥ-punishing; rakṣaḥ-gaṇāḥ-being Rākṣasas; saunikāḥ-the killers; iva-like; svadhitinā-by a sword; avadāya-cutting to pieces; asṛk-the blood; pibanti-drink; nṛtyanti-dance; ca-and; gāyanti-sing; ca-also; hṛṣyamāṇāḥ-being delighted; yathā-just like; iha-in this world; puruṣa-adāḥ-the man-eaters.





There are men and women in this world who sacrifice human beings to Bhairava or Bhadra Kālī and then eat their victims' flesh. Those who perform such sacrifices are taken after death to the abode of Yamarāja, where their victims, having taken the form of Rākṣasas, cut them to pieces with sharpened swords. Just as in this world the man-eaters drank their victims' blood, dancing and singing in jubilation, their victims now enjoy drinking the blood of the sacrificers and celebrating in the same way.





TEXT 32



ye tv iha vā anāgaso 'raṇye grāme vā vaiśrambhakair upasṛtān upaviśrambhayya jijīviṣūn śūla-sūtrādiṣūpaprotān krīḍanakatayā yātayanti te 'pi ca pretya yama-yātanāsu śūlādiṣu protātmānaḥ kṣut-tṛḍbhyāṁ cābhihatāḥ kaṅka-vaṭādibhiś cetas tatas tigma-tuṇḍair āhanyamānā ātma-śamalaṁ smaranti.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; anāgasaḥ-who are faultless; araṇye-in the forest; grāme-in the village; vā-or; vaiśrambhakaiḥ-by means of good faith; upasṛtān-brought near; upaviśrambhayya-inspiring with confidence; jijīviṣūn-who want to be protected; śūla-sūtra-ādiṣu-on a lance, thread, and so on; upaprotān-fixed; krīḍanakatayā-like a plaything; yātayanti-cause pain; te-those persons; api-certainly; ca-and; pretya-after dying; yama-yātanāsu-the persecutions of Yamarāja; śūla-ādiṣu-on lances and so on; prota-ātmānaḥ-whose bodies are fixed; kṣut-tṛḍbhyām-by hunger and thirst; ca-also; abhihatāḥ-overwhelmed; kaṅka-vaṭa-ādibhiḥ-by birds such as herons and vultures; ca-and; itaḥ tataḥ-here and there; tigma-tuṇḍaiḥ-having pointed beaks; āhanyamānāḥ-being tortured; ātma-śamalam-own sinful activities; smaranti-they remember.





In this life some people give shelter to animals and birds that come to them for protection in the village or forest, and after making them believe that they will be protected, such people pierce them with lances or threads and play with them like toys, giving them great pain. After death such people are brought by the assistants of Yamarāja to the hell known as Śūlaprota, where their bodies are pierced with sharp, needlelike lances. They suffer from hunger and thirst, and sharp-beaked birds such as vultures and herons come at them from all sides to tear at their bodies. Tortured and suffering, they can then remember the sinful activities they committed in the past.





TEXT 33



ye tv iha vai bhūtāny udvejayanti narā ulbaṇa-svabhāvā yathā dandaśūkās te 'pi pretya narake dandaśūkākhye nipatanti yatra nṛpa dandaśūkāḥ pañca-mukhāḥ sapta-mukhā upasṛtya grasanti yathā bileśayān.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vai-indeed; bhūtāni-to living entities; udvejayanti-cause unnecessary pain; narāḥ-men; ulbaṇa-svabhāvāḥ-angry by nature; yathā-just like; dandaśūkāḥ-snakes; te-they; api-also; pretya-after dying; narake-in the hell; dandaśūka-ākhye-named Dandaśūka; nipatanti-fall down; yatra-where; nṛpa-O King; dandaśūkāḥ-serpents; pañca-mukhāḥ-having five hoods; sapta-mukhāḥ-having seven hoods; upasṛtya-reaching up; grasanti-eat; yathā-just like; bileśayān-mice.





Those who in this life are like envious serpents, always angry and giving pain to other living entities, fall after death into the hell known as Dandaśūka. My dear King, in this hell there are serpents with five or seven hoods. These serpents eat such sinful persons just as snakes eat mice.





TEXT 34



ye tv iha vā andhāvaṭa-kusūla-guhādiṣu bhūtāni nirundhanti tathāmutra teṣv evopaveśya sagareṇa vahninā dhūmena nirundhanti.



SYNONYMS



ye-persons who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; andha-avaṭa-a blind well; kusūla-granaries; guha-ādiṣu-and in caves; bhūtāni-the living entities; nirundhanti-confine; tathā-similarly; amutra-in the next life; teṣu-in those same places; eva-certainly; upaveśya-causing to enter; sagareṇa-with poisonous fumes; vahninā-with fire; dhūmena-with smoke; nirundhanti-confine.





Those who in this life confine other living entities in dark wells, granaries or mountain caves are put after death into the hell known as Avaṭa-nirodhana. There they themselves are pushed into dark wells, where poisonous fumes and smoke suffocate them and they suffer very severely.





TEXT 35



yas tv iha vā atithīn abhyāgatān vā gṛha-patir asakṛd upagata-manyur didhakṣur iva pāpena cakṣuṣā nirīkṣate tasya cāpi niraye pāpa-dṛṣṭer akṣiṇī vajra-tuṇḍā gṛdhrāḥ kaṅka-kāka-vaṭādayaḥ prasahyoru-balād utpāṭayanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-a person who; tu-but; iha-in this life; vā-or; atithīn-guests; abhyāgatān-visitors; vā-or; gṛha-patiḥ-a householder; asakṛt-many times; upagata-obtaining; manyuḥ-anger; didhakṣuḥ-one desiring to burn; iva-like; pāpena-sinful; cakṣuṣā-with eyes; nirīkṣate-looks at; tasya-of him; ca-and; api-certainly; niraye-in hell; pāpa-dṛṣṭeḥ-of he whose vision has become sinful; akṣiṇī-the eyes; vajra-tuṇḍāḥ-those who have powerful beaks; gṛdhrāḥ-vultures; kaṅka-herons; kāka-crows; vaṭa-ādayaḥ-and other birds; prasahya-violently; uru-balāt-with great force; utpāṭayanti-pluck out.





A householder who receives guests or visitors with cruel glances, as if to burn them to ashes, is put into the hell called Paryāvartana, where he is gazed at by hard-eyed vultures, herons, crows and similar birds, which suddenly swoop down and pluck out his eyes with great force.





According to the Vedic etiquette, even an enemy who comes to a householder's home should be received in such a gentle way that he forgets that he has come to the home of an enemy. A guest who comes to one's home should be received very politely. If he is unwanted, the householder should not stare at him with blinking eyes, for one who does so will be put into the hell known as Paryāvartana after death, and there many ferocious birds like vultures, crows, and coknis will suddenly come upon him and pluck out his eyes.





TEXT 36



yas tv iha vā āḍhyābhimatir ahaṅkṛtis tiryak-prekṣaṇaḥ sarvato 'bhiviśaṅkī artha-vyaya-nāśa-cintayā pariśuṣyamāṇa-hṛdaya-vadano nirvṛtim anavagato graha ivārtham abhirakṣati sa cāpi pretya tad-utpādanotkarṣaṇa-saṁrakṣaṇa-śamala-grahaḥ sūcīmukhe narake nipatati yatra ha vitta-grahaṁ pāpa-puruṣaṁ dharmarāja-puruṣā vāyakā iva sarvato 'ṅgeṣu sūtraiḥ parivayanti.



SYNONYMS



yaḥ-any person who; tu-but; iha-in this world; vā-or; āḍhya-abhimatiḥ-proud because of wealth; ahaṅkṛtiḥ-egotistic; tiryak-prekṣaṇaḥ-whose vision is crooked; sarvataḥ abhiviśaṅkī-always fearful of being cheated by others, even by superiors; artha-vyaya-nāśa-cintayā-by the thought of expenditure and loss; pariśuṣyamāṇa-dried up; hṛdaya-vadanaḥ-his heart and face; nirvṛtim-happiness; anavagataḥ-not obtaining; grahaḥ-a ghost; iva-like; artham-wealth; abhirakṣati-protects; saḥ-he; ca-also; api-indeed; pretya-after dying; tat-of those riches; utpādana-of the earning; utkarṣaṇa-increasing; saṁrakṣaṇa-protecting; śamala-grahaḥ-accepting the sinful activities; sūcīmukhe-named Sūcīmukha; narake-in the hell; nipatati-falls down; yatra-where; ha-indeed; vitta-graham-as a money-grabbing ghost; pāpa-puruṣam-very sinful man; dharmarāja-puruṣāḥ-the commanding men of Yamarāja; vāyakāḥ iva-like expert weavers; sarvataḥ-all over; aṅgeṣu-on the limbs of the body; sūtraiḥ-by threads; parivayanti-stitch.





One who in this world or this life is very proud of his wealth always thinks, "I am so rich. Who can equal me?" His vision is twisted, and he is always afraid that someone will take his wealth. Indeed, he even suspects his superiors. His face and heart dry up at the thought of losing his wealth, and therefore he always looks like a wretched fiend. He is not in any way able to obtain actual happiness, and he does not know what it is to be free from anxiety. Because of the sinful things he does to earn money, augment his wealth and protect it, he is put into the hell called Sūcīmukha, where the officials of Yamarāja punish him by stitching thread through his entire body like weavers manufacturing cloth.





When one possesses more wealth than necessary, he certainly becomes very proud. This is the situation of men in modern civilization. According to the Vedic culture, brāhmaṇas do not possess anything, whereas kṣatriyas possess riches, but only for performing sacrifices and other noble activities as prescribed in the Vedic injunctions. A vaiśya also earns money honestly through agriculture, cow protection and some trade. If a śūdra gets money, however, he will spend it lavishly, without discrimination, or simply accumulate it for no purpose. Because in this age there are no qualified brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas or vaiśyas, almost everyone is a śūdra (kalau śūdra-sambhavaḥ). Therefore the śūdra mentality is causing great harm to modern civilization. A śūdra does not know how to use money to render transcendental loving service to the Lord. Money is also called lakṣmī, and Lakṣmī is always engaged in the service of Nārāyaṇa. Wherever there is money, it must be engaged in the service of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Everyone should use his money to spread the great transcendental movement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one does not spend money for this purpose but accumulates more than necessary, he will certainly become proud of the money he illegally possesses. The money actually belongs to Kṛṣṇa, who says in Bhagavad-gītā (5.29), bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram: "I am the true enjoyer of sacrifices and penances, and I am the owner of all the planets." Therefore nothing belongs to anyone but Kṛṣṇa. One who possesses more money than he needs should spend it for Kṛṣṇa. Unless one does so, he will become puffed up because of his false possessions, and therefore he will be punished in the next life, as described herein.





TEXT 37



evaṁ-vidhā narakā yamālaye santi śataśaḥ sahasraśas teṣu sarveṣu ca sarva evādharma-vartino ye kecid ihoditā anuditāś cāvani-pate paryāyeṇa viśanti tathaiva dharmānuvartina itaratra iha tu punar-bhave ta ubhaya-śeṣābhyāṁ niviśanti.



SYNONYMS



evam-vidhāḥ-of this sort; narakāḥ-the many hells; yama-ālaye-in the province of Yamarāja; santi-are; śataśaḥ-hundreds; sahasraśaḥ-thousands; teṣu-in those hellish planets; sarveṣu-all; ca-also; sarve-all; eva-indeed; adharma-vartinaḥ-persons not following the Vedic principles or regulative principles; ye kecit-whosoever; iha-here; uditāḥ-mentioned; anuditāḥ-not mentioned; ca-and; avani-pate-O King; paryāyeṇa-according to the degree of different kinds of sinful activity; viśanti-they enter; tathā eva-similarly; dharma-anuvartinaḥ-those who are pious and act according to the regulative principles or Vedic injunctions; itaratra-elsewhere; iha-on this planet; tu-but; punaḥ-bhave-into another birth; te-all of them; ubhaya-śeṣābhyām-by the remainder of the results of piety or vice; niviśanti-they enter.





My dear King Parīkṣit, in the province of Yamarāja there are hundreds and thousands of hellish planets. The impious people I have mentioned-and also those I have not mentioned-must all enter these various planets according to the degree of their impiety. Those who are pious, however, enter other planetary systems, namely the planets of the demigods. Nevertheless, both the pious and impious are again brought to earth after the results of their pious or impious acts are exhausted.





This corresponds to the beginning of Lord Kṛṣṇa's instructions in Bhagavad-gītā. Tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ: within this material world, one is simply meant to change from one body to another in different planetary systems. Ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā: [Bg. 14.18] those in the mode of goodness are elevated to the heavenly planets. Adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ: similarly, those too engrossed in ignorance enter the hellish planetary systems. Both of them, however, are subjected to the repetition of birth and death. In Bhagavad-gītā it is stated that even one who is very pious returns to earth after his enjoyment in the higher planetary systems is over (kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti [Bg. 9.21]). Therefore, going from one planet to another does not solve the problems of life. The problems of life will only be solved when we no longer have to accept a material body. This can be possible if one simply becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." This is the perfection of life and the real solution to life's problems. We should not be eager to go to the higher, heavenly planetary systems, nor should we act in such a way that we have to go to the hellish planets. The complete purpose of this material world will be fulfilled when we resume our spiritual identities and go back home, back to Godhead. The very simple method for doing this is prescribed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]. One should be neither pious nor impious. One should be a devotee and surrender to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. This surrendering process is also very easy. Even a child can perform it. Man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru [Bg. 18.65]. One must always simply think of Kṛṣṇa by chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma. Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. One should become Kṛṣṇa's devotee. worship Him and offer obeisances to Him. Thus one should engage all the activities of his life in the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 38



nivṛtti-lakṣaṇa-mārga ādāv eva vyākhyātaḥ; etāvān evāṇḍa-kośo yaś caturdaśadhā purāṇeṣu vikalpita upagīyate yat tad bhagavato nārāyaṇasya sākṣān mahā-puruṣasya sthaviṣṭhaṁ rūpam ātmamāyā-guṇamayam anuvarṇitam ādṛtaḥ paṭhati śṛṇoti śrāvayati sa upageyaṁ bhagavataḥ paramātmano 'grāhyam api śraddhā-bhakti-viśuddha-buddhir veda.



SYNONYMS



nivṛtti-lakṣaṇa-mārgaḥ-the path symptomized by renunciation, or the path of liberation; ādau-in the beginning (the Second and Third Cantos); eva-indeed; vyākhyātaḥ-described; etāvān-this much; eva-certainly; aṇḍa-kośaḥ-the universe, which resembles a big egg; yaḥ-which; caturdaśa-dhā-in fourteen parts; purāṇeṣu-in the purāṇas; vikalpitaḥ-divided; upagīyate-is described; yat-which; tat-that; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nārāyaṇasya-of Lord Nārāyaṇa; sākṣāt-directly; mahā-puruṣasya-of the Supreme Person; sthaviṣṭham-the gross; rūpam-form; ātma-māyā-of His own energy; guṇa-of the qualities; mayam-consisting; anuvarṇitam-described; ādṛtaḥ-venerating; paṭhati-one reads; śṛṇoti-or hears; śrāvayati-or explains; saḥ-that person; upageyam-song; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paramātmanaḥ-of the Supersoul; agrāhyam-difficult to understand; api-although; śraddhā-by faith; bhakti-and devotion; viśuddha-purified; buddhiḥ-whose intelligence; veda-understands.





In the beginning [the Second and Third Cantos of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam] I have already described how one can progress on the path of liberation. In the Purāṇas the vast universal existence, which is like an egg divided into fourteen parts, is described. This vast form is considered the external body of the Lord, created by His energy and qualities. It is generally called the virāṭ-rūpa. If one reads the description of this external form of the Lord with great faith, or if one hears about it or explains it to others to propagate bhāgavata-dharma, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, his faith and devotion in spiritual consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, will gradually increase. Although developing this consciousness is very difficult, by this process one can purify himself and gradually come to an awareness of the Supreme Absolute Truth.





The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is pushing forward the publication of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as explained especially for the understanding of the modern civilized man, to awaken him to his original consciousness. Without this consciousness, one melts into complete darkness. Whether one goes to the upper planetary systems or the hellish planetary systems, he simply wastes his time. Therefore one should hear of the universal position of the virāṭ form of the Lord as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. That will help one save himself from material conditional life and gradually elevate him to the path of liberation so that he can go back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 39



śrutvā sthūlaṁ tathā sūkṣmaṁ

rūpaṁ bhagavato yatiḥ

sthūle nirjitam ātmānaṁ

śanaiḥ sūkṣmaṁ dhiyā nayed iti

SYNONYMS



śrutvā-after hearing of (from the disciplic succession); sthūlam-gross; tathā-as well as; sūkṣmam-subtle; rūpam-form; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yatiḥ-a sannyāsī or devotee; sthūle-the gross form; nirjitam-conquered; ātmānam-the mind; śanaiḥ-gradually; sūkṣmam-the subtle. spiritual form of the Lord; dhiyā-by intelligence; nayet-one should lead it to; iti-thus.





One who is interested in liberation, who accepts the path of liberation and is not attracted to the path of conditional life, is called yati, or a devotee. Such a person should first control his mind by thinking of the virāṭ-rūpa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord, and then gradually think of the spiritual form of Kṛṣṇa [sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]] after hearing of both forms. Thus one's mind is fixed in samādhi. By devotional service one can then realize the spiritual form of the Lord, which is the destination of devotees. Thus his life becomes successful.





It is said, mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ: [SB 5.5.2] if one wants to progress on the path of liberation, he should associate with mahātmās, or liberated devotees, because in such association there is a full chance for hearing, describing and chanting about the name, form, qualities and paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all of which are described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. On the path of bondage, one eternally undergoes the repetition of birth and death. One who desires liberation from such bondage should join the International Society for Krishna Consciousness and thus take advantage of the opportunity to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from devotees and also explain it to propagate Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 40



bhū-dvīpa-varṣa-sarid-adri-nabhaḥ-samudra-

pātāla-diṅ-naraka-bhāgaṇa-loka-saṁsthā

gītā mayā tava nṛpādbhutam īśvarasya

sthūlaṁ vapuḥ sakala-jīva-nikāya-dhāma

SYNONYMS



bhū-of this planet earth; dvīpa-and other different planetary systems; varṣa-of tracts of land; sarit-rivers; adri-mountains; nabhaḥ-the sky; samudra-oceans; pātāla-lower planets; dik-directions; naraka-the hellish planets; bhāgaṇa-loka-the luminaries and higher planets; saṁsthā-the situation; gītā-described; mayā-by me; tava-for you; nṛpa-O King; adbhutam-wonderful; īśvarasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sthūlam-gross; vapuḥ-body; sakala-jīva-nikāya-of all the masses of living entities; dhāma-which is the place of repose.





My dear King, I have now described for you this planet earth, other planetary systems, and their lands [varṣas], rivers and mountains. I have also described the sky, the oceans, the lower planetary systems, the directions, the hellish planetary systems and the stars. These constitute the virāṭ-rūpa, the gigantic material form of the Lord, on which all living entities repose. Thus I have explained the wonderful expanse of the external body of the Lord.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Fifth Canto, Twenty-sixth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "A Description of the Hellish Planets."

There is a supplementary note written by His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda in his Gauḍīya-bhāṣya. Its translation is as follows. Learned scholars who have full knowledge of all the Vedic scriptures agree that the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are innumerable. These incarnations are classified into two divisions, called prābhava and vaibhava. According to the scriptures, prābhava incarnations are also classified in two divisions-those which are called eternal and those which are not vividly described. In this Fifth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in Chapters Three through Six, there is a description of Ṛṣabhadeva, but there is not an expanded description of His spiritual activities. Therefore He is considered to belong to the second group of prābhava incarnations. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, First Canto, Chapter Three, verse 13. it is said:



aṣṭame merudevyāṁ tu

nābher jāta urukramaḥ

darśayan vartma dhīrāṇāṁ

sarvāśrama-namaskṛtam





"Lord Viṣṇu appeared in the eighth incarnation as the son of Mahārāja Nābhi [the son of Āgnīdhra] and his wife Merudevī. He showed the path of perfection, the paramahaṁsa stage of life, which is worshiped by all the followers of varṇāśrama-dharma. "Ṛṣabhadeva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His body is spiritual (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]). Therefore one might ask how it might be possible that he passed stool and urine. The Gauḍīya vedānta ācārya Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has replied to this question in his book known as Siddhānta-ratna (First Portion, texts 65–68). Imperfect men call attention to Ṛṣabhadeva's passing stool and urine as a subject matter for the study of nondevotees, who do not understand the spiritual position of a transcendental body. In this Fifth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.6.11) the illusioned and bewildered state of the materialists of this age is fully described. Elsewhere in Fifth Canto (5.5.19) Ṛṣabhadeva stated, idaṁ śarīram mama durvibhāvyam: "This body of Mine is inconceivable for materialists." This is also confirmed by Lord Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā (9.11):



avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram





"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." The human form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is extremely difficult to understand, and, in fact, for a common man it is inconceivable. Therefore Ṛṣabhadeva has directly explained that His own body belongs to the spiritual platform. This being so. Ṛṣabhadeva did not actually pass stool and urine. Even though He superficially seemed to pass stool and urine, that was also transcendental and cannot be imitated by any common man. It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that the stool and urine of Ṛṣabhadeva were full of transcendental fragrance. One may imitate Ṛṣabhadeva, but he cannot imitate Him by passing stool that is fragrant.



The activities of Ṛṣabhadeva, therefore, do not support the claims of a certain class of men known as arhat, who sometimes advertise that they are followers of Ṛṣabhadeva. How can they be followers of Ṛṣabhadeva while they act against the Vedic principles? Śukadeva Gosvāmī has related that after hearing about the characteristics of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the King of Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka initiated a system of religious principles known as arhat. These principles were not in accord with Vedic principles, and therefore they are called pāṣaṇḍa-dharma. The members of the arhat community considered Ṛṣabhadeva's activities material. However, Ṛṣabhadeva is an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore He is on the transcendental platform, and no one can compare to Him.



Ṛṣabhadeva personally exhibited the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.6.8), dāvānalas tad vanam ālelihānaḥ saha tena dadāha: at the conclusion of Ṛṣabhadeva's pastimes, an entire forest and the Lord's body were burned to ashes in a great forest fire. In the same way, Ṛṣabhadeva burned people's ignorance to ashes. He exhibited the characteristics of a paramahaṁsa in His instructions to His sons. The principles of the arhat community, however, do not correspond to the teachings of Ṛṣabhadeva.



Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa remarks that in the Eighth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there is another description of Ṛṣabhadeva, but that Ṛṣabhadeva is different from the one described in this canto.



END OF THE FIFTH CANTO





Sixth Canto





Chapter One



The History of the Life of Ajāmila





Throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there are descriptions of ten subject matters, including creation, subsequent creation and the planetary systems. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the speaker of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, has already described creation, subsequent creation and the planetary systems in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Cantos. Now, in this Sixth Canto, which consists of nineteen chapters, he will describe poṣaṇa, or protection by the Lord.





The first chapter relates the history of Ajāmila, who was considered a greatly sinful man, but was liberated when four order carriers of Viṣṇu came to rescue him from the hands of the order carriers of Yamarāja. A full description of how he was liberated, having been relieved of the reactions of his sinful life, is given in this chapter. Sinful activities are painful both in this life and in the next. We should know for certain that the cause of all painful life is sinful action. On the path of fruitive work one certainly commits sinful activities, and therefore according to the considerations of karma-kāṇḍa, different types of atonement are recommended. Such methods of atonement, however, do not free one from ignorance, which is the root of sinful life. Consequently one is prone to commit sinful activities even after atonement, which is therefore very inadequate for purification. On the path of speculative knowledge one becomes free from sinful life by understanding things as they are. Therefore the acquirement of speculative knowledge is also considered a method of atonement. While performing fruitive activities one can become free from the actions of sinful life through austerity, penance, celibacy, control of the mind and senses, truthfulness and the practice of mystic yoga. By awakening knowledge one may also neutralize sinful reactions. Neither of these methods, however, can free one from the tendency to commit sinful activities.





By bhakti-yoga one can completely avoid the tendency for sinful life; other methods are not very feasible. Therefore the Vedic literature concludes that devotional service is more important than the methods of karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa. Only the path of devotional service is auspicious for everyone. Fruitive activities and speculative knowledge cannot independently liberate anyone, but devotional service, independent of karma and jñāna, is so potent that one who has fixed his mind at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa is guaranteed not to meet the Yamadūtas, the order carriers of Yamarāja, even in dreams.





To prove the strength of devotional service, Śukadeva Gosvāmī described the history of Ajāmila. Ajāmila was a resident of Kānyakubja (the modern Kanauj). He was trained by his parents to become a perfect brāhmaṇa by studying the Vedas and following the regulative principles, but because of his past, this youthful brāhmaṇa was somehow attracted by a prostitute, and because of her association he became most fallen and abandoned all regulative principles. Ajāmila begot in the womb of the prostitute ten sons, the last of whom was called Nārāyaṇa. At the time of Ajāmila's death, when the order carriers of Yamarāja came to take him, he loudly called the name Nārāyaṇa in fear because he was attached to his youngest son. Thus he remembered the original Nārāyaṇa, Lord Viṣṇu. Although he did not chant the holy name of Nārāyaṇa completely offenselessly, it acted nevertheless. As soon as he chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa, the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu immediately appeared on the scene. A discussion ensued between the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu and those of Yamarāja, and by hearing that discussion Ajāmila was liberated. He could then understand the bad effect of fruitive activities and could also understand how exalted is the process of devotional service.





TEXT 1



śrī-parīkṣid uvāca

nivṛtti-mārgaḥ kathita

ādau bhagavatā yathā

krama-yogopalabdhena

brahmaṇā yad asaṁsṛtiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-parīkṣit uvāca-Mahārāja Parīkṣit said; nivṛtti-mārgaḥ-the path of liberation; kathitaḥ-described; ādau-in the beginning; bhagavatā-by Your Holiness; yathā-duly; krama-gradually; yoga-upalabdhena-obtained by the yoga process; brahmaṇā-along with Lord Brahmā (after reaching Brahmaloka); yat-by which way; asaṁsṛtiḥ-cessation of the repetition of birth and death.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: O my lord, O Śukadeva Gosvāmī, you have already described [in the Second Canto] the path of liberation [nivṛtti-mārga]. By following that path, one is certainly elevated gradually to the highest planetary system, Brahmaloka, from which one is promoted to the spiritual world along with Lord Brahmā. Thus one's repetition of birth and death in the material world ceases.





Since Mahārāja Parīkṣit was a Vaiṣṇava, when he heard the description, at the end of the Fifth Canto, of the different hellish conditions of life, he was very much concerned with how to liberate the conditioned souls from the clutches of māyā and take them back home, back to Godhead. Therefore he reminded his spiritual master, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, about the nivṛtti-mārga, or path of liberation, which he had described in the Second Canto. Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who at the time of death was fortunate to have met Śukadeva Gosvāmī, inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī about the path of liberation at that crucial time. Śukadeva Gosvāmī very much appreciated his question and congratulated him by saying:



varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ

kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa

ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ

śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ





"My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial for all kinds of people. The answer to this question is the prime subject matter for hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists." (Bhāg. 2.1.1)



Parīkṣit Mahārāja was astonished that the living entities in the conditional stage do not accept the path of liberation, devotional service, instead of suffering in so many hellish conditions. This is the symptom of a Vaiṣṇava. Vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca: a Vaiṣṇava is an ocean of mercy. Para-duḥkha-duḥkhī: he is unhappy because of the unhappiness of others. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja, being compassionate toward the conditioned souls suffering in hellish life, suggested that Śukadeva Gosvāmī continue describing the path of liberation, which he had explained in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The word asaṁsṛti is very important in this connection. Saṁsṛti refers to continuing on the path of birth and death. Asaṁsṛti, on the contrary, refers to nivṛtti-mārga, or the path of liberation, by which one's birth and death cease and one gradually progresses to Brahmaloka, unless one is a pure devotee who does not care about going to the higher planetary systems, in which case one immediately returns home, back to Godhead, by executing devotional service (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]). Parīkṣit Mahārāja, therefore, was very eager to hear from Śukadeva Gosvāmī about the path of liberation for the conditioned soul.



According to the opinion of the ācāryas, the word krama-yogopalabdhena indicates that by first performing karma-yoga and then jñāna-yoga and finally coming to the platform of bhakti-yoga, one can be liberated. Bhakti-yoga, however, is so powerful that it does not depend on karma-yoga or jñāna-yoga. Bhakti-yoga itself is so powerful that even an impious man with no assets in karma-yoga or an illiterate with no assets in jñāna-yoga can undoubtedly be elevated to the spiritual world if he simply adheres to bhakti-yoga. Mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (8.7) that by the process of bhakti-yoga one undoubtedly goes back to Godhead, back home to the spiritual world. Yogīs, however, instead of going directly to the spiritual world, sometimes want to see other planetary systems, and therefore they ascend to the planetary system where Lord Brahmā lives, as indicated here by the word brahmaṇā. At the time of dissolution, Lord Brahmā, along with all the inhabitants of Brahmaloka, goes directly to the spiritual world. This is confirmed in the Vedas as follows:



brahmaṇā saha te sarve

samprāpte pratisañcare

parasyānte kṛtātmānaḥ

praviśanti paraṁ padam





"Because of their exalted position, those who are on Brahmaloka at the time of dissolution go directly back home, back to Godhead, along with Lord Brahmā."





TEXT 2



pravṛtti-lakṣaṇaś caiva

traiguṇya-viṣayo mune

yo 'sāv alīna-prakṛter

guṇa-sargaḥ punaḥ punaḥ

SYNONYMS



pravṛtti-by inclination; lakṣaṇaḥ-symptomized; ca-also; eva-indeed; trai-guṇya-the three modes of nature; viṣayaḥ-possessing as objectives; mune-O great sage; yaḥ-which; asau-that; alīna-prakṛteḥ-of one who is not freed from the clutches of māyā; guṇa-sargaḥ-in which there is a creation of material bodies; punaḥ punaḥ-again and again.





O great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī, unless the living entity is freed from the infection of the material modes of nature, he receives different types of bodies in which to enjoy or suffer, and according to the body, he is understood to have various inclinations. By following these inclinations he traverses the path called pravṛtti-mārga, by which one may be elevated to the heavenly planets, as you have already described [in the Third Canto].





As Lord Kṛṣṇa explains in Bhagavad-gītā (9.25):



yānti deva-vratā devān

pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

yānti mad-yājino 'pi mām





"Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship Me will live with Me." Because of the influence of the various modes of nature, the living entities have various tendencies or propensities, and therefore they are qualified to achieve various destinations. As long as one is materially attached, he wants to be elevated to the heavenly planets because of his attraction to the material world. The Supreme Personality of Godhead declares, however, "Those who worship Me come to Me." If one has no information about the Supreme Lord and His abode, one tries to be elevated only to a higher material position, but when one concludes that in this material world there is nothing but repeated birth and death, he tries to return home, back to Godhead. If one attains that destination, he need never return to this material world (yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]). As Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 19.151):



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja





"According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout the entire universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper planetary systems, and some are going down into the lower planetary systems. Out of many millions of wandering living entities, one who is very fortunate gets an opportunity to associate with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of Kṛṣṇa. By the mercy of both Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master, such a person receives the seed of the creeper of devotional service." All living entities are rotating throughout the universe, going sometimes up to the higher planetary systems and sometimes down to the lower planets. This is the material disease, which is known as pravṛtti-mārga. When one becomes intelligent he takes to nivṛtti-mārga, the path of liberation, and thus instead of rotating within this material world, he returns home, back to Godhead. This is necessary.





TEXT 3



adharma-lakṣaṇā nānā

narakāś cānuvarṇitāḥ

manvantaraś ca vyākhyāta

ādyaḥ svāyambhuvo yataḥ

SYNONYMS



adharma-lakṣaṇāḥ-symptomized by impious activities; nānā-various; narakāḥ-hells; ca-also; anuvarṇitāḥ-have been described; manu-antaraḥ-the change of Manus [in one day of Brahmā there are fourteen Manus]; ca-also; vyākhyātaḥ-has been described; ādyaḥ-the original; svāyambhuvaḥ-directly the son of Lord Brahmā; yataḥ-wherein.





You have also described [at the end of the Fifth Canto] the varieties of hellish life that result from impious activities, and you have described [in the Fourth Canto] the first manvantara, which was presided over by Svāyambhuva Manu, the son of Lord Brahmā.





TEXTS 4–5



priyavratottānapador

vaṁśas tac-caritāni ca

dvīpa-varṣa-samudrādri-

nady-udyāna-vanaspatīn

dharā-maṇḍala-saṁsthānaṁ



bhāga-lakṣaṇa-mānataḥ

jyotiṣāṁ vivarāṇāṁ ca

yathedam asṛjad vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



priyavrata-of Priyavrata; uttānapadoḥ-and of Uttānapāda; vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty; tat-caritāni-their characteristics; ca-also; dvīpa-different planets; varṣa-lands; samudra-oceans and seas; adri-mountains; nadī-rivers; udyāna-gardens; vanaspatīn-and trees; dharā-maṇḍala-of the planet earth; saṁsthānam-situation; bhāga-according to divisions; lakṣaṇa-different symptoms; mānataḥ-and measurements; jyotiṣām-of the sun and other luminaries; vivarāṇām-of the lower planetary systems; ca-and; yathā-as; idam-this; asṛjat-created; vibhuḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





My dear lord, you have described the dynasties and characteristics of King Priyavrata and King Uttānapāda. The Supreme Personality of Godhead created this material world with various universes, planetary systems, planets and stars, with varied lands, seas, oceans, mountains, rivers, gardens and trees, all with different characteristics. These are divided among this planet earth, the luminaries in the sky and the lower planetary systems. You have very clearly described these planets and the living entities who live on them.





Here the words yathedam asṛjad vibhuḥ clearly indicate that the Supreme, the great, almighty Personality of Godhead, created this entire material world with its different varieties of planets, stars and so forth. Atheists try to conceal the hand of God, which is present in every creation, but they cannot explain how all these creations could come into existence without a competent intelligence and almighty power behind them. Simply to imagine or speculate is a waste of time. In Bhagavad-gītā (10.8), the Lord says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo: "I am the origin of everything." Mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: "whatever exists in the creation emanates from Me." Iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ: "When one fully understands that I create everything by My omnipotence, one becomes firmly situated in devotional service and fully surrenders at My lotus feet." Unfortunately, the unintelligent cannot immediately understand Kṛṣṇa's supremacy. Nonetheless, if they associate with devotees and read authorized books, they may gradually come to the proper understanding, although this may take many, many births. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19):



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ





"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare." Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the creator of everything, and His energy is displayed in various ways. As explained in Bhagavad-gītā (7.4–5), a combination of the material energy (bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ) and the spiritual energy, the living entity, exists in every creation. Therefore the same principle, the combination of the supreme spirit and the material elements, is the cause of the cosmic manifestation.





TEXT 6



adhuneha mahā-bhāga

yathaiva narakān naraḥ

nānogra-yātanān neyāt

tan me vyākhyātum arhasi

SYNONYMS



adhunā-right now; iha-in this material world; mahā-bhāga-O greatly opulent and fortunate Śukadeva Gosvāmī; yathā-so that; eva-indeed; narakān-all the hellish conditions into which the impious are put; naraḥ-human beings; nānā-varieties of; ugra-terrible; yātanān-conditions of suffering; na īyāt-may not undergo; tat-that; me-to me; vyākhyātum arhasi-please describe.





O greatly fortunate and opulent Śukadeva Gosvāmī, now kindly tell me how human beings may be saved from having to enter hellish conditions in which they suffer terrible pains.





In the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Canto, Śukadeva Gosvāmī has explained that people who commit sinful acts are forced to enter hellish planets and suffer. Now Mahārāja Parīkṣit, being a devotee, is concerned with how this can be stopped. A Vaiṣṇava is para-duḥkha-duḥkhī; in other words, he has no personal troubles, but he is very unhappy to see others in trouble. Prahlāda Mahārāja said, "My Lord, I have no personal problems, for I have learned how to glorify Your transcendental qualities and thus enter a trance of ecstasy. I do have a problem, however, for I am simply thinking of these rascals and fools who are busy with māyā-sukha, temporary happiness, without knowledge of devotional service unto You." This is the problem faced by a Vaiṣṇava. Because a Vaiṣṇava fully takes shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he personally has no problems, but because he is compassionate toward the fallen, conditioned souls, he is always thinking of plans to save them from their hellish life in this body and the next. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, therefore, anxiously wanted to know from Śukadeva Gosvāmī how humanity can be saved from gliding down to hell. Śukadeva Gosvāmī had already explained how people enter hellish life, and he could also explain how they could be saved from it. Intelligent men must take advantage of these instructions. Unfortunately, however, the entire world is lacking Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and therefore people are suffering from the grossest ignorance and do not even believe in a life after this one. To convince them of their next life is very difficult because they have become almost mad in their pursuit of material enjoyment. Nevertheless, our duty, the duty of all sane men, is to save them. Mahārāja Parīkṣit is the representative of one who can save them.





TEXT 7



śrī-śuka uvāca

na ced ihaivāpacitiṁ yathāṁhasaḥ

kṛtasya kuryān mana-ukta-pāṇibhiḥ

dhruvaṁ sa vai pretya narakān upaiti

ye kīrtitā me bhavatas tigma-yātanāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; na-not; cet-if; iha-within this life; eva-certainly; apacitim-counteraction, atonement; yathā-duly; aṁhasaḥ kṛtasya-when one has performed sinful activities; kuryāt-performs; manaḥ-with the mind; ukta-words; pāṇibhiḥ-and with the senses; dhruvam-undoubtedly; saḥ-that person; vai-indeed; pretya-after death; narakān-different varieties of hellish conditions; upaiti-attains; ye-which; kīrtitāḥ-were already described; me-by me; bhavataḥ-unto you; tigma-yātanāḥ-in which there is very terrible suffering.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied: My dear King, if before one's next death whatever impious acts one has performed in this life with his mind, words and body are not counteracted through proper atonement according to the description of the Manu-saṁhitā and other dharma-śāstras, one will certainly enter the hellish planets after death and undergo terrible suffering, as I have previously described to you.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura mentions that although Mahārāja Parīkṣit was a pure devotee, Śukadeva Gosvāmī did not immediately speak to him about the strength of devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





Devotional service is so strong that if one fully surrenders to Kṛṣṇa and takes fully to His devotional service, the reactions of his sinful life immediately stop.



Elsewhere in the Gītā (18.66), Lord Kṛṣṇa urges that one give up all other duties and surrender to Him, and He promises, ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi: "I shall free you from all sinful reactions and give you liberation." Therefore in response to the inquiries of Parīkṣit Mahārāja, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, his guru, could have immediately explained the principle of bhakti, but to test Parīkṣit Mahārāja's intelligence, he first prescribed atonement according to karma-kāṇḍa, the path of fruitive activities. For karma-kāṇḍa there are eighty authorized scriptures, such as Manu-saṁhitā, which are known as dharma-śāstras. In these scriptures one is advised to counteract his sinful acts by performing other types of fruitive action. This was the path first recommended by Śukadeva Gosvāmī to Mahārāja Parīkṣit, and actually it is a fact that one who does not take to devotional service must follow the decision of these scriptures by performing pious acts to counteract his impious acts. This is known as atonement.





TEXT 8



tasmāt puraivāśv iha pāpa-niṣkṛtau

yateta mṛtyor avipadyatātmanā

doṣasya dṛṣṭvā guru-lāghavaṁ yathā

bhiṣak cikitseta rujāṁ nidānavit

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; purā-before; eva-indeed; āśu-very quickly; iha-in this life; pāpa-niṣkṛtau-to become free from the reaction of sinful activities; yateta-one should endeavor; mṛtyoḥ-death; avipadyata-not troubled by disease and old age; ātmanā-with a body; doṣasya-of the sinful activities; dṛṣṭvā-estimating; guru-lāghavam-the heaviness or lightness; yathā-just like; bhiṣak-a physician; cikitseta-would treat; rujām-of disease; nidāna-vit-one who is expert in diagnosis.





Therefore, before one's next death comes, as long as one's body is strong enough, one should quickly adopt the process of atonement according to śāstra; otherwise one's time will be lost, and the reactions of his sins will increase. As an expert physician diagnoses and treats a disease according to its gravity, one should undergo atonement according to the severity of one's sins.





The dharma-śāstras like the Manu-saṁhitā prescribe that a man who has committed murder should be hanged and his own life sacrificed in atonement. Previously this system was followed all over the world, but since people are becoming atheists, they are stopping capital punishment. This is not wise. Herein it is said that a physician who knows how to diagnose a disease prescribes medicine accordingly. If the disease is very serious, the medicine must be strong. The weight of a murderer's sin is very great, and therefore according to Manu-saṁhitā a murderer must be killed. By killing a murderer the government shows mercy to him because if a murderer is not killed in this life, he will be killed and forced to suffer many times in future lives. Since people do not know about the next life and the intricate workings of nature, they manufacture their own laws, but they should properly consult the established injunctions of the śāstras and act accordingly. In India even today the Hindu community often takes advice from expert scholars regarding how to counteract sinful activities. In Christianity also there is a process of confession and atonement. Therefore atonement is required, and atonement must be undergone according to the gravity of one's sinful acts.





TEXT 9



śrī-rājovāca

dṛṣṭa-śrutābhyāṁ yat pāpaṁ

jānann apy ātmano 'hitam

karoti bhūyo vivaśaḥ

prāyaścittam atho katham

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-Parīkṣit Mahārāja replied; dṛṣṭa-by seeing; śrutābhyām-also by hearing (from the scriptures or lawbooks); yat-since; pāpam-sinful, criminal action; jānan-knowing; api-although; ātmanaḥ-of his self; ahitam-injurious; karoti-he acts; bhūyaḥ-again and again; vivaśaḥ-unable to control himself; prāyaścittam-atonement; atho-therefore; katham-what is the value of.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: One may know that sinful activity is injurious for him because he actually sees that a criminal is punished by the government and rebuked by people in general and because he hears from scriptures and learned scholars that one is thrown into hellish conditions in the next life for committing sinful acts. Nevertheless, in spite of such knowledge, one is forced to commit sins again and again, even after performing acts of atonement. Therefore, what is the value of such atonement?





In some religious sects a sinful man goes to a priest to confess his sinful acts and pay a fine, but then he again commits the same sins and returns to confess them again. This is the practice of a professional sinner. Parīkṣit Mahārāja's observations indicate that even five thousand years ago it was the practice of criminals to atone for their crimes but then commit the same crimes again, as if forced to do so. Therefore, owing to his practical experience, Parīkṣit Mahārāja saw that the process of repeatedly sinning and atoning is pointless. Regardless of how many times he is punished, one who is attached to sense enjoyment will commit sinful acts again and again until he is trained to refrain from enjoying his senses. The word vivaśa is used herein, indicating that even one who does not want to commit sinful acts will be forced to do so by habit. Parīkṣit Mahārāja therefore considered the process of atonement to have little value for saving one from sinful acts. In the following verse he further explains his rejection of this process.





TEXT 10



kvacin nivartate 'bhadrāt

kvacic carati tat punaḥ

prāyaścittam atho 'pārthaṁ

manye kuñjara-śaucavat

SYNONYMS



kvacit-sometimes; nivartate-ceases; abhadrāt-from sinful activity; kvacit-sometimes; carati-commits; tat-that (sinful activity); punaḥ-again; prāyaścittam-the process of atonement; atho-therefore; apārtham-useless; manye-I consider; kuñjara-śaucavat-exactly like the bathing of an elephant.





Sometimes one who is very alert so as not to commit sinful acts is victimized by sinful life again. I therefore consider this process of repeated sinning and atoning to be useless. It is like the bathing of an elephant, for an elephant cleanses itself by taking a full bath, but then throws dust over its head and body as soon as it returns to the land.





When Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired how a human being could free himself from sinful activities so as not to be forced to go to hellish planetary systems after death, Śukadeva Gosvāmī answered that the process of counteracting sinful life is atonement. In this way Śukadeva Gosvāmī tested the intelligence of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who passed the examination by refusing to accept this process as genuine. Now Parīkṣit Mahārāja is expecting another answer from his spiritual master, Śukadeva Gosvāmī.





TEXT 11



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

karmaṇā karma-nirhāro

na hy ātyantika iṣyate

avidvad-adhikāritvāt

prāyaścittaṁ vimarśanam

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, replied; karmaṇā-by fruitive activities; karma-nirhāraḥ-counteraction of fruitive activities; na-not; hi-indeed; ātyantikaḥ-final; iṣyate-becomes possible; avidvat-adhikāritvāt-from being without knowledge; prāyaścittam-real atonement; vimarśanam-full knowledge of Vedānta.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vedavyāsa, answered: My dear King, since acts meant to neutralize impious actions are also fruitive, they will not release one from the tendency to act fruitively. Persons who subject themselves to the rules and regulations of atonement are not at all intelligent. Indeed, they are in the mode of darkness. Unless one is freed from the mode of ignorance, trying to counteract one action through another is useless because this will not uproot one's desires. Thus even though one may superficially seem pious, he will undoubtedly be prone to act impiously. Therefore real atonement is enlightenment in perfect knowledge, Vedānta, by which one understands the Supreme Absolute Truth.





The guru, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, has examined Parīkṣit Mahārāja, and it appears that the King has passed one phase of the examination by rejecting the process of atonement because it involves fruitive activities. Now Śukadeva Gosvāmī is suggesting the platform of speculative knowledge. Progressing from karma-kāṇḍa to jñāna-kāṇḍa, he is proposing, prāyaścittaṁ vimarśanam: "Real atonement is full knowledge." Vimarśana refers to the cultivation of speculative knowledge. In Bhagavad-gītā, karmīs, who are lacking in knowledge, are compared to asses. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.15):



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ





"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me." Thus karmīs who engage in sinful acts and who do not know the true objective of life are called mūḍhas, asses. Vimarśana, however, is also explained in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), where Kṛṣṇa says, vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: the purpose of Vedic study is to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one studies Vedānta but merely advances somewhat in speculative knowledge and does not understand the Supreme Lord, one remains the same mūḍha. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19), one attains real knowledge when he understands Kṛṣṇa and surrenders unto Him (bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate). To become learned and free from material contamination, therefore, one should try to understand Kṛṣṇa, for thus one is immediately liberated from all pious and impious activities and their reactions.





TEXT 12



nāśnataḥ pathyam evānnaṁ

vyādhayo 'bhibhavanti hi

evaṁ niyamakṛd rājan

śanaiḥ kṣemāya kalpate

SYNONYMS



na-not; aśnataḥ-those who eat; pathyam-suitable; eva-indeed; annam-food; vyādhayaḥ-different types of disease; abhibhavanti-overcome; hi-indeed; evam-similarly; niyama-kṛt-one following regulative principles; rājan-O King; śanaiḥ-gradually; kṣemāya-for well-being; kalpate-becomes fit.





My dear King, if a diseased person eats the pure, uncontaminated food prescribed by a physician, he is gradually cured, and the infection of disease can no longer touch him. Similarly, if one follows the regulative principles of knowledge, he gradually progresses toward liberation from material contamination.





One is gradually purified if one cultivates knowledge, even through mental speculation, and strictly follows the regulative principles enjoined in the śāstras and explained in the next verse. Therefore the platform of jñāna, speculative knowledge, is better than the platform of karma, fruitive action. There is every chance of falling from the platform of karma to hellish conditions, but on the platform of jñāna one is saved from hellish life, although one is still not completely free from infection. The difficulty is that on the platform of jñāna one thinks that he has been liberated and has become Nārāyaṇa, or Bhagavān. This is another phase of ignorance.



ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ





(Bhāg. 10.2.32)



Because of ignorance, one speculatively thinks himself liberated from material contamination although actually he is not. Therefore even if one rises to brahma jñāna, understanding of Brahman, one nevertheless falls down because of not taking shelter of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Nonetheless, jñānīs at least know what is sinful and what is pious, and they very cautiously act according to the injunctions of the śāstras.





TEXTS 13–14



tapasā brahmacaryeṇa

śamena ca damena ca

tyāgena satya-śaucābhyāṁ

yamena niyamena vā

deha-vāg-buddhijaṁ dhīrā



dharmajñāḥ śraddhayānvitāḥ

kṣipanty aghaṁ mahad api

veṇu-gulmam ivānalaḥ

SYNONYMS



tapasā-by austerity or voluntary rejection of material enjoyment; brahmacaryeṇa-by celibacy (the first austerity); śamena-by controlling the mind; ca-and; damena-by fully controlling the senses; ca-also; tyāgena-by voluntarily giving charity to good causes; satya-by truthfulness; śaucābhyām-and by following regulative principles to keep oneself internally and externally clean; yamena-by avoiding cursing and violence; niyamena-by regularly chanting the holy name of the Lord; vā-and; deha-vāk-buddhi-jam-performed by the body, words and intelligence; dhīrāḥ-those who are sober; dharma-jñāḥ-fully imbued with knowledge of religious principles; śraddhayā anvitāḥ-endowed with faith; kṣipanti-destroy; agham-all kinds of sinful activities; mahat api-although very great and abominable; veṇu-gulmam-the dried creepers beneath a bamboo tree; iva-like; analaḥ-fire.





To concentrate the mind, one must observe a life of celibacy and not fall down. One must undergo the austerity of voluntarily giving up sense enjoyment. One must then control the mind and senses, give charity, be truthful, clean and nonviolent, follow the regulative principles and regularly chant the holy name of the Lord. Thus a sober and faithful person who knows the religious principles is temporarily purified of all sins performed with his body, words and mind. These sins are like the dried leaves of creepers beneath a bamboo tree, which may be burned by fire although their roots remain to grow again at the first opportunity.





Tapaḥ is explained in the smṛti-śāstra as follows: manasaś cendriyāṇāṁ ca aikāgryaṁ paramaṁ tapaḥ. "Complete control of the mind and senses and their complete concentration on one kind of activity is called tapaḥ." Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching people how to concentrate the mind on devotional service. This is first-class tapaḥ. Brahmacarya, the life of celibacy, has eight aspects: one should not think of women, speak about sex life, dally with women, look lustfully at women, talk intimately with women or decide to engage in sexual intercourse, nor should one endeavor for sex life or engage in sex life. One should not even think of women or look at them, to say nothing of talking with them. This is called first-class brahmacarya. If a brahmacārī or sannyāsī talks with a woman in a secluded place, naturally there will be a possibility of sex life without anyone's knowledge. Therefore a complete brahmacārī practices just the opposite. If one is a perfect brahmacārī, he can very easily control the mind and senses, give charity, speak truthfully and so forth. To begin, however, one must control the tongue and the process of eating.



In the bhakti-mārga, the path of devotional service, one must strictly follow the regulative principles by first controlling the tongue (sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ). The tongue (jihvā) can be controlled if one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, does not speak of any subjects other than those concerning Kṛṣṇa and does not taste anything not offered to Kṛṣṇa. If one can control the tongue in this way, brahmacarya and other purifying processes will automatically follow. It will be explained in the next verse that the path of devotional service is completely perfect and is therefore superior to the path of fruitive activities and the path of knowledge. Quoting from the Vedas, Śrīla Vīrarāghava Ācārya explains that austerity involves observing fasts as fully as possible (tapasānāśakena). Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has also advised that atyāhāra, too much eating, is an impediment to advancement in spiritual life. Also, in Bhagavad-gītā (6.17) Kṛṣṇa says:



yuktāhāra-vihārasya

yukta-ceṣṭasya karmasu

yukta-svapnāvabodhasya

yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā





"He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system."



In text 14 the word dhīrāḥ, meaning "those who are undisturbed under all circumstances," is very significant. Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna in Bhagavad-gītā (2.14):



mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata





"O son of Kuntī, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." In material life there are many disturbances (adhyātmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika). One who has learned to tolerate these disturbances under all circumstances is called dhīra.





TEXT 15



kecit kevalayā bhaktyā

vāsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ

aghaṁ dhunvanti kārtsnyena

nīhāram iva bhāskaraḥ

SYNONYMS



kecit-some people; kevalayā bhaktyā-by executing unalloyed devotional service; vāsudeva-to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead; parāyaṇāḥ-completely attached (only to such service, without dependence on austerity, penance, cultivation of knowledge or pious activities); agham-all kinds of sinful reactions; dhunvanti-destroy; kārtsnyena-completely (with no possibility that sinful desires will revive); nīhāram-fog; iva-like; bhāskaraḥ-the sun.





Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devotional service to Kṛṣṇa can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with no possibility that they will revive. He can do this simply by discharging devotional service, just as the sun can immediately dissipate fog by its rays.





In the previous verse Śukadeva Gosvāmī gave the example that the dried leaves of creepers beneath a bamboo tree may be completely burnt to ashes by a fire, although the creepers may sprout again because the root is still in the ground. Similarly, because the root of sinful desire is not destroyed in the heart of a person who is cultivating knowledge but who has no taste for devotional service, there is a possibility that his sinful desires will reappear. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.4):



śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho

kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye





Speculators who undergo great labor to gain a meticulous understanding of the material world by distinguishing between sinful and pious activities, but who are not situated in devotional service, are prone to material activities. They may fall down and become implicated in fruitive activities. If one becomes attached to devotional service, however, his desires for material enjoyment are automatically vanquished without separate endeavor. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra ca: [SB 11.2.42] if one is advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, material activities, both sinful and pious, automatically become distasteful to him. That is the test of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Both pious and impious activities are actually due to ignorance because a living entity, as an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, has no need to act for his personal sense gratification. Therefore as soon as one is reclaimed to the platform of devotional service, he relinquishes his attachment for pious and impious activities and is interested only in what will satisfy Kṛṣṇa. This process of bhakti, devotional service to Kṛṣṇa (vāsudeva-parāyaṇa), relieves one from the reactions of all activities.



Since Mahārāja Parīkṣit was a great devotee. the answers of his guru, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, concerning karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa could not satisfy him. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī, knowing very well the heart of his disciple, explained the transcendental bliss of devotional service. The word kecit, which is used in this verse, means. "a few people but not all." Not everyone can become Kṛṣṇa conscious. As Kṛṣṇa explains in Bhagavad-gītā (7.3):



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ





"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth." Practically no one understands Kṛṣṇa as He is, for Kṛṣṇa cannot be understood through pious activities or attainment of the most elevated speculative knowledge. Actually the highest knowledge consists of understanding Kṛṣṇa. Unintelligent men who do not understand Kṛṣṇa are grossly puffed up, thinking that they are liberated or have themselves become Kṛṣṇa or Nārāyaṇa. This is ignorance.



To indicate the purity of bhakti, devotional service, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11):



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī further explains that bhakti is kleśaghnī śubhadā, which means if one takes to devotional service, all kinds of unnecessary labor and material distress cease entirely and one achieves all good fortune. Bhakti is so powerful that it is also said to be mokṣa-laghutākṛt; in other words, it minimizes the importance of liberation.



Nondevotees must undergo material hardships because they are prone to commit sinful fruitive activities. The desire to commit sinful actions continues in their hearts due to ignorance. These sinful actions are divided into three categories-pātaka, mahā-pātaka and atipātaka-and also into two divisions; prārabdha and aprārabdha. Prārabdha refers to sinful reactions from which one is suffering at the present, and aprārabdha refers to sources of potential suffering. When the seeds (bīja) of sinful reactions have not yet fructified, the reactions are called aprārabdha. These seeds of sinful action are unseen, but they are unlimited, and no one can trace when they were first planted. Because of prārabdha, sinful reactions that have already fructified, one is seen to have taken birth in a low family or to be suffering from other miseries.



When one takes to devotional service, however, all phases of sinful life, including prārabdha, aprārabdha and bīja, are vanquished. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.19) Lord Kṛṣṇa tells Uddhava:



yathāgniḥ susamṛddhārciḥ

karoty edhāṁsi bhasmasāt

tathā mad-viṣayā bhaktir

uddhavaināṁsi kṛtsnaśaḥ





"My dear Uddhava, devotional service in relationship with Me is like a blazing fire that can burn to ashes all the fuel of sinful activities supplied to it." How devotional service vanquishes the reactions of sinful life is explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.6) in a verse spoken during Lord Kapiladeva's instructions to His mother, Devahūti. Devahūti said:



yan-nāmadheya-śravaṇānukīrtanād

yat-prahvaṇād yat-smaraṇād api kvacit

śvādo 'pi sadyaḥ savanāya kalpate

kutaḥ punas te bhagavan nu darśanāt





"My dear Lord, if even a person born in a family of dog-eaters hears and repeats the chanting of Your glories, offers respects to You and remembers You, he is immediately greater than a brāhmaṇa and is therefore eligible to perform sacrifices. Therefore, what is to be said of one who has seen You directly?"



In the Padma Purāṇa there is a statement that persons whose hearts are always attached to the devotional service of Lord Viṣṇu are immediately released from all the reactions of sinful life. These reactions generally exist in four phases. Some of them are ready to produce results immediately, some are in the form of seeds, some are unmanifested, and some are current. All such reactions are immediately nullified by devotional service. When devotional service is present in one's heart, desires to perform sinful activities have no place there. Sinful life is due to ignorance, which means forgetfulness of one's constitutional position as an eternal servant of God, but when one is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious he realizes that he is God's eternal servant.



In this regard, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī comments that bhakti may be divided into two divisions: (1) santatā, devotional service that continues incessantly with faith and love, and (2) kādācitkī, devotional service that does not continue incessantly but is sometimes awakened. Incessantly flowing devotional service (santatā) may also be divided into two categories: (1) service performed with slight attachment and (2) spontaneous devotional service. Intermittent devotional service (kādācitkī) may be divided into three categories: (1) rāgābhāsamayī, devotional service in which one is almost attached, (2) rāgābhāsa-śūnya-svarūpa-bhūtā, devotional service in which there is no spontaneous love but one likes the constitutional position of serving, and (3) ābhāsa-rūpā, a slight glimpse of devotional service. As for atonement, if one has caught even a slight glimpse of devotional service, all needs to undergo prāyaścitta, atonement, are superseded. Therefore atonement is certainly unnecessary when one has achieved spontaneous love and, above that, attachment with love, which are signs of increasing advancement in kādācitkī. Even in the stage of ābhāsa-rūpā bhakti, all the reactions of sinful life are uprooted and vanquished. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī expresses the opinion that the word kārtsnyena means that even if one has a desire to commit sinful actions, the roots of that desire are vanquished merely by ābhāsa-rūpā bhakti. The example of bhāskara, the sun, is most appropriate. The ābhāsa feature of bhakti is compared to twilight, and the accumulation of one's sinful activities is compared to fog. Since fog does not spread throughout the sky, the sun need do no more than merely manifest its first rays, and the fog immediately disappears. Similarly, if one has even a slight relationship with devotional service, all the fog of his sinful life is immediately vanquished.





TEXT 16



na tathā hy aghavān rājan

pūyeta tapa-ādibhiḥ

yathā kṛṣṇārpita-prāṇas

tat-puruṣa-niṣevayā

SYNONYMS



na-not; tathā-so much; hi-certainly; agha-vān-a man full of sinful activities; rājan-O King; pūyeta-can become purified; tapaḥ-ādibhiḥ-by executing the principles of austerity, penance, brahmacarya and other purifying processes; yathā-as much as; kṛṣṇa-arpita-prāṇaḥ-the devotee whose life is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious; tat-puruṣa-niṣevayā-by engaging his life in the service of Kṛṣṇa's representative.





My dear King, if a sinful person engages in the service of a bona fide devotee of the Lord and thus learns how to dedicate his life unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, he can be completely purified. One cannot be purified merely by undergoing austerity, penance, brahmacarya and the other methods of atonement I have previously described.





Tat-puruṣa refers to a preacher of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, such as the spiritual master. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has said, chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: "Without serving a bona fide spiritual master, an ideal Vaiṣṇava, who can be delivered from the clutches of māyā?" This idea is also expressed in many other places. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.2) says, mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ: if one desires liberation from the clutches of māyā, one must associate with a pure devotee mahātmā. A mahātmā is one who engages twenty-four hours daily in the loving service of the Lord. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.13):



mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha

daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ

bhajanty ananya-manaso

jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam





"O son of Pṛthā, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and inexhaustible." Thus the symptom of a mahātmā is that he has no engagement other than service to Kṛṣṇa. One must render service to a Vaiṣṇava in order to get freed from sinful reactions, revive one's original Kṛṣṇa consciousness and be trained in how to love Kṛṣṇa. This is the result of mahātma-sevā. Of course, if one engages in the service of a pure devotee, the reactions of one's sinful life are vanquished automatically. Devotional service is necessary not to drive away an insignificant stock of sins, but to awaken our dormant love for Kṛṣṇa. As fog is vanquished at the first glimpse of sunlight, one's sinful reactions are automatically vanquished as soon as one begins serving a pure devotee; no separate endeavor is required.



The word kṛṣṇa-rpita-prāṇaḥ refers to a devotee who dedicates his life to serving Kṛṣṇa, not to being saved from the path to hellish life. A devotee is nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇa, or vāsudeva-parāyaṇa, which means that the path of Vāsudeva, or the devotional path, is his life and soul. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati (Bhāg. 6.17.28): such a devotee is not afraid of going anywhere. There is a path toward liberation in the higher planetary systems and a path toward the hellish planets, but a nārāyaṇa-para devotee is unafraid wherever he is sent; he simply wants to remember Kṛṣṇa, wherever he may be. Such a devotee is unconcerned with hell and heaven; he is simply attached to rendering service to Kṛṣṇa. When a devotee is put into hellish conditions, he accepts them as Kṛṣṇa's mercy: tat te 'nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇaḥ (Bhāg. 10.14.8). He does not protest, "Oh, I am such a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Why have I been put into this misery?" Instead he thinks, "This is Kṛṣṇa's mercy." Such an attitude is possible for a devotee who engages in the service of Kṛṣṇa's representative. This is the secret of success.





TEXT 17



sadhrīcīno hy ayaṁ loke

panthāḥ kṣemo 'kuto-bhayaḥ

suśīlāḥ sādhavo yatra

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ

SYNONYMS



sadhrīcīnaḥ-just appropriate; hi-certainly; ayam-this; loke-in the world; panthāḥ-path; kṣemaḥ-auspicious; akutaḥ-bhayaḥ-without fear; su-śīlāḥ-well-behaved; sādhavaḥ-saintly persons; yatra-wherein; nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ-those who have taken the path of Nārāyaṇa, devotional service, as their life and soul.





The path followed by pure devotees, who are well behaved and fully endowed with the best qualifications, is certainly the most auspicious path in this material world. It is free from fear, and it is authorized by the śāstras.





One should not think that the person who takes to bhakti is one who cannot perform the ritualistic ceremonies recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas or is not sufficiently educated to speculate on spiritual subjects. Māyāvādīs generally allege that the bhakti path is for women and illiterates. This is a groundless accusation. The bhakti path is followed by the most learned scholars, such as the Gosvāmīs, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Rāmānujācārya. These are the actual followers of the bhakti path. Regardless of whether or not one is educated or aristocratic, one must follow in their footsteps. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ: one must follow the path of the mahājanas. The mahājanas are those who have taken to the path of devotional service (suśīlāḥ sādhavo yatra nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ), for these great personalities are the perfect persons. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12):



yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ





"One who has unflinching devotion to the Personality of Godhead has all the good qualities of the demigods." The less intelligent, however, misunderstand the bhakti path and therefore allege that it is for one who cannot execute ritualistic ceremonies or speculate. As confirmed here by the word sadhrīcīnaḥ, bhakti is the path that is appropriate, not the paths of karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa. Māyāvādīs may be suśīlāḥ sādhavaḥ (well-behaved saintly persons), but there is nevertheless some doubt about whether they are actually making progress, for they have not accepted the path of bhakti. On the other hand, those who follow the path of the ācāryas are suśīlāḥ and sādhavaḥ, but furthermore their path is akuto-bhaya, which means free from fear. One should fearlessly follow the twelve mahājanas and their line of disciplic succession and thus be liberated from the clutches of māyā.





TEXT 18



prāyaścittāni cīrṇāni

nārāyaṇa-parāṅmukham

na niṣpunanti rājendra

surā-kumbham ivāpagāḥ

SYNONYMS



prāyaścittāni-processes of atonement; cīrṇāni-very nicely performed; nārāyaṇa-parāṅmukham-a nondevotee; na niṣpunanti-cannot purify; rājendra-O King; surā-kumbham-a pot containing liquor; iva-like; āpa-gāḥ-the waters of the rivers.





My dear King, as a pot containing liquor cannot be purified even if washed in the waters of many rivers, nondevotees cannot be purified by processes of atonement even if they perform them very well.





To take advantage of the methods of atonement, one must be at least somewhat devoted; otherwise there is no chance of one's being purified. It is clear from this verse that even those who take advantage of karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa, but are not at least slightly devoted cannot be purified simply by following these other paths. The word prāyaścittāni is plural in number to indicate both karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore says, karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa, kevala viṣera bhāṇḍa. Thus Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura compares the paths of karma-kāṇḍa and jñāna-kāṇḍa to pots of poison. Liquor and poison are in the same category. According to this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, a person who has heard a good deal about the path of devotional service, but who is not attached to it, who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious, is like a pot of liquor. Such a person cannot be purified without at least a slight touch of devotional service.





TEXT 19



sakṛn manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

niveśitaṁ tad-guṇa-rāgi yair iha

na te yamaṁ pāśa-bhṛtaś ca tad-bhaṭān

svapne 'pi paśyanti hi cīrṇa-niṣkṛtāḥ

SYNONYMS



sakṛt-once only; manaḥ-the mind; kṛṣṇa-pada-aravindayoḥ-unto the two lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa; niveśitam-completely surrendered; tat-of Kṛṣṇa; guṇa-rāgi-which is somewhat attached to the qualities, name, fame and paraphernalia; yaiḥ-by whom; iha-in this world; na-not; te-such persons; yamam-Yamarāja, the superintendent of death; pāśa-bhṛtaḥ-those who carry ropes (to catch sinful persons); ca-and; tat-his; bhaṭān-order carriers; svapne api-even in dreams; paśyanti-see; hi-indeed; cīrṇa-niṣkṛtāḥ-who have performed the right type of atonement.





Although not having fully realized Kṛṣṇa, persons who have even once surrendered completely unto His lotus feet and who have become attracted to His name, form, qualities and pastimes are completely freed of all sinful reactions, for they have thus accepted the true method of atonement. Even in dreams, such surrendered souls do not see Yamarāja or his order carriers, who are equipped with ropes to bind the sinful.





Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66):



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ





"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." This same principle is described here (sakṛn manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ). If by studying Bhagavad-gītā one decides to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, he is immediately freed from all sinful reactions. It is also significant that Śukadeva Gosvāmī, having several times repeated the words vāsudeva-parāyaṇa and nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇa, finally says kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. Thus he indicates that Kṛṣṇa is the origin of both Nārāyaṇa and Vāsudeva. Even though Nārāyaṇa and Vāsudeva are not different from Kṛṣṇa, simply by surrendering to Kṛṣṇa one fully surrenders to all His expansions, such as Nārāyaṇa, Vāsudeva and Govinda. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.7), mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat: "There is no truth superior to Me." There are many names and forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but Kṛṣṇa is the supreme form (kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam). Therefore Kṛṣṇa recommends to neophyte devotees that one should surrender unto Him only (mām ekam). Because neophyte devotees cannot understand what the forms of Nārāyaṇa, Vāsudeva and Govinda are, Kṛṣṇa directly says, mām ekam. Herein, this is also supported by the word kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. Nārāyaṇa does not speak personally, but Kṛṣṇa, or Vāsudeva, does, as in Bhagavad-gītā for example. Therefore, to follow the direction of Bhagavad-gītā means to surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, and to surrender in this way is the highest perfection of bhakti-yoga.



Parīkṣit Mahārāja had inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī how one can be saved from falling into the various conditions of hellish life. In this verse Śukadeva Gosvāmī answers that a soul who has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa certainly cannot go to naraka, hellish existence. To say nothing of going there, even in his dreams he does not see Yamarāja or his order carriers, who are able to take one there. In other words, if one wants to save himself from falling into naraka, hellish life, he should fully surrender to Kṛṣṇa. The word sakṛt is significant because it indicates that if one sincerely surrenders to Kṛṣṇa once, he is saved even if by chance he falls down by committing sinful activities. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.30):



api cet su-durācāro

bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ

samyag vyavasito hi saḥ





"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated." If one never for a moment forgets Kṛṣṇa, he is safe even if by chance he falls down by committing sinful acts.



In the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā (2.40) the Lord also says:



nehābhikrama-nāśo 'sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

svalpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt





"In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear."



Elsewhere in the Gītā (6.40) the Lord says, na hi kalyāṇa-kṛt kaścid durgatiṁ tāta gacchati: "one who performs auspicious activity is never overcome by evil." The highest kalyāṇa (auspicious) activity is to surrender to Kṛṣṇa. That is the only path by which to save oneself from falling down into hellish life. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has confirmed this as follows:



kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate

durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate

viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate

yat-kāruṇya-kaṭākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ





The sinful actions of one who has surrendered unto Kṛṣṇa are compared to a snake with its poison fangs removed (protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate). Such a snake is no longer to be feared. Of course, one should not commit sinful activities on the strength of having surrendered to Kṛṣṇa. However, even if one who has surrendered to Kṛṣṇa happens to do something sinful because of his former habits, such sinful actions no longer have a destructive effect. Therefore one should adhere to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa very tightly and serve Him under the direction of the spiritual master. Thus in all conditions one will be akuto-bhaya, free from fear.





TEXT 20



atra codāharantīmam

itihāsaṁ purātanam

dūtānāṁ viṣṇu-yamayoḥ

saṁvādas taṁ nibodha me

SYNONYMS



atra-in this connection; ca-also; udāharanti-they give as an example; imam-this; itihāsam-the history (of Ajāmila); purātanam-which is very old; dūtānām-of the order carriers; viṣṇu-of Lord Viṣṇu; yamayoḥ-and of Yamarāja; saṁvādaḥ-the discussion; tam-that; nibodha-try to understand; me-from me.





In this regard, learned scholars and saintly persons describe a very old historical incident involving a discussion between the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu and those of Yamarāja. Please hear of this from me.





The Purāṇas, or old histories, are sometimes neglected by unintelligent men who consider their descriptions mythological. Actually, the descriptions of the Purāṇas, or the old histories of the universe, are factual, although not chronological. The purāṇas record the chief incidents that have occurred over many millions of years, not only on this planet but also on other planets within the universe. Therefore all learned and realized Vedic scholars speak with references to the incidents in the Purāṇas. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī accepts the Purāṇas to be as important as the Vedas themselves. Therefore in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu he quotes the following verse from the Brahma-yāmala:



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[BRS śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate





"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.1011.2.101]



"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." A devotee of Kṛṣṇa must refer not only to the Vedas, but also to the purāṇas. One should not foolishly consider the Purāṇas mythological. If they were mythological, Śukadeva Gosvāmī would not have taken the trouble to recite the old historical incidents concerning the life of Ajāmila. Now the history begins as follows.





TEXT 21



kānyakubje dvijaḥ kaścid

dāsī-patir ajāmilaḥ

nāmnā naṣṭa-sadācāro

dāsyāḥ saṁsarga-dūṣitaḥ

SYNONYMS



kānya-kubje-in the city of Kānyakubja (Kanauj, a town near Kanpur); dvijaḥ-brāhmaṇa; kaścit-some; dāsī-patiḥ-the husband of a low-class woman or prostitute; ajāmilaḥ-Ajāmila; nāmnā-by name; naṣṭa-sat-ācāraḥ-who lost all brahminical qualities; dāsyāḥ-of the prostitute or maidservant; saṁsarga-dūṣitaḥ-contaminated by the association.





In the city known as Kānyakubja there was a brāhmaṇa named Ajāmila who married a prostitute maidservant and lost all his brahminical qualities because of the association of that low-class woman.





The fault of illicit connection with women is that it makes one lose all brahminical qualities. In India there is still a class of servants, called śūdras, whose maidservant wives are called śūdrāṇīs. Sometimes people who are very lusty establish relationships with such maidservants and sweeping women, since in the higher statuses of society they cannot indulge in the habit of woman hunting, which is strictly prohibited by social convention. Ajāmila, a qualified brāhmaṇa youth, lost all his brahminical qualities because of his association with a prostitute, but he was ultimately saved because he had begun the process of bhakti-yoga. Therefore in the previous verse, Śukadeva Gosvāmī spoke of the person who has only once surrendered himself at the lotus feet of the Lord (manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ) or has just begun the bhakti-yoga process. Bhakti-yoga begins with śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23], hearing and chanting of Lord Viṣṇu's names, as in the mahā-mantra-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Chanting is the beginning of bhakti-yoga. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu declares:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way." The process of chanting the holy name of the Lord is always superbly effective, but it is especially effective in this age of Kali. Its practical effectiveness will now be explained by Śukadeva Gosvāmī through the history of Ajāmila, who was freed from the hands of the Yamadūtas simply because of chanting the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. Parīkṣit Mahārāja's original question was how to be freed from falling down into hell or into the hands of the Yamadūtas. In reply, Śukadeva Gosvāmī is citing this old historical example to convince Parīkṣit Mahārāja of the potency of bhakti-yoga, which begins simply with the chanting of the Lord's name. All the great authorities of bhakti-yoga recommend the devotional process beginning with the chanting of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa (tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ).





TEXT 22



bandy-akṣaiḥ kaitavaiś cauryair

garhitāṁ vṛttim āsthitaḥ

bibhrat kuṭumbam aśucir

yātayām āsa dehinaḥ

SYNONYMS



bandī-akṣaiḥ-by unnecessarily arresting someone; kaitavaiḥ-by cheating in gambling or throwing dice; cauryaiḥ-by committing theft; garhitām-condemned; vṛttim-professions; āsthitaḥ-who has undertaken (because of association with a prostitute); bibhrat-maintaining; kuṭumbam-his dependent wife and children; aśuciḥ-being most sinful; yātayām āsa-he gave trouble; dehinaḥ-to other living entities.





This fallen brāhmaṇa, Ajāmila, gave trouble to others by arresting them, by cheating them in gambling or by directly plundering them. This was the way he earned his livelihood and maintained his wife and children.





This verse indicates how degraded one becomes simply by indulging in illicit sex with a prostitute. Illicit sex is not possible with a chaste or aristocratic woman, but only with unchaste śūdras. The more society allows prostitution and illicit sex, the more impetus it gives to cheaters, thieves, plunderers, drunkards and gamblers. Therefore we first advise all the disciples in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to avoid illicit sex, which is the beginning of all abominable life and which is followed by meat-eating, gambling and intoxication, one after another. Of course, restraint is very difficult, but it is quite possible if one fully surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, since all these abominable habits gradually become distasteful for a Kṛṣṇa conscious person. If illicit sex is allowed to increase in a society, however, the entire society will be condemned, for it will be full of rogues, thieves, cheaters and so forth.





TEXT 23



evaṁ nivasatas tasya

lālayānasya tat-sutān

kālo 'tyagān mahān rājann

aṣṭāśītyāyuṣaḥ samāḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; nivasataḥ-living; tasya-of him (Ajāmila); lālayānasya-maintaining; tat-of her (the śūdrāṇī); sutān-sons; kālaḥ-time; atyagāt-passed away; mahān-a great amount; rājan-O King; aṣṭāśītyā-eighty-eight; āyuṣaḥ-of the duration of life; samāḥ-years.





My dear King, while he thus spent his time in abominable, sinful activities to maintain his family of many sons, eighty-eight years of his life passed by.





TEXT 24



tasya pravayasaḥ putrā

daśa teṣāṁ tu yo 'vamaḥ

bālo nārāyaṇo nāmnā

pitroś ca dayito bhṛśam

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Ajāmila); pravayasaḥ-who was very old; putrāḥ-sons; daśa-ten; teṣām-of all of them; tu-but; yaḥ-the one who; avamaḥ-the youngest; bālaḥ-child; nārāyaṇaḥ-Nārāyaṇa; nāmnā-by name; pitroḥ-of the father and mother; ca-and; dayitaḥ-dear; bhṛśam-very.





That old man Ajāmila had ten sons, of whom the youngest was a baby named Nārāyaṇa. Since Nārāyaṇa was the youngest of all the sons, he was naturally very dear to both his father and his mother.





The word pravayasaḥ indicates Ajāmila's sinfulness because although he was eighty-eight years old, he had a very young child. According to Vedic culture, one should leave home as soon as he has reached fifty years of age; one should not live at home and go on producing children. Sex life is allowed for twenty-five years, between the ages of twenty-five and forty-five or, at the most, fifty. After that one should give up the habit of sex life and leave home as a vānaprastha and then properly take sannyāsa. Ajāmila, however, because of his association with a prostitute, lost all brahminical culture and became most sinful, even in his so-called household life.





TEXT 25



sa baddha-hṛdayas tasminn

arbhake kala-bhāṣiṇi

nirīkṣamāṇas tal-līlāṁ

mumude jaraṭho bhṛśam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he; baddha-hṛdayaḥ-being very attached; tasmin-to that; arbhake-small child; kala-bhāṣiṇi-who could not talk clearly but talked in broken language; nirīkṣamāṇaḥ-seeing; tat-his; līlām-pastimes (such as walking and talking to his father); mumude-enjoyed; jaraṭhaḥ-the old man; bhṛśam-very much.





Because of the child's broken language and awkward movements, old Ajāmila was very much attached to him. He always took care of the child and enjoyed the child's activities.





Here it is clearly mentioned that the child Nārāyaṇa was so young that he could not even speak or walk properly. Since the old man was very attached to the child, he enjoyed the child's activities, and because the child's name was Nārāyaṇa, the old man always chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. Although he was referring to the small child and not to the original Nārāyaṇa, the name of Nārāyaṇa is so powerful that even by chanting his son's name he was becoming purified (harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Adi 17.21]). Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has therefore declared that if one's mind is somehow or other attracted by the holy name of Kṛṣṇa (tasmāt kenāpy upāyena manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet), one is on the path of liberation. It is customary in Hindu society for parents to give their children names like Kṛṣṇadāsa, Govinda dāsa, Nārāyaṇa dāsa and Vṛndāvana dāsa. Thus they chant the names Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, Nārāyaṇa and Vṛndāvana and get the chance to be purified.





TEXT 26



bhuñjānaḥ prapiban khādan

bālakaṁ sneha-yantritaḥ

bhojayan pāyayan mūḍho

na vedāgatam antakam

SYNONYMS



bhuñjānaḥ-while eating; prapiban-while drinking; khādan-while chewing; bālakam-unto the child; sneha-yantritaḥ-being attached by affection; bhojayan-feeding; pāyayan-giving something to drink; mūḍhaḥ-the foolish man; na-not; veda-understood; āgatam-had arrived; antakam-death.





When Ajāmila chewed food and ate it, he called the child to chew and eat, and when he drank he called the child to drink also. Always engaged in taking care of the child and calling his name, Nārāyaṇa, Ajāmila could not understand that his own time was now exhausted and that death was upon him.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is kind to the conditioned soul. Although this man completely forgot Nārāyaṇa, he was calling his child, saying, "Nārāyaṇa, please come eat this food. Nārāyaṇa, please come drink this milk." Somehow or other, therefore, he was attached to the name Nārāyaṇa. This is called ajñāta-sukṛti. Although calling for his son, he was unknowingly chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa, and the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so transcendentally powerful that his chanting was being counted and recorded.





TEXT 27



sa evaṁ vartamāno 'jño

mṛtyu-kāla upasthite

matiṁ cakāra tanaye

bāle nārāyaṇāhvaye

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that Ajāmila; evam-thus; vartamānaḥ-living; ajñaḥ-foolish; mṛtyu-kāle-when the time of death; upasthite-arrived; matim cakāra-concentrated his mind; tanaye-on his son; bāle-the child; nārāyaṇa-āhvaye-whose name was Nārāyaṇa.





When the time of death arrived for the foolish Ajāmila, he began thinking exclusively of his son Nārāyaṇa.





In the Second Canto of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.1.6) Śukadeva Gosvāmī says:



etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ

svadharma-pariniṣṭhayā

janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām

ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ





"The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete knowledge of matter and spirit, by acquirement of mystic powers, or by perfect discharge of one's occupational duty, is to remember the Personality of Godhead at the end of life." Somehow or other, Ajāmila consciously or unconsciously chanted the name of Nārāyaṇa at the time of death (ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ), and therefore he became all-perfect simply by concentrating his mind on the name of Nārāyaṇa.



It may also be concluded that Ajāmila, who was the son of a brāhmaṇa, was accustomed to worshiping Nārāyaṇa in his youth because in every brāhmaṇa's house there is worship of the nārāyaṇa-śilā. This system is still present in India; in a rigid brāhmaṇa's house, there is nārāyaṇa-sevā, worship of Nārāyaṇa. Therefore, although the contaminated Ajāmila was calling for his son, by concentrating his mind on the holy name of Nārāyaṇa he remembered the Nārāyaṇa he had very faithfully worshiped in his youth.



In this regard Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī expressed his verdict as follows: etac ca tad-upalālanādi-śrī-nārāyaṇa-namoccāraṇa-māhātmyena tad-bhaktir evābhūd iti siddhāntopayogitvenāpi draṣṭavyam. "According to the bhakti-siddhānta, it is to be analyzed that because Ajāmila constantly chanted his son's name, Nārāyaṇa, he was elevated to the platform of bhakti, although he did not know it." Similarly, Śrīla Vīrarāghava Ācārya gives this opinion: evaṁ vartamānaḥ sa dvijaḥ mṛtyu-kāle upasthite satyajño nārāyaṇākhye putra eva matiṁ cakāra matim āsaktām akarod ity arthaḥ. "Although at the time of death he was chanting the name of his son, he nevertheless concentrated his mind upon the holy name of Nārāyaṇa." Śrīla Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha gives a similar opinion:



mṛtyu-kāle deha-viyoga-lakṣaṇa-kāle mṛtyoḥ sarva-doṣa-pāpa-harasya harer anugrahāt kāle datta-jñāna-lakṣaṇe upasthite hṛdi prakāśite tanaye pūrṇa-jñāne bāle pañca-varṣa-kalpe prādeśa-mātre nārāyaṇāhvaye mūrti-viśeṣe matiṁ smaraṇa-samarthaṁ cittaṁ cakāra bhaktyāsmarad ity arthaḥ.



Directly or indirectly, Ajāmila factually remembered Nārāyaṇa at the time of death (ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ).





TEXTS 28–29



sa pāśa-hastāṁs trīn dṛṣṭvā

puruṣān ati-dāruṇān

vakra-tuṇḍān ūrdhva-romṇa

ātmānaṁ netum āgatān

dūre krīḍanakāsaktaṁ



putraṁ nārāyaṇāhvayam

plāvitena svareṇoccair

ājuhāvākulendriyaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that person (Ajāmila); pāśa-hastān-having ropes in their hands; trīn-three; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; puruṣān-persons; ati-dāruṇān-very fearful in their features; vakra-tuṇḍān-with twisted faces; ūrdhva-romṇaḥ-with hair standing on the body; ātmānam-the self; netum-to take away; āgatān-arrived; dūre-a short distance away; krīḍanaka-āsaktam-engaged in his play; putram-his child; nārāyaṇa-āhvayam-named Nārāyaṇa; plāvitena-with tearful eyes; svareṇa-with his voice; uccaiḥ-very loudly; ājuhāva-called; ākula-indriyaḥ-being full of anxiety.





Ajāmila then saw three awkward persons with deformed bodily features, fierce, twisted faces, and hair standing erect on their bodies. With ropes in their hands, they had come to take him away to the abode of Yamarāja. When he saw them he was extremely bewildered, and because of attachment to his child, who was playing a short distance away, Ajāmila began to call him loudly by his name. Thus with tears in his eyes he somehow or other chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa.





A person who performs sinful activities performs them with his body, mind and words. Therefore three order carriers from Yamarāja came to take Ajāmila to Yamarāja's abode. Fortunately, even though he was referring to his son, Ajāmila chanted the four syllables of the hari-nāma Nārāyaṇa, and therefore the order carriers of Nārāyaṇa, the Viṣṇudūtas, also immediately arrived there. Because Ajāmila was extremely afraid of the ropes of Yamarāja, he chanted the Lord's name with tearful eyes. Actually, however, he never meant to chant the holy name of Nārāyaṇa; he meant to call his son.





TEXT 30



niśamya mriyamāṇasya

mukhato hari-kīrtanam

bhartur nāma mahārāja

pārṣadāḥ sahasāpatan

SYNONYMS



niśamya-hearing; mriyamāṇasya-of the dying man; mukhataḥ-from the mouth; hari-kīrtanam-chanting of the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhartuḥ nāma-the holy name of their master; mahā-rāja-O King; pārṣadāḥ-the order carriers of Viṣṇu; sahasā-immediately; āpatan-arrived.





My dear King, the order carriers of Viṣṇu, the Viṣṇudūtas, immediately arrived when they heard the holy name of their master from the mouth of the dying Ajāmila, who had certainly chanted without offense because he had chanted in complete anxiety.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks, hari-kīrtanaṁ niśamyāpatan, katham-bhūtasya bhartur nāma bruvataḥ: the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu came because Ajāmila had chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. They did not consider why he was chanting. While chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa, Ajāmila was actually thinking of his son, but simply because they heard Ajāmila chanting the Lord's name, the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, the Viṣṇudūtas, immediately came for Ajāmila's protection. Hari-kīrtana is actually meant to glorify the holy name, form, pastimes and qualities of the Lord. Ajāmila, however, did not glorify the form, qualities or paraphernalia of the Lord; he simply chanted the holy name. Nevertheless, that chanting was sufficient to cleanse him of all sinful activities. As soon as the Viṣṇudūtas heard their master's name being chanted, they immediately came. In this regard Śrīla Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha remarks: anena putra-sneham antareṇa prācīnādṛṣṭa-balād udbhūtayā bhaktyā bhagavan-nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ kṛtam iti jñāyate. "Ajāmila chanted the name of Nārāyaṇa because of his excessive attachment to his son. Nevertheless, because of his past good fortune in having rendered devotional service to Nārāyaṇa, he apparently chanted the holy name in full devotional service and without offenses."





TEXT 31



vikarṣato 'ntar hṛdayād

dāsī-patim ajāmilam

yama-preṣyān viṣṇudūtā

vārayām āsur ojasā

SYNONYMS



vikarṣataḥ-snatching; antaḥ hṛdayāt-from within the heart; dāsī-patim-the husband of the prostitute; ajāmilam-Ajāmila; yama-preṣyān-the messengers of Yamarāja; viṣṇu-dūtāḥ-the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu; vārayām āsuḥ-forbade; ojasā-with resounding voices.





The order carriers of Yamarāja were snatching the soul from the core of the heart of Ajāmila, the husband of the prostitute, but with resounding voices the messengers of Lord Viṣṇu, the Viṣṇudūtas, forbade them to do so.





A Vaiṣṇava, one who has surrendered to the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu, is always protected by Lord Viṣṇu's order carriers. Because Ajāmila had chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa, the Viṣṇudūtas not only immediately arrived on the spot but also at once ordered the Yamadūtas not to touch him. By speaking with resounding voices, the Viṣṇudūtas threatened to punish the Yamadūtas if they continued trying to snatch Ajāmila's soul from his heart. The order carriers of Yamarāja have jurisdiction over all sinful living entities, but the messengers of Lord Viṣṇu, the Viṣṇudūtas, are capable of punishing anyone, including Yamarāja, if he wrongs a Vaiṣṇava.



Materialistic scientists do not know where to find the soul within the body with their material instruments, but this verse clearly explains that the soul is within the core of the heart (hṛdaya); it is from the heart that the Yamadūtas were extracting the soul of Ajāmila. Similarly, we learn that the Supersoul, Lord Viṣṇu, is also situated within the heart (īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]). In the Upaniṣads it is said that the Supersoul and the individual soul are living in the same tree of the body as two friendly birds. The Supersoul is said to be friendly because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind to the original soul that when the original soul transmigrates from one body to another, the Lord goes with him. Furthermore, according to the desire and karma of the individual soul, the Lord, through the agency of māyā, creates another body for him.



The heart of the body is a mechanical arrangement. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61):



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā





"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy." Yantra means a machine, such as an automobile. The driver of the machine of the body is the individual soul, who is also its director or proprietor, but the supreme proprietor is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One's body is created through the agency of māyā (karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa), and according to one's activities in this life, another vehicle is created, again under the supervision of daivī māyā (daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā). At the appropriate time, one's next body is immediately chosen, and both the individual soul and the Supersoul transfer to that particular bodily machine. This is the process of transmigration. During transmigration from one body to the next, the soul is taken away by the order carriers of Yamarāja and put into a particular type of hellish life (naraka) in order to become accustomed to the condition in which he will live in his next body.





TEXT 32



ūcur niṣedhitās tāṁs te

vaivasvata-puraḥsarāḥ

ke yūyaṁ pratiṣeddhāro

dharma-rājasya śāsanam

SYNONYMS



ūcuḥ-replied; niṣedhitāḥ-being forbidden; tān-to the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu; te-they; vaivasvata-of Yamarāja; puraḥ-sarāḥ-the assistants or messengers; ke-who; yūyam-all of you; pratiṣed-dhāraḥ-who are opposing; dharma-rājasya-of the king of religious principles, Yamarāja; śāsanam-the ruling jurisdiction.





When the order carriers of Yamarāja, the son of the sun-god, were thus forbidden, they replied: Who are you, sirs, that have the audacity to challenge the jurisdiction of Yamarāja?





According to the sinful activities of Ajāmila, he was within the jurisdiction of Yamarāja, the supreme judge appointed to consider the sins of the living entities. When forbidden to touch Ajāmila, the order carriers of Yamarāja were surprised because they had never been hindered in the execution of their duty by anyone within the three worlds.





TEXT 33



kasya vā kuta āyātāḥ

kasmād asya niṣedhatha

kiṁ devā upadevā yā

yūyaṁ kiṁ siddha-sattamāḥ

SYNONYMS



kasya-whose servants; vā-or; kutaḥ-from where; āyātāḥ-have you come; kasmāt-what is the reason; asya-(the taking away) of this Ajāmila; niṣedhatha-are you forbidding; kim-whether; devāḥ-demigods; upadevāḥ-sub-demigods; yāḥ-who; yūyam-all of you; kim-whether; siddha-sat-tamāḥ-the best of the perfect beings, the pure devotees.





Dear sirs, whose servants are you, where have you come from, and why are you forbidding us to touch the body of Ajāmila? Are you demigods from the heavenly planets, are you sub-demigods, or are you the best of devotees?





The most significant word used in this verse is siddha-sattamāḥ, which means "the best of the perfect." In Bhagavad-gītā (7.3) it is said, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye: out of millions of persons, one may try to become siddha, perfect-or, in other words, self-realized. A self-realized person knows that he is not the body but a spiritual soul (). At the present moment practically everyone is unaware of this fact, but one who understands this has attained perfection and is therefore called siddha. When one understands that the soul is part and parcel of the supreme soul and one thus engages in the devotional service of the supreme soul, one becomes siddha-sat-tama. One is then eligible to live in the Vaikuṇṭha planets or Kṛṣṇaloka. The word siddha-sattama, therefore, refers to a liberated, pure devotee.

Since the Yamadūtas are servants of Yamarāja, who is also one of the siddha-sattamas, they knew that a siddha-sattama is above the demigods and sub-demigods and, indeed, above all the living entities within this material world. The Yamadūtas therefore inquired why the Viṣṇudūtas were present where a sinful man was going to die.



It should also be noted that Ajāmila was not yet dead, for the Yamadūtas were trying to snatch the soul from his heart. They could not take the soul, however, and therefore Ajāmila was not yet dead. This will be revealed in later verses. Ajāmila was simply in an unconscious state when the argument was in progress between the Yamadūtas and the Viṣṇudūtas. The conclusion of the argument was to be a decision regarding who would claim the soul of Ajāmila.





TEXTS 34–36



sarve padma-palāśākṣāḥ

pīta-kauśeya-vāsasaḥ

kirīṭinaḥ kuṇḍalino

lasat-puṣkara-mālinaḥ

sarve ca nūtna-vayasaḥ



sarve cāru-caturbhujāḥ

dhanur-niṣaṅgāsi-gadā-

śaṅkha-cakrāmbuja-śriyaḥ

diśo vitimirālokāḥ



kurvantaḥ svena tejasā

kim arthaṁ dharma-pālasya

kiṅkarān no niṣedhatha

SYNONYMS



sarve-all of you; padma-palāśa-akṣāḥ-with eyes like the petals of a lotus flower; pīta-yellow; kauśeya-silk; vāsasaḥ-wearing garments; kirīṭinaḥ-with helmets; kuṇḍalinaḥ-with earrings; lasat-glittering; puṣkara-mālinaḥ-with a garland of lotus flowers; sarve-all of you; ca-also; nūtna-vayasaḥ-very youthful; sarve-all of you; cāru-very beautiful; catuḥ-bhujāḥ-with four arms; dhanuḥ-bow; niṣaṅga-quiver of arrows; asi-sword; gadā-club; śaṅkha-conchshell; cakra-disc; ambuja-lotus flower; śriyaḥ-decorated with; diśaḥ-all directions; vitimira-without darkness; ālokāḥ-extraordinary illumination; kurvantaḥ-exhibiting; svena-by your own; tejasā-effulgence; kim artham-what is the purpose; dharma-pālasya-of Yamarāja, the maintainer of religious principles; kiṅkarān-servants; naḥ-us; niṣedhatha-you are forbidding.





The order carriers of Yamarāja said: Your eyes are just like the petals of lotus flowers. Dressed in yellow silken garments, decorated with garlands of lotuses, and wearing very attractive helmets on your heads and earrings on your ears, you all appear fresh and youthful. Your four long arms are decorated with bows and quivers of arrows and with swords, clubs, conchshells, discs and lotus flowers. Your effulgence has dissipated the darkness of this place with extraordinary illumination. Now, sirs, why are you obstructing us?





Before even being introduced to a foreigner, one becomes acquainted with him through his dress, bodily features and behavior and can thus understand his position. Therefore when the Yamadūtas saw the Viṣṇudūtas for the first time, they were surprised. They said, "By your bodily features you appear to be very exalted gentlemen, and you have such celestial power that you have dissipated the darkness of this material world with your own effulgences. Why then should you endeavor to stop us from executing our duty?" It will be explained that the Yamadūtas, the order carriers of Yamarāja, mistakenly considered Ajāmila sinful. They did not know that although he was sinful throughout his entire life, he was purified by constantly chanting the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. In other words, unless one is a Vaiṣṇava, one cannot understand the activities of a Vaiṣṇava.



The dress and bodily features of the residents of Vaikuṇṭhaloka are properly described in these verses. The residents of Vaikuṇṭha, who are decorated with garlands and yellow silken garments, have four arms holding various weapons. Thus they conspicuously resemble Lord Viṣṇu. They have the same bodily features as Nārāyaṇa because they have attained the liberation of sārūpya, but they nevertheless act as servants. All the residents of Vaikuṇṭhaloka know perfectly well that their master is Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa, and that they are all His servants. They are all self-realized souls who are nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. Although they could conceivably declare themselves Nārāyaṇa or Viṣṇu, they never do so; they always remain Kṛṣṇa conscious and serve the Lord faithfully. Such is the atmosphere of Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Similarly, one who learns the faithful service of Lord Kṛṣṇa through the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement will always remain in Vaikuṇṭhaloka and have nothing to do with the material world.





TEXT 37



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity ukte yamadūtais te

vāsudevokta-kāriṇaḥ

tān pratyūcuḥ prahasyedaṁ

megha-nirhrādayā girā

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; ukte-being addressed; yamadūtaiḥ-by the messengers of Yamarāja; te-they; vāsudeva-ukta-kāriṇaḥ-who are always ready to execute the orders of Lord Vāsudeva (being personal associates of Lord Viṣṇu who have obtained the liberation of sālokya); tān-unto them; pratyūcuḥ-replied; prahasya-smiling; idam-this; megha-nirhrādayā-resounding like a rumbling cloud; girā-with voices.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Being thus addressed by the messengers of Yamarāja, the servants of Vāsudeva smiled and spoke the following words in voices as deep as the sound of rumbling clouds.





The Yamadūtas were surprised to see that the Viṣṇudūtas, although polite, were hindering the rule of Yamarāja. Similarly, the Viṣṇudūtas were also surprised that the Yamadūtas, although claiming to be servants of Yamarāja, the supreme judge of religious principles, were unaware of the principles of religious action. Thus the Viṣṇudūtas smiled, thinking, "What is this nonsense they are speaking? If they are actually servants of Yamarāja they should know that Ajāmila is not a suitable candidate for them to carry off."





TEXT 38



śrī-viṣṇudūtā ūcuḥ

yūyaṁ vai dharma-rājasya

yadi nirdeśa-kāriṇaḥ

brūta dharmasya nas tattvaṁ

yac cādharmasya lakṣaṇam

SYNONYMS



śrī-viṣṇudūtāḥ ūcuḥ-the blessed messengers of Lord Viṣṇu spoke; yūyam-all of you; vai-indeed; dharma-rājasya-of King Yamarāja, who knows the religious principles; yadi-if; nirdeśa-kāriṇaḥ-order carriers; brūta-just speak; dharmasya-of religious principles; naḥ-unto us; tattvam-the truth; yat-that which; ca-also; adharmasya-of impious activities; lakṣaṇam-symptoms.





The blessed messengers of Lord Viṣṇu, the Viṣṇudūtas, said: If you are actually servants of Yamarāja, you must explain to us the meaning of religious principles and the symptoms of irreligion.





This inquiry by the Viṣṇudūtas to the Yamadūtas is most important. A servant must know the instructions of his master. The servants of Yamarāja claimed to be carrying out his orders, and therefore the Viṣṇudūtas very intelligently asked them to explain the symptoms of religious and irreligious principles. A Vaiṣṇava knows these principles perfectly well because he is well acquainted with the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." Therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the actual principle of religion. Those who have surrendered to the principles of material nature instead of to Kṛṣṇa are all impious, regardless of their material position. Unaware of the principles of religion, they do not surrender to Kṛṣṇa, and therefore they are considered sinful rascals, the lowest of men, and fools bereft of all knowledge. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.15):



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ





"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me." One who has not surrendered to Kṛṣṇa does not know the true principle of religion; otherwise he would have surrendered.



The question posed by the Viṣṇudūtas was very suitable. One who represents someone else must fully know that person's mission. The devotees in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement must therefore be fully aware of the mission of Kṛṣṇa and Lord Caitanya; otherwise they will be considered foolish. All devotees, especially preachers, must know the philosophy of Kṛṣṇa consciousness so as not to be embarrassed and insulted when they preach.





TEXT 39



kathaṁ svid dhriyate daṇḍaḥ

kiṁ vāsya sthānam īpsitam

daṇḍyāḥ kiṁ kāriṇaḥ sarve

āho svit katicin nṛṇām

SYNONYMS



katham svit-by which means; dhriyate-is imposed; daṇḍaḥ-punishment; kim-what; vā-or; asya-of this; sthānam-the place; īpsitam-desirable; daṇḍyāḥ-punishable; kim-whether; kāriṇaḥ-fruitive actors; sarve-all; āho svit-or whether; katicit-some; nṛṇām-of the human beings.





What is the process of punishing others? Who are the actual candidates for punishment? Are all karmīs engaged in fruitive activities punishable, or only some of them?





One who has the power to punish others should not punish everyone. There are innumerable living entities, the majority of whom are in the spiritual world and are nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. There is no question of judging these liberated living beings. Only a small fraction of the living entities, perhaps one fourth, are in the material world. And the major portion of the living entities in the material world-8,000,000 of the 8,400,000 forms of life-are lower than human beings. They are not punishable, for under the laws of material nature they are automatically evolving. Human beings, who are advanced in consciousness, are responsible, but not all of them are punishable. Those engaged in advanced pious activities are beyond punishment. Only those who engage in sinful activities are punishable. Therefore the Viṣṇudūtas particularly inquired about who is punishable and why Yamarāja has been designated to discriminate between who is punishable and who is not. How is one to be judged? What is the basic principle of authority? These are the questions raised by the Viṣṇudūtas.





TEXT 40



yamadūtā ūcuḥ

veda-praṇihito dharmo

hy adharmas tad-viparyayaḥ

vedo nārāyaṇaḥ sākṣāt

svayambhūr iti śuśruma

SYNONYMS



yamadūtāḥ ūcuḥ-the order carriers of Yamarāja said; veda-by the four Vedas (Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva); praṇihitaḥ-prescribed; dharmaḥ-religious principles; hi-indeed; adharmaḥ-irreligious principles; tat-viparyayaḥ-the opposite of that (that which is not supported by Vedic injunctions); vedaḥ-the Vedas, books of knowledge; nārāyaṇaḥ sākṣāt-directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead (being the words of Nārāyaṇa); svayam-bhūḥ-self-born, self-sufficient (appearing only from the breath of Nārāyaṇa and not being learned from anyone else); iti-thus; śuśruma-we have heard.





The Yamadūtas replied: That which is prescribed in the Vedas constitutes dharma, the religious principles, and the opposite of that is irreligion. The Vedas are directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, and are self-born. This we have heard from Yamarāja.





The servants of Yamarāja replied quite properly. They did not manufacture principles of religion or irreligion. Instead, they explained what they had heard from the authority Yamarāja. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ: one should follow the mahājana, the authorized person. Yamarāja is one of twelve authorities. Therefore the servants of Yamarāja, the Yamadūtas, replied with perfect clarity when they said śuśruma ("we have heard"). The members of modern civilization manufacture defective religious principles through speculative concoction. This is not dharma. They do not know what is dharma and what is adharma. Therefore, as stated in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] dharma not supported by the Vedas is rejected from śrīmad-bhāgavata-dharma. Bhāgavata-dharma comprises only that which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhāgavata-dharma is sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] one must accept the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and surrender to Him and whatever He says. That is dharma. Arjuna, for example, thinking that violence was adharma, was declining to fight, but Kṛṣṇa urged him to fight. Arjuna abided by the orders of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore he is actually a dharmī because the order of Kṛṣṇa is dharma. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: "The real purpose of veda, knowledge, is to know Me." One who knows Kṛṣṇa perfectly is liberated. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." One who understands Kṛṣṇa and abides by His order is a candidate for returning home, back to Godhead. It may be concluded that dharma, religion, refers to that which is ordered in the Vedas, and adharma, irreligion, refers to that which is not supported in the Vedas.



Dharma is not actually manufactured by Nārāyaṇa. As stated in the Vedas, asya mahato bhūtasya niśvasitam etad yad ṛg-vedaḥ iti: the injunctions of dharma emanate from the breathing of Nārāyaṇa, the supreme living entity. Nārāyaṇa exists eternally and breathes eternally, and therefore dharma, the injunctions of Nārāyaṇa, also exist eternally. Śrīla Madhvācārya, the original ācārya for those who belong to the Mādhva-Gauḍīya-sampradāya, says:



vedānāṁ prathamo vaktā

harir eva yato vibhuḥ

ato viṣṇv-ātmakā vedā

ity āhur veda-vādinaḥ





The transcendental words of the Vedas emanated from the mouth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Vedic principles should be understood to be Vaiṣṇava principles because Viṣṇu is the origin of the Vedas. The Vedas contain nothing besides the instructions of Viṣṇu, and one who follows the Vedic principles is a Vaiṣṇava. The Vaiṣṇava is not a member of a manufactured community of this material world. A Vaiṣṇava is a real knower of the Vedas, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]).





TEXT 41



yena sva-dhāmny amī bhāvā

rajaḥ-sattva-tamomayāḥ

guṇa-nāma-kriyā-rūpair

vibhāvyante yathā-tatham

SYNONYMS



yena-by whom (Nārāyaṇa); sva-dhāmni-although in His own place, the spiritual world; amī-all these; bhāvāḥ-manifestations; rajaḥ-sattva-tamaḥ-mayāḥ-created by the three modes of material nature (passion, goodness and ignorance); guṇa-qualities; nāma-names; kriyā-activities; rūpaiḥ-and with forms; vibhāvyante-are variously manifested; yathā-tatham-exactly to the right point.





The supreme cause of all causes, Nārāyaṇa, is situated in His own abode in the spiritual world, but nevertheless He controls the entire cosmic manifestation according to the three modes of material nature-sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. In this way all living entities are awarded different qualities, different names [such as brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and vaiśya], different duties according to the varṇāśrama institution, and different forms. Thus Nārāyaṇa is the cause of the entire cosmic manifestation.





The Vedas inform us:



na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca





(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8)



Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is almighty, omnipotent. He has multifarious energies, and therefore He is able to remain in His own abode and without endeavor supervise and manipulate the entire cosmic manifestation through the interaction of the three modes of material nature-sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa. These interactions create different forms, bodies, activities and changes, which all occur perfectly. Because the Lord is perfect, everything works as if He were directly supervising and taking part in it. Atheistic men, however, being covered by the three modes of material nature, cannot see Nārāyaṇa to be the supreme cause behind all activities. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.13):



tribhir guṇamayair bhāvair

ebhiḥ sarvam idaṁ jagat

mohitaṁ nābhijānāti

mām ebhyaḥ param avyayam





"Deluded by the three modes, the whole world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible." Because unintelligent agnostics are mohita, illusioned by the three modes of material nature, they cannot understand that Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, is the supreme cause of all activities. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1):



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam





"Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes."





TEXT 42



sūryo 'gniḥ khaṁ marud devaḥ

somaḥ sandhyāhanī diśaḥ

kaṁ kuḥ svayaṁ dharma iti

hy ete daihyasya sākṣiṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



sūryaḥ-the sun-god; agniḥ-the fire; kham-the sky; marut-the air; devaḥ-the demigods; somaḥ-the moon; sandhyā-evening; ahanī-the day and night; diśaḥ-the directions; kam-the water; kuḥ-the land; svayam-personally; dharmaḥ-Yamarāja or the Supersoul; iti-thus; hi-indeed; ete-all of these; daihyasya-of a living entity embodied in the material elements; sākṣiṇaḥ-witnesses.





The sun, fire, sky, air, demigods, moon, evening, day, night, directions, water, land and Supersoul Himself all witness the activities of the living entity.





The members of some religious sects, especially Christians, do not believe in the reactions of karma. We once had a discussion with a learned Christian professor who argued that although people are generally punished after the witnesses of their misdeeds are examined, where are the witnesses responsible for one's suffering the reactions of past karma? To such a person the answer by the Yamadūtas is given here. A conditioned soul thinks that he is working stealthily and that no one can see his sinful activities, but we can understand from the śāstras that there are many witnesses, including the sun, fire, sky, air, moon, demigods, evening, day, night, directions, water, land and the Supersoul Himself, who sits with the individual soul within his heart. Where is the dearth of witnesses? The witnesses and the Supreme Lord both exist, and therefore so many living entities are elevated to higher planetary systems or degraded to lower planetary systems, including the hellish planets. There are no discrepancies, for everything is arranged perfectly by the management of the Supreme God (svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca). The witnesses mentioned in this verse are also mentioned in other Vedic literatures:



āditya-candrāv anilo 'nalaś ca

dyaur bhūmir āpo hṛdayaṁ yamaś ca

ahaś ca rātriś ca ubhe ca sandhye

dharmo 'pi jānāti narasya vṛttam





TEXT 43



etair adharmo vijñātaḥ

sthānaṁ daṇḍasya yujyate

sarve karmānurodhena

daṇḍam arhanti kāriṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



etaiḥ-by all these (witnesses, beginning from the sun-god); adharmaḥ-deviation from the regulative principles; vijñātaḥ-is known; sthānam-the proper place; daṇḍasya-of punishment; yujyate-is accepted as; sarve-all; karma-anurodhena-with consideration of the activities performed; daṇḍam-punishment; arhanti-deserve; kāriṇaḥ-the performers of sinful activities.





The candidates for punishment are those who are confirmed by these many witnesses to have deviated from their prescribed regulative duties. Everyone engaged in fruitive activities is suitable to be subjected to punishment according to his sinful acts.





TEXT 44



sambhavanti hi bhadrāṇi

viparītāni cānaghāḥ

kāriṇāṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sti

dehavān na hy akarma-kṛt

SYNONYMS



sambhavanti-there are; hi-indeed; bhadrāṇi-auspicious, pious activities; viparītāni-just the opposite (inauspicious, sinful activities); ca-also; anaghāḥ-O sinless inhabitants of Vaikuṇṭha; kāriṇām-of the fruitive workers; guṇa-saṅgaḥ-contamination of the three modes of nature; asti-there is; deha-vān-anyone who has accepted this material body; na-not; hi-indeed; akarma-kṛt-without performing action.





O inhabitants of Vaikuṇṭha, you are sinless, but those within this material world are all karmīs, whether acting piously or impiously. Both kinds of action are possible for them because they are contaminated by the three modes of nature and must act accordingly. One who has accepted a material body cannot be inactive, and sinful action is inevitable for one acting under the modes of material nature. Therefore all the living entities within this material world are punishable.





The difference between human beings and nonhuman beings is that a human is supposed to act according to the direction of the Vedas. Unfortunately, men manufacture their own ways of acting, without reference to the Vedas. Therefore all of them commit sinful actions and are punishable.





TEXT 45



yena yāvān yathādharmo

dharmo veha samīhitaḥ

sa eva tat-phalaṁ bhuṅkte

tathā tāvad amutra vai

SYNONYMS



yena-by which person; yāvān-to which extent; yathā-in which manner; adharmaḥ-irreligious activities; dharmaḥ-religious activities; vā-or; iha-in this life; samīhitaḥ-performed; saḥ-that person; eva-indeed; tat-phalam-the particular result of that; bhuṅkte-enjoys or suffers; tathā-in that way; tāvat-to that extent; amutra-in the next life; vai-indeed.





In proportion to the extent of one's religious or irreligious actions in this life, one must enjoy or suffer the corresponding reactions of his karma in the next.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (14.18):



ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā

madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ

jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā

adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ





Those who act in the mode of goodness are promoted to higher planetary systems to become demigods, those who act in an ordinary way and do not commit excessively sinful acts remain within this middle planetary system, and those who perform abominable sinful actions must go down to hellish life.





TEXT 46



yatheha deva-pravarās

trai-vidhyam upalabhyate

bhūteṣu guṇa-vaicitryāt

tathānyatrānumīyate

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; iha-in this life; deva-pravarāḥ-O best of the demigods; trai-vidhyam-three kinds of attributes; upalabhyate-are achieved; bhūteṣu-among all living entities; guṇa-vaicitryāt-because of the diversity of the contamination by the three modes of nature; tathā-similarly; anyatra-in other places; anumīyate-it is inferred.





O best of the demigods, we can see three different varieties of life, which are due to the contamination of the three modes of nature. The living entities are thus known as peaceful, restless and foolish; as happy, unhappy or in-between; or as religious, irreligious and semireligious. We can deduce that in the next life these three kinds of material nature will similarly act.





The actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature are visible in this life. For example, some people are very happy, some are very distressed, and some are in mixed happiness and distress. This is the result of past association with the modes of material nature-goodness, passion and ignorance. Since these varieties are visible in this life, we may assume that the living entities, according to their association with the different modes of material nature, will be happy, distressed or between the two in their next lives also. Therefore the best policy is to disassociate oneself from the three modes of material nature and be always transcendental to their contamination. This is possible only when one fully engages in the devotional service of the Lord. As Kṛṣṇa confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down under any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the spiritual platform." Unless one is fully absorbed in the service of the Lord, one is subject to the contamination of the three modes of material nature and must therefore suffer from distress or mixed happiness and distress.





TEXT 47



vartamāno 'nyayoḥ kālo

guṇābhijñāpako yathā

evaṁ janmānyayor etad

dharmādharma-nidarśanam

SYNONYMS



vartamānaḥ-the present; anyayoḥ-of the past and future; kālaḥ-time; guṇa-abhijñāpakaḥ-making known the qualities; yathā-just as; evam-thus; janma-birth; anyayoḥ-of the past and future births; etat-this; dharma-religious principles; adharma-irreligious principles; nidarśanam-indicating.





Just as springtime in the present indicates the nature of springtimes in the past and future, so this life of happiness, distress or a mixture of both gives evidence concerning the religious and irreligious activities of one's past and future lives.





Our past and future are not very difficult to understand, for time is under the contamination of the three modes of material nature. As soon as spring arrives, the usual exhibition of various types of fruits and flowers automatically becomes manifest, and therefore we may conclude that spring in the past was adorned with similar fruits and flowers and will be so adorned in the future also. Our repetition of birth and death is taking place within time, and according to the influence of the modes of nature, we are receiving various types of bodies and being subjected to various conditions.





TEXT 48



manasaiva pure devaḥ

pūrva-rūpaṁ vipaśyati

anumīmāṁsate 'pūrvaṁ

manasā bhagavān ajaḥ

SYNONYMS



manasā-by the mind; eva-indeed; pure-in his abode, or within everyone's heart like the Supersoul; devaḥ-the demigod Yamarāja (dīvyatīti devaḥ, one who is always brilliant and illuminated is called deva); pūrva-rūpam-the past religious or irreligious condition; vipaśyati-completely observes; anumīmāṁsate-he considers; apūrvam-the future condition; manasā-with his mind; bhagavān-who is omnipotent; ajaḥ-as good as Lord Brahmā.





The omnipotent Yamarāja is as good as Lord Brahmā, for while situated in his own abode or in everyone's heart like the Paramātmā, he mentally observes the past activities of a living entity and thus understands how the living entity will act in future lives.





One should not consider Yamarāja an ordinary living being. He is as good as Lord Brahmā. He has the complete cooperation of the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart, and therefore, by the grace of the Supersoul, he can see the past, present and future of a living being from within. The word anumīmāṁsate means that he can decide in consultation with the Supersoul. Anu means "following." The actual decisions concerning the next lives of the living entities are made by the Supersoul, and they are carried out by Yamarāja.





TEXT 49



yathājñas tamasā yukta

upāste vyaktam eva hi

na veda pūrvam aparaṁ

naṣṭa-janma-smṛtis tathā

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; ajñaḥ-an ignorant living being; tamasā-in sleep; yuktaḥ-engaged; upāste-acts according to; vyaktam-a body manifested in a dream; eva-certainly; hi-indeed; na veda-does not know; pūrvam-the past body; aparam-the next body; naṣṭa-lost; janma-smṛtiḥ-the remembrance of birth; tathā-similarly.





As a sleeping person acts according to the body manifested in his dreams and accepts it to be himself, so one identifies with his present body, which he acquired because of his past religious or irreligious actions, and is unable to know his past or future lives.





A man engages in sinful activities because he does not know what he did in his past life to get his present materially conditioned body, which is subjected to the threefold miseries. As stated by Ṛṣabhadeva in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.4), nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma: a human being who is mad after sense gratification does not hesitate to act sinfully. Yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti: he performs sinful actions simply for sense gratification. Na sādhu manye: this is not good. Yata ātmano 'yam asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ: because of such sinful actions, one receives another body in which to suffer as he is suffering in his present body because of his past sinful activities.



It should be understood that a person who does not have Vedic knowledge always acts in ignorance of what he has done in the past, what he is doing at the present and how he will suffer in the future. He is completely in darkness. Therefore the Vedic injunction is, tamasi mā: "Don't remain in darkness." Jyotir gama: "Try to go to the light." The light or illumination is Vedic knowledge, which one can understand when he is elevated to the mode of goodness or when he transcends the mode of goodness by engaging in devotional service to the spiritual master and the Supreme Lord. This is described in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23):



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

[ŚU yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ





"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically revealed." (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23)



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ





"No one can understand Kṛṣṇa as He is by the blunt material senses. But He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their transcendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram





"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55)



These are Vedic instructions. One must have full faith in the words of the spiritual master and similar faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the real knowledge of ātmā and Paramātmā and the distinction between matter and spirit will be automatically revealed. This ātma-tattva, or spiritual knowledge, will be revealed within the core of a devotee's heart because of his having taken shelter of the lotus feet of a mahājana such as Prahlāda Mahārāja.6.23]



"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically revealed." The Vedas enjoin, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet: [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12] one must approach a spiritual master who has full knowledge of the Vedas and be faithfully directed by him in order to become a devotee of the Lord. Then the knowledge of the Vedas will be revealed. When the Vedic knowledge is revealed, one need no longer remain in the darkness of material nature.



According to his association with the material modes of nature-goodness, passion and ignorance-a living entity gets a particular type of body. The example of one who associates with the mode of goodness is a qualified brāhmaṇa. Such a brāhmaṇa knows past, present and future because he consults the Vedic literature and sees through the eyes of śāstra (śāstra-cakṣuḥ). He can understand what his past life was, why be is in the present body, and how he can obtain liberation from the clutches of māyā and not accept another material body. This is all possible when one is situated in the mode of goodness. Generally, however, the living entities are engrossed in the modes of passion and ignorance.



In any case, one receives an inferior or superior body at the discretion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramātmā. As stated in the previous verse:



manasaiva pure devaḥ

pūrva-rūpaṁ vipaśyati

anumīmāṁsate 'pūrvaṁ

manasā bhagavān ajaḥ





Everything depends on bhagavān, or ajaḥ, the unborn. Why doesn't one please Bhagavān to receive a better body? The answer is ajñas tamasā: because of gross ignorance. One who is in complete darkness cannot know what his past life was or what his next life will be; he is simply interested in his present body. Even though he has a human body, a person in the mode of ignorance and interested only in his present body is like an animal, for an animal, being covered by ignorance, thinks that the ultimate goal of life and happiness is to eat as much as possible. A human being must be educated to understand his past life and how he can endeavor for a better life in the future. There is even a book, called Bhṛgu-saṁhitā, which reveals information about one's past, present and future lives according to astrological calculations. Somehow or other one must be enlightened about his past, present and future. One who is interested only in his present body and who tries to enjoy his senses to the fullest extent is understood to be engrossed in the mode of ignorance. His future is very, very dark. Indeed, the future is always dark for one who is grossly covered by ignorance. Especially in this age, human society is covered by the mode of ignorance, and therefore everyone thinks his present body to be everything, without consideration of the past or future.





TEXT 50



pañcabhiḥ kurute svārthān

pañca vedātha pañcabhiḥ

ekas tu ṣoḍaśena trīn

svayaṁ saptadaśo 'śnute

SYNONYMS



pañcabhiḥ-with the five working senses (voice, arms, legs, anus and genitals); kurute-performs; sva-arthān-his desired interests; pañca-the five objects of the senses (sound, form, touch, aroma and taste); veda-knows; atha-thus; pañcabhiḥ-by the five senses of perception (hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting and feeling); ekaḥ-the one; tu-but; ṣoḍaśena-by these fifteen items and the mind; trīn-the three categories of experience (happiness, distress and a mixture of both); svayam-he, the living entity himself; saptadaśaḥ-the seventeenth item; aśnute-enjoys.





Above the five senses of perception, the five working senses and the five objects of the senses is the mind, which is the sixteenth element. Above the mind is the seventeenth element, the soul, the living being himself, who, in cooperation with the other sixteen, enjoys the material world alone. The living being enjoys three kinds of situations, namely happy, distressful and mixed.





Everyone engages in work with his hands, legs and other senses just to achieve a certain goal according to his concocted ideas. One tries to enjoy the five sense objects, namely form, sound, taste, aroma and touch, not knowing the actual goal of life, which is to satisfy the Supreme Lord. Because of disobeying the Supreme Lord, one is put into material conditions, and he then tries to improve his situation in a concocted way, not desiring to follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nevertheless, the Supreme Lord is so kind that He comes Himself to instruct the bewildered living entity how to act obediently and then gradually return home, back to Godhead, where he can attain an eternal, peaceful life of bliss and knowledge. The living entity has a body, which is a very complicated combination of the material elements, and with this body he struggles alone, as indicated in this verse by the words ekas tu. For example, if one is struggling in the ocean, he must swim through it alone. Although many other men and aquatics are swimming in the ocean, he must take care of himself because no one else will help him. Therefore this verse indicates that the seventeenth item, the soul, must work alone. Although he tries to create society, friendship and love, no one will be able to help him but Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. Therefore his only concern should be how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa. That is also what Kṛṣṇa wants (sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]). People bewildered by material conditions try to be united, but although they strive for unity among men and nations, all their attempts are futile. Everyone must struggle alone for existence with the many elements of nature. Therefore one's only hope, as Kṛṣṇa advises, is to surrender to Him, for He can help one become free from the ocean of nescience. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore prayed:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





"O Kṛṣṇa, beloved son of Nanda Mahārāja, I am Your eternal servant, but somehow or other I have fallen into this ocean of nescience, and although I am struggling very hard, there is no way I can save myself. If You kindly pick me up and fix me as one of the particles of dust at Your lotus feet, that will save me."



In a similar way, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sang:



anādi karama-phale, paḍi' bhavārṇava-jale,

taribāre nā dekhi upāya

"My dear Lord, I cannot remember when I somehow or other fell into this ocean of nescience, and now I can find no way to rescue myself." We should remember that everyone is responsible for his own life. If an individual becomes a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he is then delivered from the ocean of nescience.





TEXT 51



tad etat ṣoḍaśa-kalaṁ

liṅgaṁ śakti-trayaṁ mahat

dhatte 'nusaṁsṛtiṁ puṁsi

harṣa-śoka-bhayārtidām

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; etat-this; ṣoḍaśa-kalam-made of sixteen parts (namely the ten senses, the mind and the five sense objects); liṅgam-the subtle body; śakti-trayam-the effect of the three modes of material nature; mahat-insurmountable; dhatte-gives; anusaṁsṛtim-almost perpetual rotation and transmigration in different types of bodies; puṁsi-unto the living entity; harṣa-jubilation; śoka-lamentation; bhaya-fear; ārti-misery; dām-which gives.





The subtle body is endowed with sixteen parts-the five knowledge-acquiring senses, the five working senses, the five objects of sense gratification, and the mind. This subtle body is an effect of the three modes of material nature. It is composed of insurmountably strong desires, and therefore it causes the living entity to transmigrate from one body to another in human life, animal life and life as a demigod. When the living entity gets the body of a demigod, he is certainly very jubilant, when he gets a human body he is always in lamentation, and when he gets the body of an animal, he is always afraid. In all conditions, however, he is actually miserable. His miserable condition is called saṁsṛti, or transmigration in material life.





The sum and substance of material conditional life is explained in this verse. The living entity, the seventeenth element, is struggling alone, life after life. This struggle is called saṁsṛti, or material conditional life. In Bhagavad-gītā it is said that the force of material nature is insurmountably strong (daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā). Material nature harasses the living entity in different bodies, but if the living entity surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes free from this entanglement, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]). Thus his life becomes successful.





TEXT 52



dehy ajño 'jita-ṣaḍ-vargo

necchan karmāṇi kāryate

kośakāra ivātmānaṁ

karmaṇācchādya muhyati

SYNONYMS



dehī-the embodied soul; ajñaḥ-without perfect knowledge; ajita-ṣaṭ-vargaḥ-who has not controlled the senses of perception and the mind; na icchan-without desiring; karmāṇi-activities for material benefit; kāryate-is caused to perform; kośakāraḥ-the silkworm; iva-like; ātmānam-himself; karmaṇā-by fruitive activities; ācchādya-covering; muhyati-becomes bewildered.





The foolish embodied living entity, inept at controlling his senses and mind, is forced to act according to the influence of the modes of material nature, against his desires. He is like a silkworm that uses its own saliva to create a cocoon and then becomes trapped in it, with no possibility of getting out. The living entity traps himself in a network of his own fruitive activities and then can find no way to release himself. Thus he is always bewildered, and repeatedly he dies.





As already explained, the influence of the modes of nature is very strong. The living entity entangled in different types of fruitive activity is like a silkworm trapped in a cocoon. Getting free is very difficult unless he is helped by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 53



na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api

jātu tiṣṭhaty akarma-kṛt

kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma

guṇaiḥ svābhāvikair balāt

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; kaścit-anyone; kṣaṇam api-even for a moment; jātu-at any time; tiṣṭhati-remains; akarma-kṛt-without doing anything; kāryate-he is caused to perform; hi-indeed; avaśaḥ-automatically; karma-fruitive activities; guṇaiḥ-by the three modes of nature; svābhāvikaiḥ-which are produced by his own tendencies in previous lives; balāt-by force.





Not a single living entity can remain unengaged even for a moment. One must act by his natural tendency according to the three modes of material nature because this natural tendency forcibly makes him work in a particular way.





The svābhāvika, or one's natural tendency, is the most important factor in action. One's natural tendency is to serve because a living entity is an eternal servant of God. The living entity wants to serve, but because of his forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord, he serves under the modes of material nature and manufactures various modes of service, such as socialism, humanitarianism and altruism. However, one should be enlightened in the tenets of Bhagavad-gītā and accept the instruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that one give up all natural tendencies for material service under different names and take to the service of the Lord. One's original natural tendency is to act in Kṛṣṇa consciousness because one's real nature is spiritual. The duty of a human being is to understand that since he is essentially spirit, he must abide by the spiritual tendency and not be carried away by material tendencies. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has therefore sung:



(miche) māyāra vaśe, yāccha bhese',

khāccha hābuḍubu, bhāi

"My dear brothers, you are being carried away by the waves of material energy and are suffering in many miserable conditions. Sometimes you are drowning in the waves of material nature, and sometimes you are tossed like a swimmer struggling in the ocean." As confirmed by Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, this tendency to be battered by the waves of māyā can be changed to one's original, natural tendency, which is spiritual, when the living entity comes to understand that he is eternally kṛṣṇa-dāsa, a servant of God, Kṛṣṇa.



(jīva) kṛṣṇa-dāsa, ei viśvāsa,

karle ta' āra duḥkha nāi

If instead of serving māyā under different names, one turns his service attitude toward the Supreme Lord, he is then safe, and there is no more difficulty. If one returns to his original, natural tendency in the human form of life by understanding the perfect knowledge given by Kṛṣṇa Himself in the Vedic literature, one's life is successful.





TEXT 54



labdhvā nimittam avyaktaṁ

vyaktāvyaktaṁ bhavaty uta

yathā-yoni yathā-bījaṁ

svabhāvena balīyasā

SYNONYMS



labdhvā-having gotten; nimittam-the cause; avyaktam-unseen or unknown to the person; vyakta-avyaktam-manifested and unmanifested, or the gross body and the subtle body; bhavati-come into being; uta-certainly; yathā-yoni-exactly like the mother; yathā-bījam-exactly like the father; sva-bhāvena-by the natural tendency; balīyasā-which is very powerful.





The fruitive activities a living being performs, whether pious or impious, are the unseen cause for the fulfillment of his desires. This unseen cause is the root for the living entity's different bodies. Because of his intense desire, the living entity takes birth in a particular family and receives a body which is either like that of his mother or like that of his father. The gross and subtle bodies are created according to his desire.





The gross body is a product of the subtle body. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (8.6):



yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ





"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail." The atmosphere of the subtle body at the time of death is created by the activities of the gross body. Thus the gross body acts during one's lifetime, and the subtle body acts at the time of death. The subtle body, which is called liṅga, the body of desire, is the background for the development of a particular type of gross body, which is either like that of one's mother or like that of one's father. According to the Ṛg Veda, if at the time of sex the secretions of the mother are more profuse than those of the father, the child will receive a female body, and if the secretions of the father are more profuse than those of the mother, the child will receive a male body. These are the subtle laws of nature, which act according to the desire of the living entity. If a human being is taught to change his subtle body by developing a consciousness of Kṛṣṇa, at the time of death the subtle body will create a gross body in which he will be a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, or if he is still more perfect, he will not take another material body but will immediately get a spiritual body and thus return home, back to Godhead. This is the process of the transmigration of the soul. Therefore instead of trying to unite human society through pacts for sense gratification that can never be achieved, it is clearly desirable to teach people how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious and return home, back to Godhead. This is true now and, indeed, at any time.





TEXT 55



eṣa prakṛti-saṅgena

puruṣasya viparyayaḥ

āsīt sa eva na cirād

īśa-saṅgād vilīyate

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this; prakṛti-saṅgena-because of association with the material nature; puruṣasya-of the living entity; viparyayaḥ-a situation of forgetfulness or an awkward position; āsīt-came to be; saḥ-that position; eva-indeed; na-not; cirāt-taking a long time; īśa-saṅgāt-from the association of the Supreme Lord; vilīyate-is vanquished.





Since the living entity is associated with material nature, he is in an awkward position, but if in the human form of life he is taught how to associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His devotee, this position can be overcome.





The word prakṛti means material nature, and puruṣa may also refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one wants to continue his association with prakṛti, the female energy of Kṛṣṇa, and be separated from Kṛṣṇa by the illusion that he is able to enjoy prakṛti, he must continue in his conditional life. If he changes his consciousness, however, and associates with the supreme, original person (puruṣaṁ śāśvatam), or with His associates, he can get out of the entanglement of material nature. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9), janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ: one must simply understand the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa, in terms of His form, name, activities and pastimes. This will keep one always in the association of Kṛṣṇa. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so'rjuna: [Bg. 4.9] thus after giving up his gross material body, one accepts not another gross body but a spiritual body in which to return home, back to Godhead. Thus one ends the tribulation caused by his association with the material energy. In summary, the living entity is an eternal servant of God, but he comes to the material world and is bound by material conditions because of his desire to lord it over matter. Liberation means giving up this false consciousness and reviving one's original service to the Lord. This return to one's original life is called mukti, as confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ).





TEXTS 56–57



ayaṁ hi śruta-sampannaḥ

śīla-vṛtta-guṇālayaḥ

dhṛta-vrato mṛdur dāntaḥ

satya-vāṅ mantra-vic chuciḥ

gurv-agny-atithi-vṛddhānāṁ



śuśrūṣur anahaṅkṛtaḥ

sarva-bhūta-suhṛt sādhur

mita-vāg anasūyakaḥ

SYNONYMS



ayam-this person (known as Ajāmila); hi-indeed; śruta-sampannaḥ-well educated in Vedic knowledge; śīla-of good character; vṛtta-good conduct; guṇa-and good qualities; ālayaḥ-the reservoir; dhṛta-vrataḥ-fixed in the execution of the Vedic injunctions; mṛduḥ-very mild; dāntaḥ-completely controlling the mind and senses; satya-vāk-always truthful; mantra-vit-knowing how to chant the Vedic hymns; śuciḥ-always very neat and clean; guru-the spiritual master; agni-the fire-god; atithi-guests; vṛddhānām-and of the old household members; śuśrūṣuḥ-very respectfully engaged in the service; anahaṅkṛtaḥ-without pride or false prestige; sarva-bhūta-suhṛt-friendly to all living entities; sādhuḥ-well behaved (no one could find any fault in his character); mita-vāk-talking with great care not to speak nonsense; anasūyakaḥ-not envious.





In the beginning this brāhmaṇa named Ajāmila studied all the Vedic literatures. He was a reservoir of good character, good conduct and good qualities. Firmly established in executing all the Vedic injunctions, he was very mild and gentle, and he kept his mind and senses under control. Furthermore, he was always truthful, he knew how to chant the Vedic mantras, and he was also very pure. Ajāmila was very respectful to his spiritual master, the fire-god, guests, and the elderly members of his household. Indeed, he was free from false prestige. He was upright, benevolent to all living entities, and well behaved. He would never speak nonsense or envy anyone.





The order carriers of Yamarāja, the Yamadūtas, are explaining the factual position of piety and impiety and how a living entity is entangled in this material world. Describing the history of Ajāmila's life, the Yamadūtas relate that in the beginning he was a learned scholar of the Vedic literature. He was well behaved, neat and clean, and very kind to everyone. In fact, he had all good qualities. In other words, he was like a perfect brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa is expected to be perfectly pious, to follow all the regulative principles and to have all good qualities. The symptoms of piety are explained in these verses. Śrīla Vīrarāghava Ācārya comments that dhṛta-vrata means dhṛtaṁ vrataṁ strī-saṅga-rāhityātmaka-brahmacarya-rūpam. In other words, Ajāmila followed the rules and regulations of celibacy as a perfect brahmacārī and was very softhearted, truthful, clean and pure. How he fell down in spite of all these qualities and thus came to be threatened with punishment by Yamarāja will be described in the following verses.





TEXTS 58–60



ekadāsau vanaṁ yātaḥ

pitṛ-sandeśa-kṛd dvijaḥ

ādāya tata āvṛttaḥ

phala-puṣpa-samit-kuśān

dadarśa kāminaṁ kañcic



chūdraṁ saha bhujiṣyayā

pītvā ca madhu maireyaṁ

madāghūrṇita-netrayā

mattayā viślathan-nīvyā



vyapetaṁ nirapatrapam

krīḍantam anugāyantaṁ

hasantam anayāntike

SYNONYMS



ekadā-once upon a time; asau-this Ajāmila; vanam yātaḥ-went to the forest; pitṛ-of his father; sandeśa-the order; kṛt-carrying out; dvijaḥ-the brāhmaṇa; ādāya-collecting; tataḥ-from the forest; āvṛttaḥ-returning; phala-puṣpa-fruits and flowers; samit-kuśān-two kinds of grass, known as samit and kuśa; dadarśa-saw; kāminam-very lusty; kañcit-someone; śūdram-a fourth-class man, a śūdra; saha-along with; bhujiṣyayā-an ordinary maidservant or prostitute; pītvā-after drinking; ca-also; madhu-nectar; maireyam-made of the soma flower; mada-by intoxication; āghūrṇita-moving; netrayā-her eyes; mattayā-intoxicated; viślathat-nīvyā-whose dress was slackened; vyapetam-fallen from proper behavior; nirapatrapam-without fear of public opinion; krīḍantam-engaged in enjoyment; anugāyantam-singing; hasantam-smiling; anayā-with her; antike-close by.





Once this brāhmaṇa Ajāmila, following the order of his father, went to the forest to collect fruit, flowers and two kinds of grass, called samit and kuśa. On the way home, he came upon a śūdra, a very lusty, fourth-class man, who was shamelessly embracing and kissing a prostitute. The śūdra was smiling, singing and enjoying as if this were proper behavior. Both the śūdra and the prostitute were drunk. The prostitute's eyes were rolling in intoxication, and her dress had become loose. Such was the condition in which Ajāmila saw them.





While traveling along the public way, Ajāmila came upon a fourth-class man and a prostitute, who are vividly described here. Drunkenness was sometimes manifest even in bygone ages, although not very frequently. In this age of Kali, however, such sin is to be seen everywhere, for people all over the world have become shameless. Long ago, when he saw the scene of the drunken śūdra and the prostitute, Ajāmila, who was a perfect brahmacārī, was affected. Nowadays such sin is visible in so many places, and we must consider the position of a brahmacārī student who sees such behavior. For such a brahmacārī to remain steady is very difficult unless he is extremely strong in following the regulative principles. Nevertheless, if one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness very seriously, he can withstand the provocation created by sin. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we prohibit illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. In Kali-yuga, a drunk, half-naked woman embracing a drunk man is a very common sight, especially in the Western countries, and restraining oneself after seeing such things is very difficult. Nevertheless, if by the grace of Kṛṣṇa one adheres to the regulative principles and chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, Kṛṣṇa will certainly protect him. Indeed, Kṛṣṇa says that His devotee is never vanquished (kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati). Therefore all the disciples practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness should obediently follow the regulative principles and remain fixed in chanting the holy name of the Lord. Then there need be no fear. Otherwise one's position is very dangerous, especially in this Kali-yuga.





TEXT 61



dṛṣṭvā tāṁ kāma-liptena

bāhunā parirambhitām

jagāma hṛc-chaya-vaśaṁ

sahasaiva vimohitaḥ

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭvā-by seeing; tām-her (the prostitute); kāma-liptena-decorated with turmeric to incite lusty desires; bāhunā-with the arm; parirambhitām-embraced; jagāma-went; hṛt-śaya-of lusty desires within the heart; vaśam-under the control; sahasā-suddenly; eva-indeed; vimohitaḥ-being illusioned.





The śūdra, his arm decorated with turmeric powder, was embracing the prostitute. When Ajāmila saw her, the dormant lusty desires in his heart awakened, and in illusion he fell under their control.





It is said that if one's body is smeared with turmeric, it attracts the lusty desires of the opposite sex. The word kāma-liptena indicates that the śūdra was decorated with turmeric smeared on his body.





TEXT 62



stambhayann ātmanātmānaṁ

yāvat sattvaṁ yathā-śrutam

na śaśāka samādhātuṁ

mano madana-vepitam

SYNONYMS



stambhayan-trying to control; ātmanā-by the intelligence; ātmānam-the mind; yāvat sattvam-as far as possible for him; yathā-śrutam-by remembering the instruction (of celibacy, brahmacarya, not even to see a woman); na-not; śaśāka-was able; samādhātum-to restrain; manaḥ-the mind; madana-vepitam-agitated by Cupid or lusty desire.





As far as possible he patiently tried to remember the instructions of the śāstras not even to see a woman. With the help of this knowledge and his intellect, he tried to control his lusty desires, but because of the force of Cupid within his heart, he failed to control his mind.





Unless one is very strong in knowledge, patience and proper bodily, mental and intellectual behavior, controlling one's lusty desires is extremely difficult. Thus after seeing a man embracing a young woman and practically doing everything required for sex life, even a fully qualified brāhmaṇa, as described above, could not control his lusty desires and restrain himself from pursuing them. Because of the force of materialistic life, to maintain self-control is extremely difficult unless one is specifically under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead through devotional service.





TEXT 63



tan-nimitta-smara-vyāja-

graha-grasto vicetanaḥ

tām eva manasā dhyāyan

sva-dharmād virarāma ha

SYNONYMS



tat-nimitta-caused by the sight of her; smara-vyāja-taking advantage of his thinking of her always; graha-grastaḥ-being caught by an eclipse; vicetanaḥ-having completely forgotten his real position; tām-her; eva-certainly; manasā-by the mind; dhyāyan-meditating upon; sva-dharmāt-from the regulative principles executed by a brāhmaṇa; virarāma ha-he completely ceased.





In the same way that the sun and moon are eclipsed by a low planet, the brāhmaṇa lost all his good sense. Taking advantage of this situation, he always thought of the prostitute, and within a short time he took her as a servant in his house and abandoned all the regulative principles of a brāhmaṇa.





By speaking this verse, Śukadeva Gosvāmī wants to impress upon the mind of the reader that Ajāmila's exalted position as a brāhmaṇa was vanquished by his association with the prostitute, so much so that he forgot all his brahminical activities. Nevertheless, at the end of his life, by chanting the four syllables of the name Nārāyaṇa, he was saved from the gravest danger of falling down. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt: even a little devotional service can save one from the greatest danger. Devotional service, which begins with chanting of the holy name of the Lord, is so powerful that even if one falls down from the exalted position of a brāhmaṇa through sexual indulgence, he can be saved from all calamities if he somehow or other chants the holy name of the Lord. This is the extraordinary power of the Lord's holy name. Therefore in Bhagavad-gītā it is advised that one not forget the chanting of the holy name even for a moment (satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ [Bg. 9.14]). There are so many dangers in this material world that one may fall down from an exalted position at any time. Yet if one keeps himself always pure and steady by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, he will be safe without a doubt.





TEXT 64



tām eva toṣayām āsa

pitryeṇārthena yāvatā

grāmyair manoramaiḥ kāmaiḥ

prasīdeta yathā tathā

SYNONYMS



tām-her (the prostitute); eva-indeed; toṣayām āsa-he tried to please; pitryeṇa-he got from his father's hard labor; arthena-by the money; yāvatā-as long as possible; grāmyaiḥ-material; manaḥ-ramaiḥ-pleasing to her mind; kāmaiḥ-by presentations for sense enjoyment; prasīdeta-she would be satisfied; yathā-so that; tathā-in that way.





Thus Ajāmila began spending whatever money he had inherited from his father to satisfy the prostitute with various material presentations so that she would remain pleased with him. He gave up all his brahminical activities to satisfy the prostitute.





There are many instances throughout the world in which even a purified person, being attracted by a prostitute, spends all the money he has inherited. Prostitute hunting is so abominable that the desire for sex with a prostitute can ruin one's character, destroy one's exalted position and plunder all one's money. Therefore illicit sex is strictly prohibited. One should be satisfied with his married wife, for even a slight deviation will create havoc. A Kṛṣṇa conscious gṛhastha should always remember this. He should always be satisfied with one wife and be peaceful simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Otherwise at any moment he may fall down from his good position, as exemplified in the case of Ajāmila.





TEXT 65



viprāṁ sva-bhāryām aprauḍhāṁ

kule mahati lambhitām

visasarjācirāt pāpaḥ

svairiṇyāpāṅga-viddha-dhīḥ

SYNONYMS



viprām-the daughter of a brāhmaṇa; sva-bhāryām-his wife; aprauḍhām-not very old (youthful); kule-from a family; mahati-very respectable; lambhitām-married; visasarja-he gave up; acirāt-very soon; pāpaḥ-being sinful; svairiṇyā-of the prostitute; apāṅga-viddha-dhīḥ-his intelligence pierced by the lustful glance.





Because his intelligence was pierced by the lustful glance of the prostitute, the victimized brāhmaṇa Ajāmila engaged in sinful acts in her association. He even gave up the company of his very beautiful young wife, who came from a very respectable brāhmaṇa family.





Customarily everyone is eligible to inherit his father's property, and Ajāmila also inherited the money of his father. But what did he do with the money? Instead of engaging the money in the service of Kṛṣṇa, he engaged it in the service of a prostitute. Therefore he was condemned and was punishable by Yamarāja. How did this happen? He was victimized by the dangerous lustful glance of a prostitute.





TEXT 66



yatas tataś copaninye

nyāyato 'nyāyato dhanam

babhārāsyāḥ kuṭumbinyāḥ

kuṭumbaṁ manda-dhīr ayam

SYNONYMS



yataḥ tataḥ-wherever possible, however possible; ca-and; upaninye-he got; nyāyataḥ-properly; anyāyataḥ-improperly; dhanam-money; babhāra-he maintained; asyāḥ-of her; kuṭum-binyāḥ-possessing many sons and daughters; kuṭumbam-the family; manda-dhīḥ-bereft of all intelligence; ayam-this person (Ajāmila).





Although born of a brāhmaṇa family, this rascal, bereft of intelligence because of the prostitute's association, earned money somehow or other, regardless of whether properly or improperly, and used it to maintain the prostitute's sons and daughters.





TEXT 67



yad asau śāstram ullaṅghya

svaira-cāry ati-garhitaḥ

avartata ciraṁ kālam

aghāyur aśucir malāt

SYNONYMS



yat-because; asau-this brāhmaṇa; śāstram ullaṅghya-transgressing the laws of śāstra; svaira-cārī-acting irresponsibly; ati-garhitaḥ-very much condemned; avartata-passed; ciram kālam-a long time; agha-āyuḥ-whose life was full of sinful activities; aśuciḥ-unclean; malāt-because of impurity.





This brāhmaṇa irresponsibly spent his long lifetime transgressing all the rules and regulations of the holy scripture, living extravagantly and eating food prepared by a prostitute. Therefore he is full of sins. He is unclean and is addicted to forbidden activities.





Food prepared by an unclean, sinful man or woman, especially a prostitute, is extremely infectious. Ajāmila ate such food, and therefore he was subject to be punished by Yamarāja.





TEXT 68



tata enaṁ daṇḍa-pāṇeḥ

sakāśaṁ kṛta-kilbiṣam

neṣyāmo 'kṛta-nirveśaṁ

yatra daṇḍena śuddhyati

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-therefore; enam-him; daṇḍa-pāṇeḥ-of Yamarāja, who is authorized to punish; sakāśam-in the presence; kṛta-kilbiṣam-who has regularly committed all sinful activities; neṣyāmaḥ-we shall take; akṛta-nirveśam-who has not undergone atonement; yatra-where; daṇḍena-by punishment; śuddhyati-he will be purified.





This man Ajāmila did not undergo atonement. Therefore because of his sinful life, we must take him into the presence of Yamarāja for punishment. There, according to the extent of his sinful acts, he will be punished and thus purified.





The Viṣṇudūtas had forbidden the Yamadūtas to take Ajāmila to Yamarāja, and therefore the Yamadūtas explained that taking such a man to Yamarāja was appropriate. Since Ajāmila had not undergone atonement for his sinful acts, he was to be taken to Yamarāja to be purified. When a man commits murder he becomes sinful, and therefore he also must be killed; otherwise after death he must suffer many sinful reactions. Similarly, punishment by Yamarāja is a process of purification for the most abominable sinful persons. Therefore the Yamadūtas requested the Viṣṇudūtas not to obstruct their taking Ajāmila to Yamarāja.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, First Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The History of the Life of Ajāmila."



Chapter Two



Ajāmila Delivered by the Viṣṇudūtas





In this chapter the messengers from Vaikuṇṭha explain to the Yamadūtas the glories of chanting the holy name of the Lord. The Viṣṇudūtas said, "Now impious acts are being performed even in an assembly of devotees, for a person who is not punishable is going to be punished in the assembly of Yamarāja. The mass of people are helpless and must depend upon the government for their safety and security, but if the government takes advantage of this to harm the citizens, where will they go? We see perfectly that Ajāmila should not be punished, although you are attempting to take him to Yamarāja for punishment."





It was due to Ajāmila's glorifying the holy name of the Supreme Lord that he was not punishable. The Viṣṇudūtas explained this as follows: "Simply by once chanting the holy name of Nārāyaṇa, this brāhmaṇa has become free from the reactions of sinful life. Indeed, he has been freed not only from the sins of this life, but from the sins of many, many thousands of other lives. He has already undergone true atonement for all his sinful actions. If one atones according to the directions of the śāstras, one does not actually become free from sinful reactions, but if one chants the holy name of the Lord, even a glimpse of such chanting can immediately free one from all sins. Chanting the glories of the Lord's holy name awakens all good fortune. Therefore there is no doubt that Ajāmila, being completely free from all sinful reactions, should not be punished by Yamarāja."





As they were saying this, the Viṣṇudūtas released Ajāmila from the ropes of the Yamadūtas and left for their own abode. The brāhmaṇa Ajāmila, however, offered his respectful obeisances to the Viṣṇudūtas. He could understand how fortunate he was to have chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa at the end of his life. Indeed, he could realize the full significance of this good fortune. Having thoroughly understood the discussion between the Yamadūtas and the Viṣṇudūtas, he became a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He lamented very much for how very sinful he had been, and he condemned himself again and again.





Finally, because of his association with the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila, his original consciousness aroused, gave up everything and went to Hardwar, where he engaged in devotional service without deviation, always thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus the Viṣṇudūtas went there, seated him on a golden throne and took him away to Vaikuṇṭhaloka.





In summary, although the sinful Ajāmila meant to call his son, the holy name of Lord Nārāyaṇa, even though chanted in the preliminary stage, nāmābhāsa, was able to give him liberation. Therefore one who chants the holy name of the Lord with faith and devotion is certainly exalted. He is protected even in his material, conditional life.





TEXT 1



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

evaṁ te bhagavad-dūtā

yamadūtābhibhāṣitam

upadhāryātha tān rājan

pratyāhur naya-kovidāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, said; evam-thus; te-they; bhagavat-dūtāḥ-the servants of Lord Viṣṇu; yamadūta-by the servants of Yamarāja; abhibhāṣitam-what was spoken; upadhārya-hearing; atha-then; tān-unto them; rājan-O King; pratyāhuḥ-replied properly; naya-kovidāḥ-being conversant in good arguments or good logic.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, the servants of Lord Viṣṇu are always very expert in logic and arguments. After hearing the statements of the Yamadūtas, they replied as follows.





TEXT 2



śrī-viṣṇudūtā ūcuḥ

aho kaṣṭaṁ dharma-dṛśām

adharmaḥ spṛśate sabhām

yatrādaṇḍyeṣv apāpeṣu

daṇḍo yair dhriyate vṛthā

SYNONYMS



śrī-viṣṇudūtāḥ ūcuḥ-the Viṣṇudūtas said; aho-alas; kaṣṭam-how painful it is; dharma-dṛśām-of persons interested in maintaining religion; adharmaḥ-irreligion; spṛśate-is affecting; sabhām-the assembly; yatra-wherein; adaṇḍyeṣu-upon persons not to be punished; apāpeṣu-who are sinless; daṇḍaḥ-punishment; yaiḥ-by whom; dhriyate-is being allotted; vṛthā-unnecessarily.





The Viṣṇudūtas said: Alas, how painful it is that irreligion is being introduced into an assembly where religion should be maintained. Indeed, those in charge of maintaining the religious principles are needlessly punishing a sinless, unpunishable person.





The Viṣṇudūtas accused the Yamadūtas of violating the religious principles by attempting to drag Ajāmila to Yamarāja for punishment. Yamarāja is the officer appointed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to judge religious and irreligious principles and to punish people who are irreligious. However, if completely sinless people are punished, the entire assembly of Yamarāja is contaminated. This principle applies not only in the assembly of Yamarāja, but throughout human society also.



In human society, properly maintaining religious principles is the duty of the king's court or the government. Unfortunately, in this yuga, Kali-yuga, the religious principles are tampered with, and the government cannot properly judge who is to be punished and who is not. It is said that in the Kali-yuga if one cannot spend money in court, one cannot get justice. Indeed, in courts of justice it is often found that magistrates are bribed for favorable judgments. Sometimes religious men who preach the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement for the benefit of the entire populace are arrested and harassed by the police and courts. The Viṣṇudūtas, who are Vaiṣṇavas, lamented for these very regrettable facts. Because of their spiritual compassion for all the fallen souls, Vaiṣṇavas go out to preach according to the standard method of all religious principles, but unfortunately, because of the influence of Kali-yuga, Vaiṣṇavas who have dedicated their lives to preaching the glories of the Lord are sometimes harassed and punished by courts on false charges of disturbing the peace.





TEXT 3



prajānāṁ pitaro ye ca

śāstāraḥ sādhavaḥ samāḥ

yadi syāt teṣu vaiṣamyaṁ

kaṁ yānti śaraṇaṁ prajāḥ

SYNONYMS



prajānām-of the citizens; pitaraḥ-protectors, guardians (kings or government servants); ye-they who; ca-and; śāstāraḥ-give instructions concerning law and order; sādhavaḥ-endowed with all good qualities; samāḥ-equal to everyone; yadi-if; syāt-there is; teṣu-among them; vaiṣamyam-partiality; kam-what; yānti-will go to; śaraṇam-shelter; prajāḥ-the citizens.





A king or governmental official should be so well qualified that he acts as a father, maintainer and protector of the citizens because of affection and love. He should give the citizens good advice and instructions according to the standard scriptures and should be equal to everyone. Yamarāja does this, for he is the supreme master of justice, and so do those who follow in his footsteps. However, if such persons become polluted and exhibit partiality by punishing an innocent, blameless person, where will the citizens go to take shelter for their maintenance and security?





The king, or in modern times the government, should act as the guardian of the citizens by teaching them the proper goal of life. The human form of life is especially meant for realization of one's self and one's relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead because this cannot be realized in animal life. The duty of the government, therefore, is to take charge of training all the citizens in such a way that by a gradual process they will be elevated to the spiritual platform and will realize the self and his relationship with God. This principle was followed by kings like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Lord Rāmacandra, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and Prahlāda Mahārāja. The leaders of the government must be very honest and religious because otherwise all the affairs of the state will suffer. Unfortunately, in the name of democracy, rogues and thieves are electing other rogues and thieves to the most important posts in the government. Recently this has been proven in America, where the president had to be condemned and dragged down from his post by the citizens. This is only one case, but there are many others. Because of the importance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, people should be Kṛṣṇa conscious and should not vote for anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious. Then there will be actual peace and prosperity in the state. When a Vaiṣṇava sees mismanagement in the government, he feels great compassion in his heart and tries his best to purify the situation by spreading the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement.





TEXT 4



yad yad ācarati śreyān

itaras tat tad īhate

sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute

lokas tad anuvartate

SYNONYMS



yat yat-whatever; ācarati-executes; śreyān-a first-class man with full knowledge of religious principles; itaraḥ-the subordinate man; tat tat-that; īhate-performs; saḥ-he (the great man); yat-whatever; pramāṇam-as evidence or as the right thing; kurute-accepts; lokaḥ-the general public; tat-that; anuvartate-follows.





The mass of people follow the example of a leader in society and imitate his behavior. They accept as evidence whatever the leader accepts.





Although Ajāmila was not punishable, the Yamadūtas were insisting on taking him away to Yamarāja for punishment. This was adharma, contrary to religious principles. The Viṣṇudūtas feared that if such irreligious acts were allowed, the management of human society would be spoiled. In modern times, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to introduce the right principles of management for human society, but unfortunately the governments of Kali-yuga do not properly support the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement because they do not appreciate its valuable service. The Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is the right movement for ameliorating the fallen condition of human society, and therefore governments and public leaders in every part of the world should support this movement to completely rectify humanity's sinful condition.





TEXTS 5–6



yasyāṅke śira ādhāya

lokaḥ svapiti nirvṛtaḥ

svayaṁ dharmam adharmaṁ vā

na hi veda yathā paśuḥ

sa kathaṁ nyarpitātmānaṁ



kṛta-maitram acetanam

visrambhaṇīyo bhūtānāṁ

saghṛṇo dogdhum arhati

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; aṅke-on the lap; śiraḥ-the head; ādhāya-placing; lokaḥ-the general mass of people; svapiti-sleep; nirvṛtaḥ-in peace; svayam-personally; dharmam-religious principles or the goal of life; adharmam-irreligious principles; vā-or; na-not; hi-indeed; veda-know; yathā-exactly like; paśuḥ-an animal; saḥ-such a person; katham-how; nyarpita-ātmānam-unto the living entity who has fully surrendered; kṛta-maitram-endowed with good faith and friendship; acetanam-with undeveloped consciousness, foolish; visrambhaṇīyaḥ-deserving to be the object of faith; bhūtānām-of the living entities; sa-ghṛṇaḥ-who has a soft heart for the good of all people; dogdhum-to give pain; arhati-is able.





People in general are not very advanced in knowledge by which to discriminate between religion and irreligion. The innocent, unenlightened citizen is like an ignorant animal sleeping in peace with its head on the lap of its master, faithfully believing in the master's protection. If a leader is actually kindhearted and deserves to be the object of a living entity's faith, how can he punish or kill a foolish person who has fully surrendered in good faith and friendship?





The Sanskrit word viśvasta-ghāta refers to one who breaks faith or causes a breach of trust. The mass of people should always feel security because of the government's protection. Therefore, how regrettable it is for the government itself to cause a breach of trust and put the citizens in difficulty for political reasons. We actually saw during the partition days in India that although Hindus and Muslims were living together peacefully, manipulation by politicians suddenly aroused feelings of hatred between them, and thus the Hindus and Muslims killed one another over politics. This is a sign of Kali-yuga. In this age, animals are kept nicely sheltered, completely confident that their masters will protect them, but unfortunately as soon as the animals are fat, they are immediately sent for slaughter. Such cruelty is condemned by Vaiṣṇavas like the Viṣṇudūtas. Indeed, the hellish conditions already described await the sinful men responsible for such suffering. One who betrays the confidence of a living entity who takes shelter of him in good faith, whether that living entity be a human being or an animal, is extremely sinful. Because such betrayals now go unpunished by the government, all of human society is terribly contaminated. The people of this age are therefore described as mandāḥ sumanda-matayo manda-bhāgyā hy upadrutāḥ [SB 1.1.10]. As a consequence of such sinfulness, men are condemned (mandāḥ), their intelligence is unclear (sumanda-matayaḥ), they are unfortunate (manda-bhāgyāḥ), and therefore they are always disturbed by many problems (upadrutāḥ). This is their situation in this life, and after death they are punished in hellish conditions.





TEXT 7



ayaṁ hi kṛta-nirveśo

janma-koṭy-aṁhasām api

yad vyājahāra vivaśo

nāma svasty-ayanaṁ hareḥ

SYNONYMS



ayam-this person (Ajāmila); hi-indeed; kṛta-nirveśaḥ-has undergone all kinds of atonement; janma-of births; koṭi-of millions; aṁhasām-for the sinful activities; api-even; yat-because; vyājahāra-he has chanted; vivaśaḥ-in a helpless condition; nāma-the holy name; svasti-ayanam-the means of liberation; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Ajāmila has already atoned for all his sinful actions. Indeed, he has atoned not only for sins performed in one life but for those performed in millions of lives, for in a helpless condition he chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. Even though he did not chant purely, he chanted without offense, and therefore he is now pure and eligible for liberation.





The Yamadūtas had considered only the external situation of Ajāmila. Since he was extremely sinful throughout his life, they thought he should be taken to Yamarāja and did not know that he had become free from the reactions of all his sins. The Viṣṇudūtas therefore instructed that because he had chanted the four syllables of the name Nārāyaṇa at the time of his death, he was freed from all sinful reactions. In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes the following verses from the smṛti-śāstra:



nāmno hi yāvatī śaktiḥ

pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ

tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti

pātakaṁ pātakī naraḥ





"Simply by chanting one holy name of Hari, a sinful man can counteract the reactions to more sins than he is able to commit." (Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa)



avaśenāpi yan-nāmni

kīrtite sarva-pātakaiḥ

pumān vimucyate sadyaḥ

siṁha-trastair mṛgair iva





"If one chants the holy name of the Lord, even in a helpless condition or without desiring to do so, all the reactions of his sinful life depart, just as when a lion roars, all the small animals flee in fear." (Garuḍa Purāṇa)



sakṛd uccāritaṁ yena

harir ity akṣara-dvayam

baddha-parikaras tena

mokṣāya gamanaṁ prati





"By once chanting the holy name of the Lord, which consists of the two syllables ha-ri, one guarantees his path to liberation." (Skanda Purāṇa)



These are some of the reasons why the Viṣṇudūtas objected to the Yamadūtas' taking Ajāmila to the court of Yamarāja.





TEXT 8



etenaiva hy aghono 'sya

kṛtaṁ syād agha-niṣkṛtam

yadā nārāyaṇāyeti

jagāda catur-akṣaram

SYNONYMS



etena-by this (chanting); eva-indeed; hi-certainly; aghonaḥ-who possesses sinful reactions; asya-of this (Ajāmila); kṛtam-performed; syāt-is; agha-of sins; niṣkṛtam-complete atonement; yadā-when; nārāyaṇa-O Nārāyaṇa (the name of his son); āya-please come; iti-thus; jagāda-he chanted; catuḥ-akṣaram-the four syllables (nā-rā-ya-ṇa).





The Viṣṇudūtas continued: Even previously, while eating and at other times, this Ajāmila would call his son, saying, "My dear Nārāyaṇa, please come here." Although calling the name of his son, he nevertheless uttered the four syllables nā-rā-ya-ṇa. Simply by chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa in this way, he sufficiently atoned for the sinful reactions of millions of lives.





Previously, when engaged in sinful activities to maintain his family, Ajāmila chanted the name of Nārāyaṇa without offenses. To chant the holy name of the Lord just to counteract one's sinful activities, or to commit sinful activities on the strength of chanting the holy name, is offensive (nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ). But although Ajāmila engaged in sinful activities, he never chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa to counteract them; he simply chanted the name Nārāyaṇa to call his son. Therefore his chanting was effective. Because of chanting the holy name of Nārāyaṇa in this way, he had already vanquished the accumulated sinful reactions of many, many lives. In the beginning he was pure, but although he later committed many sinful acts, he was offenseless because he did not chant the holy name of Nārāyaṇa to counteract them. One who always chants the holy name of the Lord without offenses is always pure. As confirmed in this verse Ajāmila was already sinless, and because he chanted the name of Nārāyaṇa he remained sinless. It did not matter that he was calling his son; the name itself was effective.





TEXTS 9–10



stenaḥ surā-po mitra-dhrug

brahma-hā guru-talpa-gaḥ

strī-rāja-pitṛ-go-hantā

ye ca pātakino 'pare

sarveṣām apy aghavatām



idam eva suniṣkṛtam

nāma-vyāharaṇaṁ viṣṇor

yatas tad-viṣayā matiḥ

SYNONYMS



stenaḥ-one who steals; surā-paḥ-a drunkard; mitra-dhruk-one who turns against a friend or relative; brahma-hā-one who kills a brāhmaṇa; guru-talpa-gaḥ-one who indulges in sex with the wife of his teacher or guru; strī-women; rāja-king; pitṛ-father; go-of cows; hantā-the killer; ye-those who; ca-also; pātakinaḥ-committed sinful activities; apare-many others; sarveṣām-of all of them; api-although; agha-vatām-persons who have committed many sins; idam-this; eva-certainly; su-niṣkṛtam-perfect atonement; nāma-vyāharaṇam-chanting of the holy name; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; yataḥ-because of which; tat-viṣayā-on the person who chants the holy name; matiḥ-His attention.





The chanting of the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu is the best process of atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a drunkard, for one who betrays a friend or relative, for one who kills a brāhmaṇa, or for one who indulges in sex with the wife of his guru or another superior. It is also the best method of atonement for one who murders women, the king or his father, for one who slaughters cows, and for all other sinful men. Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu, such sinful persons may attract the attention of the Supreme Lord, who therefore considers, "Because this man has chanted My holy name, My duty is to give him protection."





TEXT 11



na niṣkṛtair uditair brahma-vādibhis

tathā viśuddhyaty aghavān vratādibhiḥ

yathā harer nāma-padair udāhṛtais

tad uttamaśloka-guṇopalambhakam

SYNONYMS



na-not; niṣkṛtaiḥ-by the processes of atonement; uditaiḥ-prescribed; brahma-vādibhiḥ-by learned scholars such as Manu; tathā-to that extent; viśuddhyati-becomes purified; agha-vān-a sinful man; vrata-ādibhiḥ-by observing the vows and regulative principles; yathā-as; hareḥ-of Lord Hari; nāma-padaiḥ-by the syllables of the holy name; udāhṛtaiḥ-chanted; tat-that; uttamaśloka-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-of the transcendental qualities; upalambhakam-reminding one.





By following the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or undergoing atonement, sinful men do not become as purified as by chanting once the holy name of Lord Hari. Although ritualistic atonement may free one from sinful reactions, it does not awaken devotional service, unlike the chanting of the Lord's names, which reminds one of the Lord's fame, qualities, attributes, pastimes and paraphernalia.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that the chanting of the holy name of the Lord has special significance that distinguishes it from the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies of atonement for severe, more severe or most severe sinful actions. There are twenty types of religious scriptures called dharma-śāstras, beginning with the Manu-saṁhitā and parāśara-saṁhitā, but herein it is stressed that although one may become free from the reactions of the most sinful activities by following the religious principles of these scriptures, this cannot promote a sinful man to the stage of loving service to the Lord. On the other hand, chanting the holy name of the Lord even once not only frees one immediately from the reactions of the greatest sins, but also raises one to the platform of rendering loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is described as uttamaśloka because He is famous for His glorious activities. Thus one serves the Lord by remembering His form, His attributes and pastimes. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that this is all possible simply by chanting the Lord's holy name because of the Lord's omnipotence. What cannot be achieved through the performance of Vedic rituals can be easily achieved through the chanting of the Lord's holy name. To chant the holy name and dance in ecstasy is so easy and sublime that one can achieve all the benefits of spiritual life simply by following this process. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu declares, paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam: "All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana!" The saṅkīrtana movement we have started offers the best process for becoming purified of all sinful reactions and coming immediately to the platform of spiritual life.





TEXT 12



naikāntikaṁ tad dhi kṛte 'pi niṣkṛte

manaḥ punar dhāvati ced asat-pathe

tat karma-nirhāram abhīpsatāṁ harer

guṇānuvādaḥ khalu sattva-bhāvanaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; aikāntikam-absolutely cleansed; tat-the heart; hi-because; kṛte-very nicely performed; api-although; niṣkṛte-atonement; manaḥ-the mind; punaḥ-again; dhāvati-runs; cet-if; asat-pathe-on the path of material activities; tat-therefore; karma-nirhāram-cessation of the fruitive reactions of material activities; abhīpsatām-for those who seriously want; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-anuvādaḥ-constant chanting of the glories; khalu-indeed; sattva-bhāvanaḥ-actually purifying one's existence.





The ritualistic ceremonies of atonement recommended in the religious scriptures are insufficient to cleanse the heart absolutely because after atonement one's mind again runs toward material activities. Consequently, for one who wants liberation from the fruitive reactions of material activities, the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, or glorification of the name, fame and pastimes of the Lord, is recommended as the most perfect process of atonement because such chanting eradicates the dirt from one's heart completely.





The statements in this verse have been confirmed previously in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17):



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām





"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted." It is the special mercy of the Supreme Lord that as soon as He knows that one is glorifying His name, fame and attributes, He personally helps cleanse the dirt from one's heart. Therefore simply by such glorification one not only becomes purified, but also achieves the results of pious activities (puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtana). Puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtana refers to the process of devotional service. Even if one does not understand the meaning of the Lord's name, pastimes or attributes, one is purified simply by hearing or chanting of them. Such purification is called sattva-bhāvana.



One's main purpose in human life should be to purify his existence and achieve liberation. As long as one has a material body, one is understood to be impure. In such an impure, material condition, one cannot enjoy a truly blissful life, although everyone seeks it. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.1) says, tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ śuddhyet: one must perform tapasya, austerity, to purify his existence in order to come to the spiritual platform. The tapasya of chanting and glorifying the name, fame and attributes of the Lord is a very easy purifying process by which everyone can be happy. Therefore everyone who desires the ultimate cleansing of his heart must adopt this process. Other processes, such as karma, jñāna and yoga, cannot cleanse the heart absolutely.





TEXT 13



athainaṁ māpanayata

kṛtāśeṣāgha-niṣkṛtam

yad asau bhagavan-nāma

mriyamāṇaḥ samagrahīt

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; enam-him (Ajāmila); mā-do not; apanayata-try to take; kṛta-already done; aśeṣa-unlimited; agha-niṣkṛtam-atonement for his sinful actions; yat-because; asau-he; bhagavat-nāma-the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mriyamāṇaḥ-while dying; samagrahīt-perfectly chanted.





At the time of death, this Ajāmila helplessly and very loudly chanted the holy name of the Lord, Nārāyaṇa. That chanting alone has already freed him from the reactions of all sinful life. Therefore, O servants of Yamarāja, do not try to take him to your master for punishment in hellish conditions.





The Viṣṇudūtas, who are superior authorities, gave orders to the Yamadūtas, who did not know that Ajāmila was no longer subject to tribulation in hellish life for his past sins. Although he had chanted the holy name Nārāyaṇa to indicate his son, the holy name is so transcendentally powerful that he was automatically freed because he had chanted the holy name while dying (ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ). As Kṛṣṇa confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (7.28):



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ





"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." Unless one is freed from all sinful reactions, one cannot be promoted to the platform of devotional service. Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā (8.5) it is stated:



anta-kāle ca mām eva

smaran muktvā kalevaram

yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ

yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ





If one remembers Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa, at the time of death, one is certainly eligible to return immediately home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 14



sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā

stobhaṁ helanam eva vā

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam

aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ

SYNONYMS



sāṅketyam-as an assignation; pārihāsyam-jokingly; vā-or; stobham-as musical entertainment; helanam-neglectfully; eva-certainly; vā-or; vaikuṇṭha-of the Lord; nāma-grahaṇam-chanting the holy name; aśeṣa-unlimited; agha-haram-neutralizing the effect of sinful life; viduḥ-advanced transcendentalists know.





One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately freed from the reactions of unlimited sins, even if he chants indirectly [to indicate something else], jokingly, for musical entertainment, or even neglectfully. This is accepted by all the learned scholars of the scriptures.





TEXT 15



patitaḥ skhalito bhagnaḥ

sandaṣṭas tapta āhataḥ

harir ity avaśenāha

pumān nārhati yātanāḥ

SYNONYMS



patitaḥ-fallen down; skhalitaḥ-slipped; bhagnaḥ-having broken his bones; sandaṣṭaḥ-bitten; taptaḥ-severely attacked by fever or similar painful conditions; āhataḥ-injured; hariḥ-Lord Kṛṣṇa; iti-thus; avaśena-accidentally; āha-chants; pumān-a person; na-not; arhati-deserves; yātanāḥ-hellish conditions.





If one chants the holy name of Hari and then dies because of an accidental misfortune, such as falling from the top of a house, slipping and suffering broken bones while traveling on the road, being bitten by a serpent, being afflicted with pain and high fever, or being injured by a weapon, one is immediately absolved from having to enter hellish life, even though he is sinful.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (8.6):



yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ





"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail." If one practices chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, he is naturally expected to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa when he meets with some accident. Even without such practice, however, if one somehow or other chants the holy name of the Lord (Hare Kṛṣṇa) when he meets with an accident and dies, he will be saved from hellish life after death.





TEXT 16



gurūṇāṁ ca laghūnāṁ ca

gurūṇi ca laghūni ca

prāyaścittāni pāpānāṁ

jñātvoktāni maharṣibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



gurūṇām-heavy; ca-and; laghūnām-light; ca-also; gurūṇi-heavy; ca-and; laghūni-light; ca-also; prāyaścittāni-the processes of atonement; pāpānām-of sinful activities; jñātvā-knowing perfectly well; uktāni-have been prescribed; mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ-by great sages.





Authorities who are learned scholars and sages have carefully ascertained that one should atone for the heaviest sins by undergoing a heavy process of atonement and one should atone for lighter sins by undergoing lighter atonement. Chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, however, vanquishes all the effects of sinful activities, regardless of whether heavy or light.





In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes an incident that took place when Sāmba was rescued from the punishment of the Kauravas. Sāmba fell in love with the daughter of Duryodhana, and since according to kṣatriya custom one is not offered a kṣatriya's daughter unless he displays his chivalrous valor, Sāmba abducted her. Consequently Sāmba was arrested by the Kauravas. Later, when Lord Balarāma came to rescue him, there was an argument about Sāmba's release. Since the argument was not settled, Balarāma showed His power in such a way that all of Hastināpura trembled and would have been vanquished as if by a great earthquake. Then the matter was settled, and Sāmba married Duryodhana's daughter. The purport is that one should take shelter of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose protective power is so great that it cannot be equaled in the material world. However powerful the reactions of one's sins, they will immediately be vanquished if one chants the name of Hari, Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma or Nārāyaṇa.





TEXT 17



tais tāny aghāni pūyante

tapo-dāna-vratādibhiḥ

nādharmajaṁ tad-dhṛdayaṁ

tad apīśāṅghri-sevayā

SYNONYMS



taiḥ-by those; tāni-all those; aghāni-sinful activities and their results; pūyante-become vanquished; tapaḥ-austerity; dāna-charity; vrata-ādibhiḥ-by vows and other such activities; na-not; adharma-jam-produced from irreligious actions; tat-of that; hṛdayam-the heart; tat-that; api-also; īśa-aṅghri-of the lotus feet of the Lord; sevayā-by service.





Although one may neutralize the reactions of sinful life through austerity, charity, vows and other such methods, these pious activities cannot uproot the material desires in one's heart. However, if one serves the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, he is immediately freed from all such contaminations.





As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.42), bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra ca: devotional service is so powerful that one who performs devotional service is immediately freed from all sinful desires. All desires within this material world are sinful because material desire means sense gratification, which always involves action that is more or less sinful. Pure bhakti, however, is anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya; in other words, it is free from material desires, which result from karma and jñāna. One who is situated in devotional service no longer has material desires, and therefore he is beyond sinful life. Material desires should be completely stopped. Otherwise, although one's austerities, penances and charity may free one from sin for the time being, one's desires will reappear because his heart is impure. Thus he will act sinfully and suffer.





TEXT 18



ajñānād athavā jñānād

uttamaśloka-nāma yat

saṅkīrtitam aghaṁ puṁso

dahed edho yathānalaḥ

SYNONYMS



ajñānāt-out of ignorance; athavā-or; jñānāt-with knowledge; uttamaśloka-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nāma-the holy name; yat-that which; saṅkīrtitam-chanted; agham-sin; puṁsaḥ-of a person; dahet-burns to ashes; edhaḥ-dry grass; yathā-just as; analaḥ-fire.





As a fire burns dry grass to ashes, so the holy name of the Lord, whether chanted knowingly or unknowingly, burns to ashes, without fail, all the reactions of one's sinful activities.





Fire will act, regardless of whether handled by an innocent child or by someone well aware of its power. For example, if a field of straw or dry grass is set afire, either by an elderly man who knows the power of fire or by a child who does not, the grass will be burned to ashes. Similarly, one may or may not know the power of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but if one chants the holy name he will become free from all sinful reactions.





TEXT 19



yathāgadaṁ vīryatamam

upayuktaṁ yadṛcchayā

ajānato 'py ātma-guṇaṁ

kuryān mantro 'py udāhṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-just like; agadam-medicine; vīrya-tamam-very powerful; upayuktam-properly taken; yadṛcchayā-somehow or other; ajānataḥ-by a person without knowledge; api-even; ātma-guṇam-its own potency; kuryāt-manifests; mantraḥ-the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra; api-also; udāhṛtaḥ-chanted.





If a person unaware of the effective potency of a certain medicine takes that medicine or is forced to take it, it will act even without his knowledge because its potency does not depend on the patient's understanding. Similarly, even though one does not know the value of chanting the holy name of the Lord, if one chants knowingly or unknowingly, the chanting will be very effective.





In the Western countries, where the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is spreading, learned scholars and other thoughtful men are realizing its effectiveness. For example, Dr. J. Stillson Judah, a learned scholar, has been very much attracted to this movement because he has actually seen that it is turning hippies addicted to drugs into pure Vaiṣṇavas who voluntarily become servants of Kṛṣṇa and humanity. Even a few years ago, such hippies did not know the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but now they are chanting it and becoming pure Vaiṣṇavas. Thus they are becoming free from all sinful activities, such as illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. This is practical proof of the effectiveness of the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, which is supported in this verse. One may or may not know the value of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, but if one somehow or other chants it, he will immediately be purified, just as one who takes a potent medicine will feel its effects, regardless of whether he takes it knowingly or unknowingly.





TEXT 20



śrī-śuka uvāca

ta evaṁ suvinirṇīya

dharmaṁ bhāgavataṁ nṛpa

taṁ yāmya-pāśān nirmucya

vipraṁ mṛtyor amūmucan

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; te-they (the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu); evam-thus; su-vinirṇīya-perfectly ascertaining; dharmam-real religion; bhāgavatam-in terms of devotional service; nṛpa-O King; tam-him (Ajāmila); yāmya-pāśāt-from the bondage of the order carriers of Yamarāja; nirmucya-releasing; vipram-the brāhmaṇa; mṛtyoḥ-from death; amūmucan-rescued.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, having thus perfectly judged the principles of devotional service with reasoning and arguments, the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu released the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila from the bondage of the Yamadūtas and saved him from imminent death.





TEXT 21



iti pratyuditā yāmyā

dūtā yātvā yamāntikam

yama-rājñe yathā sarvam

ācacakṣur arindama

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; pratyuditāḥ-having been replied to (by the order carriers of Viṣṇu); yāmyāḥ-the servants of Yamarāja; dūtāḥ-the messengers; yātvā-going; yama-antikam-to the abode of Lord Yamarāja; yama-rājñe-unto King Yamarāja; yathā-duly; sarvam-everything; ācacakṣuḥ-informed in full detail; arindama-O subduer of the enemies.





My dear Mahārāja Parīkṣit, O subduer of all enemies, after the servants of Yamarāja had been answered by the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, they went to Yamarāja and explained to him everything that had happened.





In this verse the word pratyuditāḥ is very significant. The servants of Yamarāja are so powerful that they can never be hindered anywhere, but this time they were baffled and disappointed in their attempt to take away a man they considered sinful. Therefore they immediately returned to Yamarāja and described to him everything that had happened.





TEXT 22



dvijaḥ pāśād vinirmukto

gata-bhīḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ

vavande śirasā viṣṇoḥ

kiṅkarān darśanotsavaḥ

SYNONYMS



dvijaḥ-the brāhmaṇa (Ajāmila); pāśāt-from the noose; vinirmuktaḥ-being released; gata-bhīḥ-freed from fear; prakṛtim gataḥ-came to his senses; vavande-offered his respectful obeisances; śirasā-by bowing his head; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; kiṅkarān-unto the servants; darśana-utsavaḥ-very pleased by seeing them.





Having been released from the nooses of Yamarāja's servants, the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila, now free from fear, came to his senses and immediately offered obeisances to the Viṣṇudūtas by bowing his head at their lotus feet. He was extremely pleased by their presence, for he had seen them save his life from the hands of the servants of Yamarāja.





Vaiṣṇavas are also Viṣṇudūtas because they carry out the orders of Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa is very eager for all the conditioned souls rotting in this material world to surrender to Him and be saved from material pangs in this life and punishment in hellish conditions after death. A Vaiṣṇava therefore tries to bring conditioned souls to their senses. Those who are fortunate like Ajāmila are saved by the Viṣṇudūtas, or Vaiṣṇavas, and thus they return back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 23



taṁ vivakṣum abhipretya

mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkarāḥ

sahasā paśyatas tasya

tatrāntardadhire 'nagha

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Ajāmila); vivakṣum-desiring to speak; abhipretya-understanding; mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkarāḥ-the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu; sahasā-suddenly; paśyataḥ tasya-while he looked on; tatra-there; antardadhire-disappeared; anagha-O sinless Mahārāja Parīkṣit.





O sinless Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the order carriers of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Viṣṇudūtas, saw that Ajāmila was attempting to say something, and thus they suddenly disappeared from his presence.





The śāstras say:



pāpiṣṭhā ye durācārā

deva-brāhmaṇa-nindakāḥ

apathya-bhojanās teṣām

akāle maraṇaṁ dhruvam





"For persons who are pāpiṣṭha, very sinful, and durācāra, misbehaved or very unclean in their habits, who are against the existence of God, who disrespect Vaiṣṇavas and brāhmaṇas, and who eat anything and everything, untimely death is sure." It is said that in Kali-yuga one has a maximum lifetime of one hundred years, but as people become degraded, the duration of their lives decreases (prāyeṇālpāyuṣaḥ). Because Ajāmila was now free from all sinful reactions, his lifetime was extended, even though he was to have died immediately. When the Viṣṇudūtas saw Ajāmila trying to say something to them, they disappeared to give him a chance to glorify the Supreme Lord. Since all his sinful reactions had been vanquished, he was now prepared to glorify the Lord. Indeed, one cannot glorify the Lord unless one is completely free from all sinful activities. This is confirmed by Kṛṣṇa Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (7.28):



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ





"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." The Viṣṇudūtas made Ajāmila aware of devotional service so that He might immediately become fit to return home, back to Godhead. To increase his eagerness to glorify the Lord, they disappeared so that he would feel separation in their absence. In the mode of separation, glorification of the Lord is very intense.





TEXTS 24–25



ajāmilo 'py athākarṇya

dūtānāṁ yama-kṛṣṇayoḥ

dharmaṁ bhāgavataṁ śuddhaṁ

trai-vedyaṁ ca guṇāśrayam

bhaktimān bhagavaty āśu



māhātmya-śravaṇād dhareḥ

anutāpo mahān āsīt

smarato 'śubham ātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



ajāmilaḥ-Ajāmila; api-also; atha-thereafter; ākarṇya-hearing; dūtānām-of the order carriers; yama-kṛṣṇayoḥ-of Yamarāja and Lord Kṛṣṇa; dharmam-actual religious principles; bhāgavatam-as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or concerning the relationship between the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śuddham-pure; trai-vedyam-mentioned in three Vedas; ca-also; guṇa-aśrayam-material religion, under the modes of material nature; bhakti-mān-a pure devotee (cleansed of the modes of material nature); bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āśu-immediately; māhātmya-glorification of the name, fame, etc.; śravaṇāt-because of hearing; hareḥ-of Lord Hari; anutāpaḥ-regret; mahān-very great; āsīt-there was; smarataḥ-remembering; aśubham-all the inglorious activities; ātmanaḥ-done by himself.





After hearing the discourses between the Yamadūtas and the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila could understand the religious principles that act under the three modes of material nature. These principles are mentioned in the three Vedas. He could also understand the transcendental religious principles, which are above the modes of material nature and which concern the relationship between the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Furthermore, Ajāmila heard glorification of the name, fame, qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He thus became a perfectly pure devotee. He could then remember his past sinful activities, which he greatly regretted having performed.





In Bhagavad-gītā (2.45) Lord Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna:



traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā

nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna

nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho

niryoga-kṣema ātmavān





"The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established in the Self." The Vedic principles certainly prescribe a gradual process for rising to the spiritual platform, but if one remains attached to the Vedic principles, there is no chance of his being elevated to spiritual life. Kṛṣṇa therefore advised Arjuna to perform devotional service, which is the process of transcendental religion. The transcendental position of devotional service is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.6). Sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje. Bhakti, devotional service, is paro dharmaḥ, transcendental dharma; it is not material dharma. People generally think that religion should be pursued for material profit. This may be suitable for persons interested in material life, but one who is interested in spiritual life should be attached to paro dharmaḥ, the religious principles by which one becomes a devotee of the Supreme Lord (yato bhaktir adhokṣaje). The bhāgavata religion teaches that the Lord and the living entity are eternally related and that the duty of the living entity is to surrender to the Lord. When one is situated on the platform of devotional service, one is freed from impediments and completely satisfied (ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati). Having been elevated to that platform, Ajāmila began to lament for his past materialistic activities and glorify the name, fame, form and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 26



aho me paramaṁ kaṣṭam

abhūd avijitātmanaḥ

yena viplāvitaṁ brahma

vṛṣalyāṁ jāyatātmanā

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; me-my; paramam-extreme; kaṣṭam-miserable condition; abhūt-became; avijita-ātmanaḥ-because my senses were uncontrolled; yena-by which; viplāvitam-destroyed; brahma-all my brahminical qualifications; vṛṣalyām-through a śūdrāṇī, a maidservant; jāyatā-being born; ātmanā-by me.





Ajāmila said: Alas, being a servant of my senses, how degraded I became! I fell down from my position as a duly qualified brāhmaṇa and begot children in the womb of a prostitute.





The men of the higher classes-the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas-do not beget children in the wombs of lower-class women. Therefore the custom in Vedic society is to examine the horoscopes of a girl and boy being considered for marriage to see whether their combination is suitable. Vedic astrology reveals whether one has been born in the vipra-varṇa, kṣatriya-varṇa, vaiśya-varṇa or śūdra-varṇa, according to the three qualities of material nature. This must be examined because a marriage between a boy of the vipra-varṇa and a girl of the śūdra-varṇa is incompatible; married life would be miserable for both husband and wife. Consequently a boy should marry a girl of the same category. Of course, this is trai-guṇya, a material calculation according to the Vedas, but if the boy and girl are devotees there need be no such considerations. A devotee is transcendental, and therefore in a marriage between devotees, the boy and girl form a very happy combination.





TEXT 27



dhiṅ māṁ vigarhitaṁ sadbhir

duṣkṛtaṁ kula-kajjalam

hitvā bālāṁ satīṁ yo 'haṁ

surā-pīm asatīm agām

SYNONYMS



dhik mām-all condemnation upon me; vigarhitam-condemned; sadbhiḥ-by honest men; duṣkṛtam-who has committed sinful acts; kula-kajjalam-who has defamed the family tradition; hitvā-giving up; bālām-a young wife; satīm-chaste; yaḥ-who; aham-I; surāpīm-with a woman accustomed to drinking wine; asatīm-unchaste; agām-I had sexual intercourse.





Alas, all condemnation upon me! I acted so sinfully that I degraded my family tradition. Indeed, I gave up my chaste and beautiful young wife to have sexual intercourse with a fallen prostitute accustomed to drinking wine. All condemnation upon me!





This is the mentality of one who is becoming a pure devotee. When one is elevated to the platform of devotional service by the grace of the Lord and the spiritual master, one first regrets his past sinful activities. This helps one advance in spiritual life. The Viṣṇudūtas had given Ajāmila the chance to become a pure devotee, and the duty of a pure devotee is to regret his past sinful activities in illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling. Not only should one give up his past bad habits, but he must always regret his past sinful acts. This is the standard of pure devotion.





TEXT 28



vṛddhāv anāthau pitarau

nānya-bandhū tapasvinau

aho mayādhunā tyaktāv

akṛtajñena nīcavat

SYNONYMS



vṛddhau-old; anāthau-who had no other person to look after their comforts; pitarau-my father and mother; na anya-bandhū-who had no other friend; tapasvinau-who underwent great difficulties; aho-alas; mayā-by me; adhunā-at that moment; tyaktau-were given up; akṛta-jñena-ungrateful; nīca-vat-like the most abominable low-class person.





My father and mother were old and had no other son or friend to look after them. Because I did not take care of them, they lived with great difficulty. Alas, like an abominable lower-class man, I ungratefully left them in that condition.





According to Vedic civilization, everyone has the responsibility for taking care of brāhmaṇas, old men, women, children and cows. This is the duty of everyone, especially an upper-class person. Because of his association with a prostitute, Ajāmila abandoned all his duties. Regretting this, Ajāmila now considered himself quite fallen.





TEXT 29



so 'haṁ vyaktaṁ patiṣyāmi

narake bhṛśa-dāruṇe

dharma-ghnāḥ kāmino yatra

vindanti yama-yātanāḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-such a person; aham-I; vyaktam-it is now clear; patiṣyāmi-will fall down; narake-in hell; bhṛśa-dāruṇe-most miserable; dharma-ghnāḥ-they who break the principles of religion; kāminaḥ-who are too lusty; yatra-where; vindanti-undergo; yama-yātanāḥ-the miserable conditions imposed by Yamarāja.





It is now clear that as a consequence of such activities, a sinful person like me must be thrown into hellish conditions meant for those who have broken religious principles and must there suffer extreme miseries.





TEXT 30



kim idaṁ svapna āho svit

sākṣād dṛṣṭam ihādbhutam

kva yātā adya te ye māṁ

vyakarṣan pāśa-pāṇayaḥ

SYNONYMS



kim-whether; idam-this; svapne-in a dream; āho svit-or; sākṣāt-directly; dṛṣṭam-seen; iha-here; adbhutam-wonderful; kva-where; yātāḥ-have gone; adya-now; te-all of them; ye-who; mām-me; vyakarṣan-were dragging; pāśa-pāṇayaḥ-with ropes in their hands.





Was this a dream I saw, or was it reality? I saw fearsome men with ropes in their hands coming to arrest me and drag me away. Where have they gone?





TEXT 31



atha te kva gatāḥ siddhāś

catvāraś cāru-darśanāḥ

vyāmocayan nīyamānaṁ

baddhvā pāśair adho bhuvaḥ

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; te-those persons; kva-where; gatāḥ-went; siddhāḥ-liberated; catvāraḥ-four personalities; cāru-darśanāḥ-extremely beautiful to see; vyāmocayan-they released; nīyamānam-me, who was being carried away; baddhvā-being arrested; pāśaiḥ-by ropes; adhaḥ bhuvaḥ-downward to the hellish region.





And where have those four liberated and very beautiful persons gone who released me from arrest and saved me from being dragged down to the hellish regions?





As we have learned from the descriptions in the Fifth Canto, the hellish planets are situated in the lower portions of this universe. Therefore they are called adho bhuvaḥ. Ajāmila could understand that the Yamadūtas had come from that region.





TEXT 32



athāpi me durbhagasya

vibudhottama-darśane

bhavitavyaṁ maṅgalena

yenātmā me prasīdati

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; api-although; me-of me; durbhagasya-so unfortunate; vibudha-uttama-exalted devotees; darśane-because of seeing; bhavitavyam-there must be; maṅgalena-auspicious activities; yena-by which; ātmā-self; me-my; prasīdati-actually becomes happy.





I am certainly most abominable and unfortunate to have merged in an ocean of sinful activities, but nevertheless, because of my previous spiritual activities, I could see those four exalted personalities who came to rescue me. Now I feel exceedingly happy because of their visit.





As stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.54):



'sādhu-saṅga', 'sādhu-saṅga'--sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya





"Association with devotees is recommended by all the śāstras because by even a moment of such association one can receive the seed for all perfection." In the beginning of his life Ajāmila was certainly very pure, and he associated with devotees and brāhmaṇas; because of that pious activity, even though he was fallen, he was inspired to name his son Nārāyaṇa. Certainly this was due to good counsel given from within by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." The Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart, is so kind that if one has ever rendered service to Him, the Lord never forgets him. Thus the Lord, from within, gave Ajāmila the opportunity to name his youngest son Nārāyaṇa so that in affection he would constantly call "Nārāyaṇa! Nārāyaṇa!" and thus be saved from the most fearful and dangerous condition at the time of his death. Such is the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja: by the mercy of the guru and Kṛṣṇa, one receives the seed of bhakti. This association saves a devotee from the greatest fear. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we therefore change a devotee's name to a form that reminds him of Viṣṇu. If at the time of death the devotee can remember his own name, such as Kṛṣṇadāsa or Govinda dāsa, he can be saved from the greatest danger. Therefore the change of names at the time of initiation is essential. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is so meticulous that it gives one a good opportunity to remember Kṛṣṇa somehow or other.





TEXT 33



anyathā mriyamāṇasya

nāśucer vṛṣalī-pateḥ

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇaṁ

jihvā vaktum ihārhati

SYNONYMS



anyathā-otherwise; mriyamāṇasya-of a person who is just ready for death; na-not; aśuceḥ-most unclean; vṛṣalī-pateḥ-the keeper of a prostitute; vaikuṇṭha-of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; nāma-grahaṇam-the chanting of the holy name; jihvā-the tongue; vaktum-to speak; iha-in this situation; arhati-is able.





Were it not for my past devotional service, how could I, a most unclean keeper of a prostitute, have gotten an opportunity to chant the holy name of Vaikuṇṭhapati when I was just ready to die? Certainly it could not have been possible.





The name Vaikuṇṭhapati, which means "the master of the spiritual world," is not different from the name Vaikuṇṭha. Ajāmila, who was now a realized soul, could understand that because of his past spiritual activities in devotional service, he had gotten this opportunity to chant the holy name of Vaikuṇṭhapati in his horrible condition at the time of death.





TEXT 34



kva cāhaṁ kitavaḥ pāpo

brahma-ghno nirapatrapaḥ

kva ca nārāyaṇety etad

bhagavan-nāma maṅgalam

SYNONYMS



kva-where; ca-also; aham-I; kitavaḥ-a cheater; pāpaḥ-all sins personified; brahma-ghnaḥ-the killer of my brahminical culture; nirapatrapaḥ-shameless; kva-where; ca-also; nārāyaṇa-Nārāyaṇa; iti-thus; etat-this; bhagavat-nāma-the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; maṅgalam-all-auspicious.





Ajāmila continued: I am a shameless cheater who has killed his brahminical culture. Indeed, I am sin personified. Where am I in comparison to the all-auspicious chanting of the holy name of Lord Nārāyaṇa?





Those engaged in broadcasting the holy name of Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, through the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should always consider what our position was before we came and what it is now. We had fallen into abominable lives as meat-eaters, drunkards and woman hunters who performed all kinds of sinful activities, but now we have been given the opportunity to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Therefore we should always appreciate this opportunity. By the grace of the Lord we are opening many branches, and we should use this good fortune to chant the holy name of the Lord and serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly. We must be conscious of the difference between our present and past conditions and should always be very careful not to fall from the most exalted life.





TEXT 35



so 'haṁ tathā yatiṣyāmi

yata-cittendriyānilaḥ

yathā na bhūya ātmānam

andhe tamasi majjaye

SYNONYMS



saḥ-such a person; aham-I; tathā-in that way; yatiṣyāmi-I shall endeavor; yata-citta-indriya-controlling the mind and senses; anilaḥ-and the internal airs; yathā-so that; na-not; bhūyaḥ-again; ātmānam-my soul; andhe-in darkness; tamasi-in ignorance; majjaye-I drown.





I am such a sinful person, but since I have now gotten this opportunity, I must completely control my mind, life and senses and always engage in devotional service so that I may not fall again into the deep darkness and ignorance of material life.





Every one of us should have this determination. We have been elevated to an exalted position by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master, and if we remember that this is a great opportunity and pray to Kṛṣṇa that we will not fall again, our lives will be successful.





TEXTS 36–37



vimucya tam imaṁ bandham

avidyā-kāma-karmajam

sarva-bhūta-suhṛc chānto

maitraḥ karuṇa ātmavān

mocaye grastam ātmānaṁ



yoṣin-mayyātma-māyayā

vikrīḍito yayaivāhaṁ

krīḍā-mṛga ivādhamaḥ

SYNONYMS



vimucya-having become free from; tam-that; imam-this; bandham-bondage; avidyā-due to ignorance; kāma-due to lusty desire; karma-jam-caused by activities; sarva-bhūta-of all living entities; suhṛt-friend; śāntaḥ-very peaceful; maitraḥ-friendly; karuṇaḥ-merciful; ātma-vān-self-realized; mocaye-I shall disentangle; grastam-encaged; ātmānam-my soul; yoṣit-mayyā-in the form of woman; ātma-māyayā-by the illusory energy of the Lord; vikrīḍitaḥ-played with; yayā-by which; eva-certainly; aham-I; krīḍā-mṛgaḥ-a controlled animal; iva-like; adhamaḥ-so fallen.





Because of identifying oneself with the body, one is subjected to desires for sense gratification, and thus one engages in many different types of pious and impious action. This is what constitutes material bondage. Now I shall disentangle myself from my material bondage, which has been caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead's illusory energy in the form of a woman. Being a most fallen soul, I was victimized by the illusory energy and have become like a dancing dog led around by a woman's hand. Now I shall give up all lusty desires and free myself from this illusion. I shall become a merciful, well-wishing friend to all living entities and always absorb myself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





This should be the standard of determination for all Kṛṣṇa conscious persons. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person should free himself from the clutches of māyā, and he should also be compassionate to all others suffering in those clutches. The activities of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement are meant not only for oneself but for others also. This is the perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One who is interested in his own salvation is not as advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness as one who feels compassion for others and who therefore propagates the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Such an advanced devotee will never fall down, for Kṛṣṇa will give him special protection. That is the sum and substance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Everyone is like a play toy in the hands of the illusory energy and is acting as she moves him. One should come to Kṛṣṇa consciousness to release oneself and also to release others.





TEXT 38



mamāham iti dehādau

hitvāmithyārtha-dhīr matim

dhāsye mano bhagavati

śuddhaṁ tat-kīrtanādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



mama-my; aham-I; iti-thus; deha-ādau-in the body and things related to the body; hitvā-giving up; amithyā-not false; artha-on values; dhīḥ-with my consciousness; matim-the attitude; dhāsye-I shall engage; manaḥ-my mind; bhagavati-on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śuddham-pure; tat-His name; kīrtana-ādibhiḥ-by chanting, hearing and so on.





Simply because I chanted the holy name of the Lord in the association of devotees, my heart is now becoming purified. Therefore I shall not fall victim again to the false lures of material sense gratification. Now that I have become fixed in the Absolute Truth, henceforward I shall not identify myself with the body. I shall give up false conceptions of "I" and "mine" and fix my mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.





How a living entity becomes a victim of the material condition is lucidly explained in this verse. The beginning is to misidentify the body as one's self. Therefore Bhagavad-gītā begins with the spiritual instruction that one is not the body, but is within the body. This consciousness can be possible only if one chants the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, and always keeps oneself in the association of devotees. This is the secret of success. Therefore we stress that one should chant the holy name of the Lord and keep oneself free from the contaminations of this material world, especially the contaminations of lusty desires for illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. With determination, one should vow to follow these principles and thus be saved from the miserable condition of material existence. The first necessity is to become freed from the bodily concept of life.





TEXT 39



iti jāta-sunirvedaḥ

kṣaṇa-saṅgena sādhuṣu

gaṅgā-dvāram upeyāya

mukta-sarvānubandhanaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; jāta-sunirvedaḥ-(Ajāmila) who had become detached from the material conception of life; kṣaṇa-saṅgena-by a moment's association; sādhuṣu-with devotees; gaṅgā-dvāram-to Hardwar (hari-dvāra), the doorway to Hari (because the Ganges begins there, Hardwar is also called gaṅgā-dvāra); upeyāya-went; mukta-being freed from; sarva-anubandhanaḥ-all kinds of material bondage.





Because of a moment's association with devotees [the Viṣṇudūtas], Ajāmila detached himself from the material conception of life with determination. Thus freed from all material attraction, he immediately started for Hardwar.





The word mukta-sarvānubandhanaḥ indicates that after this incident, Ajāmila, not caring for his wife and children, went straight to Hardwar for further advancement in his spiritual life. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement now has centers in Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa so that those who want to live a retired life, whether they be devotees or not, can go there and with determination give up the bodily concept of life. One is welcome to live in those holy places for the rest of his life in order to achieve the highest success by the very simple method of chanting the holy name of the Lord and taking prasāda. Thus one may return home, back to Godhead. We do not have a center in Hardwar, but Vṛndāvana and Śrīdhāma Māyāpur are better for devotees than any other places. The Caitanya Candrodaya temple offers one a good opportunity to associate with devotees. Let us all take advantage of this opportunity.





TEXT 40



sa tasmin deva-sadana

āsīno yogam āsthitaḥ

pratyāhṛtendriya-grāmo

yuyoja mana ātmani

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Ajāmila); tasmin-at that place (Hardwar); deva-sadane-in one Viṣṇu temple; āsīnaḥ-being situated; yogam āsthitaḥ-performed bhakti-yoga; pratyāhṛta-withdrawn from all activities of sense gratification; indriya-grāmaḥ-his senses; yuyoja-he fixed; manaḥ-the mind; ātmani-on the self or the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





In Hardwar, Ajāmila took shelter at a Viṣṇu temple, where he executed the process of bhakti-yoga. He controlled his senses and fully applied his mind in the service of the Lord.





The devotees who have joined the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement may live comfortably in our many temples and engage in the devotional service of the Lord. Thus they can control the mind and senses and achieve the highest success in life. This is the process descending from time immemorial. Learning from the life of Ajāmila, we should vow with determination to do what is necessary to follow this path.





TEXT 41



tato guṇebhya ātmānaṁ

viyujyātma-samādhinā

yuyuje bhagavad-dhāmni

brahmaṇy anubhavātmani

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; guṇebhyaḥ-from the modes of material nature; ātmānam-the mind; viyujya-detaching; ātma-samādhinā-by being fully engaged in devotional service; yuyuje-engaged; bhagavat-dhāmni-in the form of the Lord; brahmaṇi-which is Parabrahman (not idol worship); anubhava-ātmani-which is always thought of (beginning from the lotus feet and gradually progressing upward).





Ajāmila fully engaged in devotional service. Thus he detached his mind from the process of sense gratification and became fully absorbed in thinking of the form of the Lord.





If one worships the Deity in the temple, one's mind will naturally be absorbed in thought of the Lord and His form. There is no distinction between the form of the Lord and the Lord Himself. Therefore bhakti-yoga is the most easy system of yoga. Yogīs try to concentrate their minds upon the form of the Supersoul, Viṣṇu, within the heart, but this same objective is easily achieved when one's mind is absorbed in the Deity worshiped in the temple. In every temple there is a transcendental form of the Lord, and one may easily think of this form. By seeing the Lord during ārati, by offering bhoga and by constantly thinking of the form of the Deity, one becomes a first-class yogī. This is the best process of yoga, as confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." The first-class yogī is he who controls his senses and detaches himself from material activities by always thinking of the form of the Lord.





TEXT 42



yarhy upārata-dhīs tasminn

adrākṣīt puruṣān puraḥ

upalabhyopalabdhān prāg

vavande śirasā dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



yarhi-when; upārata-dhīḥ-his mind and intelligence were fixed; tasmin-at that time; adrākṣīt-had seen; puruṣān-the persons (the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu); puraḥ-before him; upalabhya-getting; upalabdhān-who were gotten; prāk-previously; vavande-offered obeisances; śirasā-by the head; dvijaḥ-the brāhmaṇa.





When his intelligence and mind were fixed upon the form of the Lord, the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila once again saw before him four celestial persons. He could understand that they were those he had seen previously, and thus he offered them his obeisances by bowing down before them.





The Viṣṇudūtas who had rescued Ajāmila came before him again when his mind was firmly fixed upon the form of the Lord. The Viṣṇudūtas had gone away for some time to give Ajāmila a chance to become firmly fixed in meditation upon the Lord. Now that his devotion had matured, they returned to take him. Understanding that the same Viṣṇudūtas had returned, Ajāmila offered them his obeisances by bowing down before them.





TEXT 43



hitvā kalevaraṁ tīrthe

gaṅgāyāṁ darśanād anu

sadyaḥ svarūpaṁ jagṛhe

bhagavat-pārśva-vartinām

SYNONYMS



hitvā-giving up; kalevaram-the material body; tīrthe-in the holy place; gaṅgāyām-on the bank of the Ganges; darśanāt anu-after seeing; sadyaḥ-immediately; sva-rūpam-his original spiritual form; jagṛhe-he assumed; bhagavat-pārśva-vartinām-which is fit for an associate of the Lord.





Upon seeing the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila gave up his material body at Hardwar on the bank of the Ganges. He regained his original spiritual body, which was a body appropriate for an associate of the Lord.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."



The result of perfection in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is that after giving up one's material body, one is immediately transferred to the spiritual world in one's original spiritual body to become an associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Some devotees go to Vaikuṇṭhaloka, and others go to Goloka Vṛndāvana to become associates of Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 44



sākaṁ vihāyasā vipro

mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkaraiḥ

haimaṁ vimānam āruhya

yayau yatra śriyaḥ patiḥ

SYNONYMS



sākam-along; vihāyasā-by the path in the sky, or the airways; vipraḥ-the brāhmaṇa (Ajāmila); mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkaraiḥ-with the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu; haimam-made of gold; vimānam-an airplane; āruhya-boarding; yayau-went; yatra-where; śriyaḥ patiḥ-Lord Viṣṇu, the husband of the goddess of fortune.





Accompanied by the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, Ajāmila boarded an airplane made of gold. Passing through the airways, he went directly to the abode of Lord Viṣṇu, the husband of the goddess of fortune.





For many years, material scientists have tried to go to the moon, but they are still unable to go there. However, the spiritual airplanes from the spiritual planets can take one back home, back to Godhead, in a second. The speed of such a spiritual plane can only be imagined. Spirit is finer than the mind, and everyone has experience of how swiftly the mind travels from one place to another. Therefore one can imagine the swiftness of the spiritual form by comparing it to the speed of the mind. In less than even a moment, a perfect devotee can return home, back to Godhead, immediately after giving up his material body.





TEXT 45



evaṁ sa viplāvita-sarva-dharmā

dāsyāḥ patiḥ patito garhya-karmaṇā

nipātyamāno niraye hata-vrataḥ

sadyo vimukto bhagavan-nāma gṛhṇan

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; saḥ-he (Ajāmila); viplāvita-sarva-dharmāḥ-who gave up all religious principles; dāsyāḥ patiḥ-the husband of a prostitute; patitaḥ-fallen; garhya-karmaṇā-by being engaged in abominable activities; nipātyamānaḥ-falling; niraye-in hellish life; hata-vrataḥ-who broke all his vows; sadyaḥ-immediately; vimuktaḥ-liberated; bhagavat-nāma-the holy name of the Lord; gṛhṇan-chanting.





Ajāmila was a brāhmaṇa who because of bad association had given up all brahminical culture and religious principles. Becoming most fallen, he stole, drank and performed other abominable acts. He even kept a prostitute. Thus he was destined to be carried away to hell by the order carriers of Yamarāja, but he was immediately rescued simply by a glimpse of the chanting of the holy name Nārāyaṇa.





TEXT 46



nātaḥ paraṁ karma-nibandha-kṛntanaṁ

mumukṣatāṁ tīrtha-padānukīrtanāt

na yat punaḥ karmasu sajjate mano

rajas-tamobhyāṁ kalilaṁ tato 'nyathā

SYNONYMS



na-not; ataḥ-therefore; param-better means; karma-nibandha-the obligation to suffer or undergo tribulations as a result of fruitive activities; kṛntanam-that which can completely cut off; mumukṣatām-of persons desiring to get out of the clutches of material bondage; tīrtha-pada-about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand; anukīrtanāt-than constantly chanting under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master; na-not; yat-because; punaḥ-again; karmasu-in fruitive activities; sajjate-becomes attached; manaḥ-the mind; rajaḥ-tamobhyām-by the modes of passion and ignorance; kalilam-contaminated; tataḥ-thereafter; anyathā-by any other means.





Therefore one who desires freedom from material bondage should adopt the process of chanting and glorifying the name, fame, form and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand. One cannot derive the proper benefit from other methods, such as pious atonement, speculative knowledge and meditation in mystic yoga, because even after following such methods one takes to fruitive activities again, unable to control his mind, which is contaminated by the base qualities of nature, namely passion and ignorance.





It has actually been seen that even after achieving so-called perfection, many karmīs, jñānīs and yogīs become attached to material activities again. Many so-called svāmīs and yogīs give up material activities as false (jagan mithyā), but after some time they nevertheless resume material activities by opening hospitals and schools or performing other activities for the benefit of the public. Sometimes they participate in politics, although still falsely declaring themselves sannyāsīs, members of the renounced order. The perfect conclusion, however, is that if one actually desires to get out of the material world, he must take to devotional service, which begins with śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ: [SB 7.5.23] chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has actually proved this. In the Western countries, many young boys who were addicted to drugs and who had many other bad habits, which they could not give up, abandoned all those propensities and very seriously engaged in chanting the glories of the Lord as soon as they joined the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. In other words, this process is the perfect method of atonement for actions performed in rajaḥ and tamaḥ (passion and ignorance). As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.19):



tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati





As a result of rajaḥ and tamaḥ, one becomes increasingly lusty and greedy, but when one takes to the process of chanting and hearing, one comes to the platform of goodness and becomes happy. As he advances in devotional service, all his doubts are completely eradicated (bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ). Thus the knot of his desire for fruitive activities is cut to pieces.





TEXTS 47–48



ya etaṁ paramaṁ guhyam

itihāsam aghāpaham

śṛṇuyāc chraddhayā yukto

yaś ca bhaktyānukīrtayet

na vai sa narakaṁ yāti



nekṣito yama-kiṅkaraiḥ

yady apy amaṅgalo martyo

viṣṇu-loke mahīyate

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; etam-this; paramam-very; guhyam-confidential; itihāsam-historical narration; agha-apaham-which frees one from all reactions to sins; śṛṇuyāt-hears; śraddhayā-with faith; yuktaḥ-endowed; yaḥ-one who; ca-also; bhaktyā-with great devotion; anukīrtayet-repeats; na-not; vai-indeed; saḥ-such a person; narakam-to hell; yāti-goes; na-not; īkṣitaḥ-is observed; yama-kiṅkaraiḥ-by the order carriers of Yamarāja; yadi api-although; amaṅgalaḥ-inauspicious; martyaḥ-a living entity with a material body; viṣṇu-loke-in the spiritual world; mahīyate-is welcomed and respectfully received.





Because this very confidential historical narration has the potency to vanquish all sinful reactions, one who hears or describes it with faith and devotion is no longer doomed to hellish life, regardless of his having a material body and regardless of how sinful he may have been. Indeed, the Yamadūtas, who carry out the orders of Yamarāja, do not approach him even to see him. After giving up his body, he returns home, back to Godhead, where he is very respectfully received and worshiped.





TEXT 49



mriyamāṇo harer nāma

gṛṇan putropacāritam

ajāmilo 'py agād dhāma

kim uta śraddhayā gṛṇan

SYNONYMS



mriyamāṇaḥ-at the time of death; hareḥ nāma-the holy name of Hari; gṛṇan-chanting; putra-upacāritam-indicating his son; ajāmilaḥ-Ajāmila; api-even; agāt-went; dhāma-to the spiritual world; kim uta-what to speak of; śraddhayā-with faith and love; gṛṇan-chanting.





While suffering at the time of death, Ajāmila chanted the holy name of the Lord, and although the chanting was directed toward his son, he nevertheless returned home, back to Godhead. Therefore if one faithfully and inoffensively chants the holy name of the Lord, where is the doubt that he will return to Godhead?





At the time of death one is certainly bewildered because his bodily functions are in disorder. At that time, even one who throughout his life has practiced chanting the holy name of the Lord may not be able to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra very distinctly. Nevertheless, such a person receives all the benefits of chanting the holy name. While the body is fit therefore, why should we not chant the holy name of the Lord loudly and distinctly? If one does so, it is quite possible that even at the time of death he will be properly able to chant the holy name of the Lord with love and faith. In conclusion, one who chants the holy name of the Lord constantly is guaranteed to return home, back to Godhead, without a doubt.



Supplementary note to this chapter.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's commentary to texts nine and ten of this chapter form a dialogue concerning how one can become free from all sinful reactions simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord.



Someone may say, "It may be accepted that by chanting the holy name of the Lord one becomes freed from all the reactions of sinful life. However, if one commits sinful acts in full consciousness, not only once but many, many times, he is unable to free himself from the reactions of such sins even after atoning for them for twelve years or more. How is it possible, then, that simply by once chanting the holy name of the Lord one immediately becomes freed from the reactions of such sins?"



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura replies by quoting verses nine and ten of this chapter: "The chanting of the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu is the best process of atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a drunkard, for one who betrays a friend or relative, for one who kills a brāhmaṇa, or for one who indulges in sex with the wife of his guru or another superior. It is also the best method of atonement for one who murders women, the king or his father, for one who slaughters cows, and for all other sinful men. Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu, such sinful persons may attract the attention of the Supreme Lord, who therefore considers "Because this man has chanted My holy name, My duty is to give him protection.' "



One may atone for sinful life and vanquish all sinful reactions by chanting the holy name, although this is not called atonement. Ordinary atonement may temporarily protect a sinful person, but it does not completely cleanse his heart of the deep-rooted desire to commit sinful acts. Therefore atonement is not as powerful as the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. In the śāstras it is said that if a person only once chants the holy name and completely surrenders unto the lotus feet of the Lord, the Lord immediately considers him His ward and is always inclined to give him protection. This is confirmed by Śrīdhara Svāmī. Thus when Ajāmila was in great danger of being carried off by the order carriers of Yamarāja, the Lord immediately sent His personal order carriers to protect him, and because Ajāmila was freed from all sinful reactions, the Viṣṇudūtas spoke on his behalf.



Ajāmila had named his son Nārāyaṇa, and because he loved the boy very much, he would call him again and again. Although he was calling for his son, the name itself was powerful because the name Nārāyaṇa is not different from the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa. When Ajāmila named his son Nārāyaṇa, all the reactions of his sinful life were neutralized, and as he continued calling his son and thus chanting the holy name of Nārāyaṇa thousands of times, he was actually unconsciously advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



One may argue, "Since he was constantly chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa, how was it possible for him to be associating with a prostitute and thinking of wine?" By his sinful actions he was bringing suffering upon himself again and again, and therefore one may say that his ultimate chanting of Nārāyaṇa was the cause of his being freed. However, his chanting would then have been a nāma-aparādha. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ: one who continues to act sinfully and tries to neutralize his sins by chanting the holy name of the Lord is a nāma-aparādhī, an offender to the holy name. In response it may be said that Ajāmila's chanting was inoffensive because he did not chant the name of Nārāyaṇa with the purpose of counteracting his sins. He did not know that he was addicted to sinful actions, nor did he know that his chanting of the name of Nārāyaṇa was neutralizing them. Thus he did not commit a nāma-aparādha, and his repeated chanting of the holy name of Nārāyaṇa while calling his son may be called pure chanting. Because of this pure chanting, Ajāmila unconsciously accumulated the results of bhakti. Indeed, even his first utterance of the holy name was sufficient to nullify all the sinful reactions of his life. To cite a logical example, a fig tree does not immediately yield fruits, but in time the fruits are available. Similarly, Ajāmila's devotional service grew little by little, and therefore although he committed very sinful acts, the reactions did not affect him. In the śāstras it is said that if one chants the holy name of the Lord even once, the reactions of past, present or future sinful life do not affect him. To give another example, if one extracts the poison fangs of a serpent, this saves the serpent's future victims from poisonous effects, even if the serpent bites repeatedly. Similarly, if a devotee chants the holy name even once inoffensively, this protects him eternally. He need only wait for the results of the chanting to mature in due course of time.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Second Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Ajāmila Delivered by the Viṣṇudūtas."



Chapter Three



Yamarāja Instructs His Messengers





As related in this chapter, the Yamadūtas approached Yamarāja, who very exhaustively explained bhāgavata-dharma, the religious principle of devotional service. Yamarāja thus satisfied the Yamadūtas, who had been very disappointed. Yamarāja said, "Although Ajāmila was calling for his son, he chanted the holy name of the Lord, Nārāyaṇa, and simply by a glimpse of the chanting of the holy name, he immediately achieved the association of Lord Viṣṇu's order carriers, who saved him from your attempt to arrest him. This is quite all right. It is a fact that even a chronically sinful person who chants the holy name of the Lord, although not completely without offenses, does not take another material birth."



By chanting the holy name of the Lord, Ajāmila had met four order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu. They were very beautiful and had quickly come to rescue him. Yamarāja now described them. "The Viṣṇudūtas are all pure devotees of the Lord, the Supreme Person in regard to the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this cosmic manifestation. Neither King Indra, Varuṇa, Śiva, Brahmā, the seven ṛṣis nor I myself can understand the transcendental activities of the Supreme Lord, who is self-sufficient and beyond the reach of the material senses. With material senses, no one can attain enlightenment about Him. The Lord, the master of the illusory energy, possesses transcendental qualities for the good fortune of everyone, and His devotees are also qualified in that way. The devotees, concerned only with rescuing the fallen souls from this material world, apparently take birth in different places in the material world just to save the conditioned souls. If one is somewhat interested in spiritual life, the devotees of the Lord protect him in many ways."



Yamarāja continued, "The essence of sanātana-dharma, or eternal religion, is extremely confidential. No one but the Lord Himself can deliver that confidential religious system to human society. It is by the mercy of the Lord that the transcendental system of religion can be understood by His pure devotees, and specifically by the twelve mahājanas-Lord Brahmā, Nārada Muni, Lord Śiva, the Kumāras, Kapila, Manu, Prahlāda, Janaka, Bhīṣma, Bali, Śukadeva Gosvāmī and me. Other learned scholars, headed by Jaimini, are almost always covered by the illusory energy, and therefore they are more or less attracted by the flowery language of the three Vedas, namely Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma, which are called trayī. Instead of becoming pure devotees, people captivated by the flowery words of these three Vedas are interested in the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. They cannot understand the glories of chanting the holy name of the Lord. Intelligent persons, however, take to the devotional service of the Lord. When they chant the holy name of the Lord without offenses, they are no longer subject to my rulings. If by chance they commit some sinful act, they are protected by the holy name of the Lord because that is where their interest lies. The four weapons of the Lord, especially the club and the Sudarśana cakra, always protect the devotees. One who chants, hears or remembers the holy name of the Lord without duplicity, or who prays or offers obeisances to the Lord, becomes perfect, whereas even a learned person may be called to hell if he is bereft of devotional service."



After Yamarāja thus described the glories of the Lord and His devotees, Śukadeva Gosvāmī further explained the potency of chanting the holy name and the futility of performing Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and pious activities for atonement.





TEXT 1



śrī-rājovāca

niśamya devaḥ sva-bhaṭopavarṇitaṁ

pratyāha kiṁ tān api dharmarājaḥ

evaṁ hatājño vihatān murārer

naideśikair yasya vaśe jano 'yam

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-the King said; niśamya-after hearing; devaḥ-Lord Yamarāja; sva-bhaṭa-of his own servants; upavarṇitam-the statements; pratyāha-replied; kim-what; tān-unto them; api-also; dharma-rājaḥ-Yamarāja, the superintendent of death and the judge of religious and irreligious activities; evam-thus; hata-ājñaḥ-whose order was foiled; vihatān-who were defeated; murāreḥ naideśikaiḥ-by the order carriers of Murāri, Kṛṣṇa; yasya-of whom; vaśe-under the subjugation; janaḥ ayam-all the people of the world.





King Parīkṣit said: O my lord, O Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Yamarāja is the controller of all living entities in terms of their religious and irreligious activities, but his order had been foiled. When his servants, the Yamadūtas, informed him of their defeat by the Viṣṇudūtas, who had stopped them from arresting Ajāmila, what did he reply?





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that although the statements of the Yamadūtas were fully upheld by Vedic principles, the statements of the Viṣṇudūtas were triumphant. This was confirmed by Yamarāja himself.





TEXT 2



yamasya devasya na daṇḍa-bhaṅgaḥ

kutaścanarṣe śruta-pūrva āsīt

etan mune vṛścati loka-saṁśayaṁ

na hi tvad-anya iti me viniścitam

SYNONYMS



yamasya-of Yamarāja; devasya-the demigod in charge of judgment; na-not; daṇḍa-bhaṅgaḥ-the breaking of the order; kutaścana-from anywhere; ṛṣe-O great sage; śruta-pūrvaḥ-heard before; āsīt-was; etat-this; mune-O great sage; vṛścati-can eradicate; loka-saṁśayam-the doubt of people; na-not; hi-indeed; tvat-anyaḥ-anyone other than you; iti-thus; me-by me; viniścitam-concluded.





O great sage, never before has it been heard anywhere that an order from Yamarāja has been baffled. Therefore I think that people will have doubts about this that no one but you can eradicate. Since that is my firm conviction, kindly explain the reasons for these events.





TEXT 3



śrī-śuka uvāca

bhagavat-puruṣai rājan

yāmyāḥ pratihatodyamāḥ

patiṁ vijñāpayām āsur

yamaṁ saṁyamanī-patim

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bhagavat-puruṣaiḥ-by the order carriers of the Lord, the Viṣṇudūtas; rājan-O King; yāmyāḥ-the order carriers of Yamarāja; pratihata-udyamāḥ-whose efforts were defeated; patim-their master; vijñāpayām āsuḥ-informed; yamam-Yamarāja; saṁyamanī-patim-the master of the city Saṁyamanī.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied: My dear King, when the order carriers of Yamarāja were baffled and defeated by the order carriers of Viṣṇu, they approached their master, the controller of Saṁyamanī-purī and master of sinful persons, to tell him of this incident.





TEXT 4



yamadūtā ūcuḥ

kati santīha śāstāro

jīva-lokasya vai prabho

trai-vidhyaṁ kurvataḥ karma

phalābhivyakti-hetavaḥ

SYNONYMS



yamadūtāḥ ūcuḥ-the order carriers of Yamarāja said; kati-how many; santi-are there; iha-in this world; śāstāraḥ-controllers or rulers; jīva-lokasya-of this material world; vai-indeed; prabho-O master; trai-vidhyam-under the three modes of material nature; kurvataḥ-performing; karma-activity; phala-of the results; abhivyakti-of the manifestation; hetavaḥ-causes.





The Yamadūtas said: Our dear lord, how many controllers or rulers are there in this material world? How many causes are responsible for manifesting the various results of activities performed under the three modes of material nature [sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa]?





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that the Yamadūtas, the order carriers of Yamarāja, were so disappointed that they asked their master, almost in great anger, whether there were many masters other than him. Furthermore, because the Yamadūtas had been defeated and their master could not protect them, they were inclined to say that there was no need to serve such a master. If a servant cannot carry out the orders of his master without being defeated, what is the use of serving such a powerless master?





TEXT 5



yadi syur bahavo loke

śāstāro daṇḍa-dhāriṇaḥ

kasya syātāṁ na vā kasya

mṛtyuś cāmṛtam eva vā

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; syuḥ-there are; bahavaḥ-many; loke-in this world; śāstāraḥ-rulers or controllers; daṇḍa-dhāriṇaḥ-who punish the sinful men; kasya-of whom; syātām-there may be; na-not; vā-or; kasya-of whom; mṛtyuḥ-distress or unhappiness; ca-and; amṛtam-happiness; eva-certainly; vā-or.





If in this universe there are many rulers and justices who disagree about punishment and reward, their contradictory actions will neutralize each other, and no one will be punished or rewarded. Otherwise, if their contradictory acts fail to neutralize each other, everyone will have to be both punished and rewarded.





Because the Yamadūtas had been unsuccessful in carrying out the order of Yamarāja, they doubted whether Yamarāja actually had the power to punish the sinful. Although they had gone to arrest Ajāmila, following Yamarāja's order, they found themselves unsuccessful because of the order of some higher authority. Therefore they were unsure of whether there were many authorities or only one. If there were many authorities who gave different judgments, which could be contradictory, a person might be wrongly punished or wrongly rewarded, or he might be neither punished nor rewarded. According to our experience in the material world, a person punished in one court may appeal to another. Thus the same man may be either punished or rewarded according to different judgments. However, in the law of nature or the court of the Supreme Personality of Godhead there cannot be such contradictory judgments. The judges and their judgments must be perfect and free from contradictions. Actually the position of Yamarāja was very awkward in the case of Ajāmila because the Yamadūtas were right in attempting to arrest Ajāmila, but the Viṣṇudūtas had baffled them. Although Yamarāja, under these circumstances, was accused by both the Viṣṇudūtas and the Yamadūtas, he is perfect in administering justice because he is empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he will explain what his real position is and how everyone is controlled by the supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 6



kintu śāstṛ-bahutve syād

bahūnām iha karmiṇām

śāstṛtvam upacāro hi

yathā maṇḍala-vartinām

SYNONYMS



kintu-but; śāstṛ-of governors or judges; bahutve-in the plurality; syāt-there may be; bahūnām-of many; iha-in this world; karmiṇām-persons performing actions; śāstṛtvam-departmental management; upacāraḥ-administration; hi-indeed; yathā-just like; maṇḍala-vartinām-of the departmental heads.





The Yamadūtas continued: Since there are many different karmīs, or workers, there may be different judges or rulers to give them justice, but just as one central emperor controls different departmental rulers, there must be one supreme controller to guide all the judges.





In governmental management there may be departmental officials to give justice to different persons, but the law must be one, and that central law must control everyone. The Yamadūtas could not imagine that two judges would give two different verdicts in the same case, and therefore they wanted to know who the central judge is. The Yamadūtas were certain that Ajāmila was a most sinful man, but although Yamarāja wanted to punish him, the Viṣṇudūtas excused him. This was a puzzling situation that the Yamadūtas wanted Yamarāja to clarify.





TEXT 7



atas tvam eko bhūtānāṁ

seśvarāṇām adhīśvaraḥ

śāstā daṇḍa-dharo nṝṇāṁ

śubhāśubha-vivecanaḥ

SYNONYMS



ataḥ-as such; tvam-you; ekaḥ-one; bhūtānām-of all living beings; sa-īśvarāṇām-including all the demigods; adhīśvaraḥ-the supreme master; śāstā-the supreme ruler; daṇḍa-dharaḥ-the supreme administrator of punishment; nṝṇām-of human society; śubha-aśubha-vivecanaḥ-who discriminates between what is auspicious and inauspicious.





The supreme judge must be one, not many. It was our understanding that you are that supreme judge and that you have jurisdiction even over the demigods. Our impression was that you are the master of all living entities, the supreme authority who discriminates between the pious and impious activities of all human beings.





TEXT 8



tasya te vihito daṇḍo

na loke vartate 'dhunā

caturbhir adbhutaiḥ siddhair

ājñā te vipralambhitā

SYNONYMS



tasya-of the influence; te-of you; vihitaḥ-ordained; daṇḍaḥ-punishment; na-not; loke-within this world; vartate-exists; adhunā-now; caturbhiḥ-by four; adbhutaiḥ-very wonderful; siddhaiḥ-perfected persons; ājñā-the order; te-your; vipralambhitā-surpassed.





But now we see that the punishment ordained under your authority is no longer effective, since your order has been transgressed by four wonderful and perfect persons.





The Yamadūtas had been under the impression that Yamarāja was the only person in charge of administering justice. They were fully confident that no one could counteract his judgments, but now, to their surprise, his order had been violated by the four wonderful persons from Siddhaloka.





TEXT 9



nīyamānaṁ tavādeśād

asmābhir yātanā-gṛhān

vyāmocayan pātakinaṁ

chittvā pāśān prasahya te

SYNONYMS



nīyamānam-being brought; tava ādeśāt-by your order; asmābhiḥ-by us; yātanā-gṛhān-to the torture chambers, the hellish planets; vyāmocayan-released; pātakinam-the sinful Ajāmila; chittvā-cutting; pāśān-the ropes; prasahya-by force; te-they.





We were bringing the most sinful Ajāmila toward the hellish planets, following your order, when those beautiful persons from Siddhaloka forcibly cut the knots of the ropes with which we were arresting him.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that the Yamadūtas wanted to bring the Viṣṇudūtas before Yamarāja. If Yamarāja could then have punished the Viṣṇudūtas, the Yamadūtas would have been satisfied.





TEXT 10



tāṁs te veditum icchāmo

yadi no manyase kṣamam

nārāyaṇety abhihite

mā bhair ity āyayur drutam

SYNONYMS



tān-about them; te-from you; veditum-to know; icchāmaḥ-we wish; yadi-if; naḥ-for us; manyase-you think; kṣamam-suitable; nārāyaṇa-Nārāyaṇa; iti-thus; abhihite-being uttered; mā-do not; bhaiḥ-fear; iti-thus; āyayuḥ-they arrived; drutam-very soon.





As soon as the sinful Ajāmila uttered the name Nārāyaṇa, these four beautiful men immediately arrived and reassured him, saying, "Do not fear. Do not fear." We wish to know about them from Your Lordship. If you think we are able to understand them, kindly describe who they are.





The order carriers of Yamarāja, being very much aggrieved because of their defeat by the four Viṣṇudūtas, wanted to bring them before Yamarāja and, if possible, punish them. Otherwise they desired to commit suicide. Before pursuing either course, however, they wanted to know about the Viṣṇudūtas from Yamarāja, who is also omniscient.





TEXT 11



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

iti devaḥ sa āpṛṣṭaḥ

prajā-saṁyamano yamaḥ

prītaḥ sva-dūtān pratyāha

smaran pādāmbujaṁ hareḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; devaḥ-the demigod; saḥ-he; āpṛṣṭaḥ-being questioned; prajā-saṁyamanaḥ yamaḥ-Lord Yamarāja, who controls the living entities; prītaḥ-being pleased; sva-dūtān-to his own servants; pratyāha-replied; smaran-remembering; pāda-ambujam-the lotus feet; hareḥ-of Hari, the Personality of Godhead.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus having been questioned, Lord Yamarāja, the supreme controller of the living entities, was very pleased with his order carriers because of hearing from them the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. He remembered the lotus feet of the Lord and began to reply.





Śrīla Yamarāja, the supreme controller of the living entities in terms of their pious and impious activities, was very pleased with his servants because they had chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa in his dominion. Yamarāja has to deal with men who are all sinful and who can hardly understand Nārāyaṇa. Consequently when his order carriers uttered the name of Nārāyaṇa, he was extremely pleased, for he also is a Vaiṣṇava.





TEXT 12



yama uvāca

paro mad-anyo jagatas tasthuṣaś ca

otaṁ protaṁ paṭavad yatra viśvam

yad-aṁśato 'sya sthiti-janma-nāśā

nasy otavad yasya vaśe ca lokaḥ

SYNONYMS



yamaḥ uvāca-Yamarāja replied; paraḥ-superior; mat-than me; anyaḥ-another; jagataḥ-of all moving things; tasthuṣaḥ-of nonmoving things; ca-and; otam-crosswise; protam-lengthwise; paṭavat-like a woven cloth; yatra-in whom; viśvam-the cosmic manifestation; yat-of whom; aṁśataḥ-from the partial expansions; asya-of this universe; sthiti-the maintenance; janma-the creation; nāśāḥ-the annihilation; nasi-in the nose; ota-vat-like the rope; yasya-of whom; vaśe-under the control; ca-and; lokaḥ-the whole creation.





Yamarāja said: My dear servants, you have accepted me as the Supreme, but factually I am not. Above me, and above all the other demigods, including Indra and Candra, is the one supreme master and controller. The partial manifestations of His personality are Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, who are in charge of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this universe. He is like the two threads that form the length and breadth of a woven cloth. The entire world is controlled by Him just as a bull is controlled by a rope in its nose.





The order carriers of Yamarāja suspected that there was a ruler even above Yamarāja. To eradicate their doubts, Yamarāja immediately replied, "Yes, there is one supreme controller above everything." Yamarāja is in charge of some of the moving living entities, namely the human beings, but the animals, who also move, are not under his control. Only human beings have consciousness of right and wrong, and among them only those who perform sinful activities come under the control of Yamarāja. Therefore although Yamarāja is a controller, he is only a departmental controller of a few living entities. There are other demigods who control many other departments, but above them all is one supreme controller, Kṛṣṇa. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]: the supreme controller is Kṛṣṇa. Others, who control their own departments in the affairs of the universe, are insignificant in comparison to Kṛṣṇa, the supreme controller. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.7), mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: "My dear Dhanañjaya [Arjuna], no one is superior to Me." Therefore Yamarāja immediately cleared away the doubts of his assistants, the Yamadūtas, by confirming that there is a supreme controller above all others.



Śrīla Madhvācārya explains that the words otaṁ protam refer to the cause of all causes. The Supreme Lord is both vertical and horizontal to the cosmic manifestation. This is confirmed by the following verse from the Skanda Purāṇa:



yathā kanthā-paṭāḥ sūtra

otāḥ protāś ca sa sthitāḥ

evaṁ viṣṇāv idaṁ viśvam

otaṁ protaṁ ca saṁsthitam





Like the two threads, horizontal and vertical, of which a quilt is manufactured, Lord Viṣṇu is situated as the vertical and horizontal cause of the cosmic manifestation.





TEXT 13



yo nāmabhir vāci janaṁ nijāyāṁ

badhnāti tantryām iva dāmabhir gāḥ

yasmai baliṁ ta ime nāma-karma-

nibandha-baddhāś cakitā vahanti

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-He who; nāmabhiḥ-by different names; vāci-to the Vedic language; janam-all people; nijāyām-which has emanated from Himself; badhnāti-binds; tantryām-to a rope; iva-like; dāmabhiḥ-by cords; gāḥ-bulls; yasmai-unto whom; balim-a small presentation of taxes; te-all of them; ime-these; nāma-karma-of names and different activities; nibandha-by the obligations; baddhāḥ-bound; cakitāḥ-being fearful; vahanti-carry.





Just as the driver of a bullock cart ties ropes through the nostrils of his bulls to control them, the Supreme Personality of Godhead binds all men through the ropes of His words in the Vedas, which set forth the names and activities of the distinct orders of human society [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra]. In fear, the members of these orders all worship the Supreme Lord by offering Him presentations according to their respective activities.





In this material world, everyone is conditioned, regardless of who he is. One may be a human being, a demigod or an animal, tree or plant, but everything is controlled by the laws of nature, and behind this natural control is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is confirmed by Bhagavad-gītā (9.10), wherein Kṛṣṇa says, mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: "The material nature is working under My direction and producing all moving and nonmoving beings." Thus Kṛṣṇa is behind the natural machine, which works under His control.



Apart from other living entities, the living being in the human form of body is systematically controlled by the Vedic injunctions in terms of the divisions of varṇa and āśrama. A human being is expected to follow the rules and regulations of varṇa and āśrama; otherwise he cannot escape punishment by Yamarāja. The point is that every human being is expected to elevate himself to the position of a brāhmaṇa, the most intelligent man, and then one must transcend that position to become a Vaiṣṇava. This is the perfection of life. The brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra can elevate themselves by worshiping the Lord according to their activities (sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ). The divisions of varṇa and āśrama are necessary to insure the proper execution of duties and peaceful existence for everyone, but everyone is directed to worship the Supreme Lord, who is all-pervading (yena sarvam idaṁ tatam). The Supreme Lord exists vertically and horizontally (otaṁ protam), and therefore if one follows the Vedic injunctions by worshiping the Supreme Lord according to one's ability, his life will be perfect. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.13):



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam





"O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest perfection one can achieve, by discharging his prescribed duties [dharma] according to caste divisions and orders of life, is to please the Lord Hari." The varṇāśrama institution offers the perfect process for making one eligible to return home, back to Godhead, because the aim of every varṇa and āśrama is to please the Supreme Lord. One can please the Lord under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master. and if one does so his life is perfect. The Supreme Lord is worshipable. and everyone worships Him directly or indirectly. Those who worship Him directly get the results of liberation quickly, whereas the liberation of those who serve Him indirectly is delayed.



The words nāmabhir vāci are very important. In the varṇāśrama institution, there are different names-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsī. The vāk, or Vedic injunctions, give directions for all these divisions. Everyone is expected to offer obeisances to the Supreme Lord and perform duties as indicated in the Vedas.





TEXTS 14–15



ahaṁ mahendro nirṛtiḥ pracetāḥ

somo 'gnir īśaḥ pavano viriñciḥ

āditya-viśve vasavo 'tha sādhyā

marud-gaṇā rudra-gaṇāḥ sasiddhāḥ

anye ca ye viśva-sṛjo 'mareśā



bhṛgv-ādayo 'spṛṣṭa-rajas-tamaskāḥ

yasyehitaṁ na viduḥ spṛṣṭa-māyāḥ

sattva-pradhānā api kiṁ tato 'nye

SYNONYMS



aham-I, Yamarāja; mahendraḥ-Indra, the King of heaven; nirṛtiḥ-Nirṛti; pracetāḥ-Varuṇa, the controller of water; somaḥ-the moon; agniḥ-fire; īśaḥ-Lord Śiva; pavanaḥ-the demigod of the air; viriñciḥ-Lord Brahmā; āditya-the sun; viśve-Viśvāsu; vasavaḥ-the eight Vasus; atha-also; sādhyāḥ-the demigods; marut-gaṇāḥ-masters of the wind; rudra-gaṇāḥ-the expansions of Lord Śiva; sa-siddhāḥ-with the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; anye-others; ca-and; ye-who; viśva-sṛjaḥ-Marīci and the other creators of the universal affairs; amara-īśāḥ-the demigods like Bṛhaspati; bhṛgu-ādayaḥ-the great sages headed by Bhṛgu; aspṛṣṭa-who have not been contaminated; rajaḥ-tamaskāḥ-by the lower modes of material nature (rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa); yasya-of whom; īhitam-the activity; na viduḥ-do not know; spṛṣṭa-māyāḥ-who are illusioned by the illusory energy; sattva-pradhānāḥ-chiefly in the mode of goodness; api-although; kim-what to speak of; tataḥ-than them; anye-others.





I, Yamarāja; Indra, the King of heaven; Nirṛti; Varuṇa; Candra, the moon-god; Agni; Lord Śiva; Pavana; Lord Brahmā; Sūrya, the sun-god; Viśvāsu; the eight Vasus; the Sādhyas; the Maruts; the Rudras; the Siddhas; and Marīci and the other great ṛṣis engaged in maintaining the departmental affairs of the universe, as well as the best of the demigods headed by Bṛhaspati, and the great sages headed by Bhṛgu are all certainly freed from the influence of the two base material modes of nature, namely passion and ignorance. Nevertheless, although we are in the mode of goodness, we cannot understand the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What, then, is to be said of others, who, under illusion, merely speculate to know God?





The men and other living entities within this cosmic manifestation are controlled by the three modes of nature. For the living entities controlled by the base qualities of nature, passion and ignorance, there is no possibility of understanding God. Even those in the mode of goodness, like the many demigods and great ṛṣis described in these verses, cannot understand the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, one who is situated in the devotional service of the Lord is transcendental to all the material qualities. Therefore the Lord personally says that no one can understand Him but the bhaktas, who are transcendental to all material qualities (bhaktyā mām abhijānāti [Bg. 18.55]). As stated by Bhīṣmadeva to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.9.16):



na hy asya karhicid rājan

pumān veda vidhitsitam

yad-vijijñāsayā yuktā

muhyanti kavayo 'pi hi





"O King, no one can know the plan of the Lord [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]. Even though great philosophers inquire exhaustively, they are bewildered." No one, therefore, can understand God by speculative knowledge. Indeed, by speculation one will be bewildered (muhyanti). This is also confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (7.3):



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ





Among many thousands of men, one may endeavor for perfection, and even among the siddhas, those who have already become perfect, only one who adopts the process of bhakti, devotional service, can understand Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 16



yaṁ vai na gobhir manasāsubhir vā

hṛdā girā vāsu-bhṛto vicakṣate

ātmānam antar-hṛdi santam ātmanāṁ

cakṣur yathaivākṛtayas tataḥ param

SYNONYMS



yam-whom; vai-indeed; na-not; gobhiḥ-by the senses; manasā-by the mind; asubhiḥ-by the life breath; vā-or; hṛdā-by thoughts; girā-by words; vā-or; asu-bhṛtaḥ-the living entities; vicakṣate-see or know; ātmānam-the Supersoul; antaḥ-hṛdi-within the core of the heart; santam-existing; ātmanām-of the living entities; cakṣuḥ-the eyes; yathā-just like; eva-indeed; ākṛtayaḥ-the different parts or limbs of the body; tataḥ-than them; param-higher.





As the different limbs of the body cannot see the eyes, the living entities cannot see the Supreme Lord, who is situated as the Supersoul in everyone's heart. Not by the senses, by the mind, by the life air, by thoughts within the heart, or by the vibration of words can the living entities ascertain the real situation of the Supreme Lord.





Although the different parts of the body do not have the power to see the eyes, the eyes direct the movements of the body's different parts. The legs move forward because the eyes see what is in front of them, and the hand touches because the eyes see touchable entities. Similarly, every living being acts according to the direction of the Supersoul, who is situated within the heart. As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: "I am sitting in everyone's heart and giving directions for remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā it is stated, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: [Bg. 18.61] "The Supreme Lord, as the Supersoul, is situated within the heart." The living entity cannot do anything without the sanction of the Supersoul. The Supersoul is acting at every moment, but the living entity cannot understand the form and activities of the Supersoul by manipulating his senses. The example of the eyes and the bodily limbs is very appropriate. If the limbs could see, they could walk forward without the help of the eyes, but that is impossible. Although one cannot see the Supersoul in one's heart through sensual activities, His direction is necessary.





TEXT 17



tasyātma-tantrasya harer adhīśituḥ

parasya māyādhipater mahātmanaḥ

prāyeṇa dūtā iha vai manoharāś

caranti tad-rūpa-guṇa-svabhāvāḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Him; ātma-tantrasya-being self-sufficient, not dependent on any other person; hareḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhīśituḥ-who is the master of everything; parasya-the Transcendence; māyā-adhipateḥ-the master of the illusory energy; mahā-ātmanaḥ-of the Supreme Soul; prāyeṇa-almost; dūtāḥ-the order carriers; iha-in this world; vai-indeed; manoharāḥ-pleasing in their dealings and bodily features; caranti-they move; tat-of Him; rūpa-possessing the bodily features; guṇa-the transcendental qualities; svabhāvāḥ-and nature.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is self-sufficient and fully independent. He is the master of everyone and everything, including the illusory energy. He has His form, qualities and features; and similarly His order carriers, the Vaiṣṇavas, who are very beautiful, possess bodily features, transcendental qualities and a transcendental nature almost like His. They always wander within this world with full independence.





Yamarāja was describing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, but the order carriers of Yamarāja were very eager to know about the Viṣṇudūtas, who had defeated them in their encounter with Ajāmila. Yamarāja therefore stated that the Viṣṇudūtas resemble the Supreme Personality of Godhead in their bodily features, transcendental qualities and nature. In other words, the Viṣṇudūtas, or Vaiṣṇavas, are almost as qualified as the Supreme Lord. Yamarāja informed the Yamadūtas that the Viṣṇudūtas are no less powerful than Lord Viṣṇu. Since Viṣṇu is above Yamarāja, the Viṣṇudūtas are above the Yamadūtas. Persons protected by the Viṣṇudūtas, therefore, cannot be touched by the Yamadūtas.





TEXT 18



bhūtāni viṣṇoḥ sura-pūjitāni

durdarśa-liṅgāni mahādbhutāni

rakṣanti tad-bhaktimataḥ parebhyo

mattaś ca martyān atha sarvataś ca

SYNONYMS



bhūtāni-living entities or servants; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; sura-pūjitāni-who are worshiped by the demigods; durdarśa-liṅgāni-possessing forms not easily seen; mahā-adbhutāni-greatly wonderful; rakṣanti-they protect; tat-bhakti-mataḥ-the devotees of the Lord; parebhyaḥ-from others who are inimical; mattaḥ-from me (Yamarāja) and my order carriers; ca-and; martyān-the human beings; atha-thus; sarvataḥ-from everything; ca-and.





The order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, who are worshiped even by the demigods, possess wonderful bodily features exactly like those of Viṣṇu and are very rarely seen. The Viṣṇudūtas protect the devotees of the Lord from the hands of enemies, from envious persons and even from my jurisdiction, as well as from natural disturbances.





Yamarāja has specifically described the qualities of the Viṣṇudūtas to convince his own servants not to be envious of them. Yamarāja warned the Yamadūtas that the Viṣṇudūtas are worshiped with respectful obeisances by the demigods and are always very alert to protect the devotees of the Lord from the hands of enemies, from natural disturbances and from all dangerous conditions in this material world. Sometimes the members of the Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Society are afraid of the impending danger of world war and ask what would happen to them if a war should occur. In all kinds of danger, they should be confident of their protection by the Viṣṇudūtas or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati). Material danger is not meant for devotees. This is also confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām: in this material world there are dangers at every step, but they are not meant for devotees who have fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord. The pure devotees of Lord Viṣṇu may rest assured of the Lord's protection, and as long as they are in this material world they should fully engage in devotional service by preaching the cult of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Lord Kṛṣṇa, namely the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 19



dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītaṁ

na vai vidur ṛṣayo nāpi devāḥ

na siddha-mukhyā asurā manuṣyāḥ

kuto nu vidyādhara-cāraṇādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



dharmam-real religious principles, or bona fide laws of religion; tu-but; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavat-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; praṇītam-enacted; na-not; vai-indeed; viduḥ-they know; ṛṣayaḥ-the great ṛṣis such as Bhṛgu; na-not; api-also; devāḥ-the demigods; na-nor; siddha-mukhyāḥ-the chief leaders of Siddhaloka; asurāḥ-the demons; manuṣyāḥ-the inhabitants of Bhūrloka, the human beings; kutaḥ-where; nu-indeed; vidyādhara-the lesser demigods known as Vidyādharas; cāraṇa-the residents of the planets where people are by nature great musicians and singers; ādayaḥ-and so on.





Real religious principles are enacted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although fully situated in the mode of goodness, even the great ṛṣis who occupy the topmost planets cannot ascertain the real religious principles, nor can the demigods or the leaders of Siddhaloka, to say nothing of the asuras, ordinary human beings, Vidyādharas and Cāraṇas.





When challenged by the Viṣṇudūtas to describe the principles of religion, the Yamadūtas said, veda-praṇihito dharmaḥ: the religious principles are the principles enacted in the Vedic literature. They did not know, however, that the Vedic literature contains ritualistic ceremonies that are not transcendental, but are meant to keep peace and order among materialistic persons in the material world. Real religious principles are nistraiguṇya, above the three modes of material nature, or transcendental. The Yamadūtas did not know these transcendental religious principles, and therefore when prevented from arresting Ajāmila they were surprised. Materialistic persons who attach all their faith to the Vedic rituals are described in Bhagavad-gītā (2.42), wherein Kṛṣṇa says, veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha nānyad astīti vādinaḥ: the supposed followers of the Vedas say that there is nothing beyond the Vedic ceremonies. Indeed, there is a group of men in India who are very fond of the Vedic rituals, not understanding the meaning of these rituals, which are intended to elevate one gradually to the transcendental platform of knowing Kṛṣṇa (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]). Those who do not know this principle but who simply attach their faith to the Vedic rituals are called veda-vāda-ratāḥ.



Herein it is stated that the real religious principle is that which is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That principle is stated in Bhagavad-gītā. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] one should give up all other duties and surrender unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. That is the real religious principle everyone should follow. Even though one follows Vedic scriptures, one may not know this transcendental principle, for it is not known to everyone. To say nothing of human beings, even the demigods in the upper planetary systems are unaware of it. This transcendental religious principle must be understood from the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly or from His special representative, as stated in the next verses.





TEXTS 20–21



svayambhūr nāradaḥ śambhuḥ

kumāraḥ kapilo manuḥ

prahlādo janako bhīṣmo

balir vaiyāsakir vayam

dvādaśaite vijānīmo



dharmaṁ bhāgavataṁ bhaṭāḥ

guhyaṁ viśuddhaṁ durbodhaṁ

yaṁ jñātvāmṛtam aśnute

SYNONYMS



svayambhūḥ-Lord Brahmā; nāradaḥ-the great saint Nārada; śambhuḥ-Lord Śiva; kumāraḥ-the four Kumāras; kapilaḥ-Lord Kapila; manuḥ-Svāyambhuva Manu; prahlādaḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja; janakaḥ-Janaka Mahārāja; bhīṣmaḥ-Grandfather Bhīṣma; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; vaiyāsakiḥ-Śukadeva, the son of Vyāsadeva; vayam-we; dvādaśa-twelve; ete-these; vijānīmaḥ-know; dharmam-real religious principles; bhāgavatam-which teach a person how to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaṭāḥ-O my dear servants; guhyam-very confidential; viśuddham-transcendental, not contaminated by the material modes of nature; durbodham-not easily understood; yam-which; jñātvā-understanding; amṛtam-eternal life; aśnute-he enjoys.





Lord Brahmā, Bhagavān Nārada, Lord Śiva, the four Kumāras, Lord Kapila [the son of Devahūti], Svāyambhuva Manu, Prahlāda Mahārāja, Janaka Mahārāja, Grandfather Bhīṣma, Bali Mahārāja, Śukadeva Gosvāmī and I myself know the real religious principle. My dear servants, this transcendental religious principle, which is known as bhāgavata-dharma, or surrender unto the Supreme Lord and love for Him, is uncontaminated by the material modes of nature. It is very confidential and difficult for ordinary human beings to understand, but if by chance one fortunately understands it, he is immediately liberated, and thus he returns home, back to Godhead.





In Bhagavad-gītā Lord Kṛṣṇa refers to bhāgavata-dharma as the most confidential religious principle (sarva-guhyatamam, guhyād guhyataram). Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna, "Because you are My very dear friend, I am explaining to you the most confidential religion." Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other duties and surrender unto Me." One may ask, "If this principle is very rarely understood, what is the use of it?" In answer, Yamarāja states herein that this religious principle is understandable if one follows the paramparā system of Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, the four Kumāras and the other standard authorities. There are four lines of disciplic succession: one from Lord Brahmā, one from Lord Śiva, one from Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, and one from the Kumāras. The disciplic succession from Lord Brahmā is called the Brahma-sampradāya, the succession from Lord Śiva (Śambhu) is called the Rudra-sampradāya, the one from the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmījī, is called the Śrī-sampradāya, and the one from the Kumāras is called the Kumāra-sampradāya. One must take shelter of one of these four sampradāyas in order to understand the most confidential religious system. In the Padma Purāṇa it is said, sampradāya-vihīnā ye mantrās te niṣphalā matāḥ: if one does not follow the four recognized disciplic successions, his mantra or initiation is useless. In the present day there are many apasampradāyas, or sampradāyas which are not bona fide, which have no link to authorities like Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, the Kumāras or Lakṣmī. People are misguided by such sampradāyas. The śāstras say that being initiated in such a sampradāya is a useless waste of time, for it will never enable one to understand the real religious principles.





TEXT 22



etāvān eva loke 'smin

puṁsāṁ dharmaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ

bhakti-yogo bhagavati

tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



etāvān-this much; eva-indeed; loke asmin-in this material world; puṁsām-of the living entities; dharmaḥ-the religious principles; paraḥ-transcendental; smṛtaḥ-recognized; bhakti-yogaḥ-bhakti-yoga, or devotional service; bhagavati-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (not to the demigods); tat-His; nāma-of the holy name; grahaṇa-ādibhiḥ-beginning with chanting.





Devotional service, beginning with the chanting of the holy name of the Lord, is the ultimate religious principle for the living entity in human society.





As stated in the previous verse, dharmaṁ bhāgavatam, real religious principles, are bhāgavata-dharma, the principles described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam itself or in Bhagavad-gītā, the preliminary study of the Bhāgavatam. What are these principles? The Bhāgavatam says, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo 'tra: [SB 1.1.2] in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there are no cheating religious systems. Everything in the Bhāgavatam is directly connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Bhāgavatam further says, sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje: [SB 1.2.6] the supreme religion is that which teaches its followers how to love the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the reach of experimental knowledge. Such a religious system begins with tan-nāma-grahaṇa, chanting of the holy name of the Lord (śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam [SB 7.5.23]). After chanting the holy name of the Lord and dancing in ecstasy, one gradually sees the form of the Lord, the pastimes of the Lord and the transcendental qualities of the Lord. This way one fully understands the situation of the Personality of Godhead. One can come to this understanding of the Lord, how He descends into the material world, how He takes His births and what activities He performs, but one can know this only by executing devotional service. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] simply by devotional service one can understand everything about the Supreme Lord. If one fortunately understands the Supreme Lord in this way, the result is tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti: [Bg. 4.9] after giving up his material body, he no longer has to take birth in this material world. Instead, he returns home, back to Godhead. That is the ultimate perfection. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (8.15):



mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ





"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection."





TEXT 23



nāmoccāraṇa-māhātmyaṁ

hareḥ paśyata putrakāḥ

ajāmilo 'pi yenaiva

mṛtyu-pāśād amucyata

SYNONYMS



nāma-of the holy name; uccāraṇa-of the pronouncing; māhātmyam-the exalted position; hareḥ-of the Supreme Lord; paśyata-just see; putrakāḥ-O my dear servants, who are like my sons; ajāmilaḥ api-even Ajāmila (who was considered greatly sinful); yena-by the chanting of which; eva-certainly; mṛtyu-pāśāt-from the ropes of death; amucyata-was delivered.





My dear servants, who are as good as my sons, just see how glorious is the chanting of the holy name of the Lord. The greatly sinful Ajāmila chanted only to call his son, not knowing that he was chanting the Lord's holy name. Nevertheless, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, he remembered Nārāyaṇa, and thus he was immediately saved from the ropes of death.





There is no need to conduct research into the significance of the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. The history of Ajāmila is sufficient proof of the power of the Lord's holy name and the exalted position of a person who chants the holy name incessantly. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





In this age of Kali, no one can perform all the ritualistic ceremonies for becoming liberated; that is extremely difficult. Therefore all the śāstras and all the ācāryas have recommended that in this age one chant the holy name.





TEXT 24



etāvatālam agha-nirharaṇāya puṁsāṁ

saṅkīrtanaṁ bhagavato guṇa-karma-nāmnām

vikruśya putram aghavān yad ajāmilo 'pi

nārāyaṇeti mriyamāṇa iyāya muktim

SYNONYMS



etāvatā-with this much; alam-sufficient; agha-nirharaṇāya-for taking away the reactions of sinful activities; puṁsām-of human beings; saṅkīrtanam-the congregational chanting; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-of the transcendental qualities; karma-nāmnām-and of His names according to His activities and pastimes; vikruśya-crying to without offense; putram-his son; aghavān-the sinful; yat-since; ajāmilaḥ api-even Ajāmila; nārāyaṇa-the Lord's name, Nārāyaṇa; iti-thus; mriyamāṇaḥ-dying; iyāya-achieved; muktim-liberation.





Therefore it should be understood that one is easily relieved from all sinful reactions by chanting the holy name of the Lord and chanting of His qualities and activities. This is the only process recommended for relief from sinful reactions. Even if one chants the holy name of the Lord with improper pronunciation, he will achieve relief from material bondage if he chants without offenses. Ajāmila, for example, was extremely sinful, but while dying he merely chanted the holy name, and although calling his son, he achieved complete liberation because he remembered the name of Nārāyaṇa.





In the assembly of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's father, Haridāsa Ṭhākura confirmed that simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord one is liberated, even if he does not chant completely inoffensively. Smārta-brāhmaṇas and Māyāvādīs do not believe that one can achieve liberation in this way, but the truth of Haridāsa Ṭhākura's statement is supported by many quotations from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



In his commentary on this verse, for example, Śrīdhara Svāmī gives the following quotation:



sāyaṁ prātar gṛṇan bhaktyā

duḥkha-grāmād vimucyate





"If one always chants the holy name of the Lord with great devotion in the evening and in the morning, one can become free from all material miseries." Another quotation confirms that one can achieve liberation if one hears the holy name of the Lord constantly, every day with great respect (anudinam idam ādareṇa śṛṇvan). Another quotation says:



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ dhyānaṁ

harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ

janma-karma-guṇānāṁ ca

tad-arthe 'khila-ceṣṭitam





"One should always chant and hear about the extraordinarily wonderful activities of the Lord, one should meditate upon these activities, and one should endeavor to please the Lord." (Bhāg. 11.3.27)



Śrīdhara Svāmī also quotes from the Purāṇas, pāpa-kṣayaś ca bhavati smaratāṁ tam ahar-niśam: "One can become free from all sinful reactions simply by remembering the lotus feet of the Lord day and night [ahar-niśam]." Furthermore, he quotes from Bhāgavatam (6.3.31):



tasmāt saṅkīrtanaṁ viṣṇor

jagan-maṅgalam aṁhasām

mahatām api kauravya

viddhy aikāntika-niṣkṛtam





All these quotations prove that one who constantly engages in chanting and hearing of the holy activities, name, fame and form of the Lord is liberated. As stated wonderfully in this verse, etāvatālam agha-nirharaṇāya puṁsām: simply by uttering the name of the Lord, one is freed from all sinful reactions.



The word alam, which is used in this verse, indicates that simply uttering the holy name of the Lord is sufficient. This word is used with different imports. As stated in the Amara-kośa, the most authorized dictionary in the Sanskrit language, alaṁ bhūṣaṇa-paryāpti-śakti-vāraṇa-vācakam: the word alam is used to mean "ornament," "sufficiency," "power" and "restraint." Here the word alam is used to indicate that there is no need of any other process, for the chanting of the holy name of the Lord is sufficient. Even if one chants imperfectly, one becomes free from all sinful reactions by chanting.



This power of chanting the holy name was proved by the liberation of Ajāmila. When Ajāmila chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa, he did not precisely remember the Supreme Lord; instead, he remembered his own son. At the time of death, Ajāmila certainly was not very clean; indeed, he was famous as a great sinner. Furthermore, one's physiological condition is completely disturbed at the time of death, and in such an awkward condition it would certainly have been very difficult for Ajāmila to have chanted clearly. Nevertheless, Ajāmila achieved liberation simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Therefore, what is to be said of those who are not sinful like Ajāmila? It is to be concluded that with a strong vow one should chant the holy name of the Lord-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare-for thus one will certainly be delivered from the clutches of māyā by the grace of Kṛṣṇa.



The chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is recommended even for persons who commit offenses, because if they continue chanting they will gradually chant offenselessly. By chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra without offenses, one increases his love for Kṛṣṇa. As stated by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, premā pum-artho mahān: one's main concern should be to increase one's attachment to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to increase one's love for Him.



In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes the following verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.24):



evaṁ dharmair manuṣyāṇām

uddhavātmani vedinām

mayi sañjāyate bhaktiḥ

ko 'nyo 'rtho 'syāvaśiṣyate





"My dear Uddhava, the supreme religious system for human society is that by which one can awaken his dormant love for Me." Commenting on this verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes the word bhakti by saying premaivoktaḥ. Kaḥ anyaḥ arthaḥ asya: in the presence of bhakti, what is the necessity of liberation?



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also quotes this verse from the Padma Purāṇa:



nāmāparādha-yuktānāṁ

nāmāny eva haranty agham

aviśrānti-prayuktāni

tāny evārtha-karāṇi ca





Even if in the beginning one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra with offenses, one will become free from such offenses by chanting again and again. Pāpa-kṣayaś ca bhavati smaratāṁ tam ahar-niśam: one becomes free from all sinful reactions if one chants day and night, following the recommendation of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. It was Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu who quoted the following verse:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way." If the members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement strictly follow this recommendation of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, their position will always be secure.





TEXT 25



prāyeṇa veda tad idaṁ na mahājano 'yaṁ

devyā vimohita-matir bata māyayālam

trayyāṁ jaḍī-kṛta-matir madhu-puṣpitāyāṁ

vaitānike mahati karmaṇi yujyamānaḥ

SYNONYMS



prāyeṇa-almost always; veda-know; tat-that; idam-this; na-not; mahājanaḥ-great personalities besides Svayambhū, Śambhu and the other ten; ayam-this; devyā-by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vimohita-matiḥ-whose intelligence is bewildered; bata-indeed; māyayā-by the illusory energy; alam-greatly; trayyām-in the three Vedas; jaḍī-kṛta-matiḥ-whose intelligence has been dulled; madhu-puṣpitāyām-in the flowery Vedic language describing the results of ritualistic performances; vaitānike-in the performances mentioned in the Vedas; mahati-very great; karmaṇi-fruitive activities; yujyamānaḥ-being engaged.





Because they are bewildered by the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yājñavalkya and Jaimini and other compilers of the religious scriptures cannot know the secret, confidential religious system of the twelve mahājanas. They cannot understand the transcendental value of performing devotional service or chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. Because their minds are attracted to the ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas-especially the Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda and Ṛg Veda-their intelligence has become dull. Thus they are busy collecting the ingredients for ritualistic ceremonies that yield only temporary benefits, such as elevation to Svargaloka for material happiness. They are not attracted to the saṅkīrtana movement; instead, they are interested in dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa.





Since one may easily achieve the highest success by chanting the holy name of the Lord, one may ask why there are so many Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and why people are attracted to them. This verse answers that question. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: the real purpose of studying the Vedas is to approach the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Unfortunately, unintelligent people bewildered by the grandeur of Vedic yajñas want to see gorgeous sacrifices performed. They want Vedic mantras chanted and huge amounts of money spent for such ceremonies. Sometimes we have to observe the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies to please such unintelligent men. Recently, when we established a large Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma temple in Vṛndāvana, we were obliged to have Vedic ceremonies enacted by brāhmaṇas because the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, especially the smārta-brāhmaṇas, would not accept Europeans and Americans as bona fide brāhmaṇas. Thus we had to engage brāhmaṇas to perform costly yajñas. In spite of these yajñas, the members of our Society performed saṅkīrtana loudly with mṛdaṅgas, and I considered the saṅkīrtana more important than the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. Both the ceremonies and the saṅkīrtana were going on simultaneously. The ceremonies were meant for persons interested in Vedic rituals for elevation to heavenly planets (jaḍī-kṛta-matir madhu-puṣpitāyām), whereas the saṅkīrtana was meant for pure devotees interested in pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We would simply have performed saṅkīrtana, but then the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana would not have taken the installation ceremony seriously. As explained here, the Vedic performances are meant for those whose intelligence has been dulled by the flowery language of the Vedas, which describe fruitive activities intended to elevate one to the higher planets.



Especially in this age of Kali, saṅkīrtana alone is sufficient. If the members of our temples in the different parts of the world simply continue saṅkīrtana before the Deity, especially before Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, they will remain perfect. There is no need of any other performances. Nevertheless, to keep oneself clean in habits and mind, Deity worship and other regulative principles are required. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that although saṅkīrtana is sufficient for the perfection of life, the arcanā, or worship of the Deity in the temple, must continue in order that the devotees may stay clean and pure. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura therefore recommended that one follow both processes simultaneously. We strictly follow his principle of performing Deity worship and saṅkīrtana along parallel lines. This we should continue.





TEXT 26



evaṁ vimṛśya sudhiyo bhagavaty anante

sarvātmanā vidadhate khalu bhāva-yogam

te me na daṇḍam arhanty atha yady amīṣāṁ

syāt pātakaṁ tad api hanty urugāya-vādaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; vimṛśya-considering; su-dhiyaḥ-those whose intelligence is sharp; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anante-the unlimited; sarva-ātmanā-with all their heart and soul; vidadhate-take to; khalu-indeed; bhāva-yogam-the process of devotional service; te-such persons; me-my; na-not; daṇḍam-punishment; arhanti-deserve; atha-therefore; yadi-if; amīṣām-of them; syāt-there is; pātakam-some sinful activity; tat-that; api-also; hanti-destroys; urugāya-vādaḥ-the chanting of the holy name of the Supreme Lord.





Considering all these points, therefore, intelligent men decide to solve all problems by adopting the devotional service of chanting the holy name of the Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart and who is a mine of all auspicious qualities. Such persons are not within my jurisdiction for punishment. Generally they never commit sinful activities, but even if by mistake or because of bewilderment or illusion they sometimes commit sinful acts, they are protected from sinful reactions because they always chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.





In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes the following verse from the prayers of Lord Brahmā (Bhāg. 10.14.29):



athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan





The purport is that even though one is a very learned scholar of the Vedic śāstras, he may be completely unaware of the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His name, fame, qualities and so forth, whereas one who is not a great scholar can understand the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he somehow or other becomes a pure devotee of the Lord by engaging in devotional service. Therefore this verse spoken by Yamarāja says, evaṁ vimṛśya sudhiyo bhagavati: those who engage in the loving service of the Lord become sudhiyaḥ, intelligent, but this is not so of a Vedic scholar who does not understand Kṛṣṇa's name, fame and qualities. A pure devotee is one whose intelligence is clear; he is truly thoughtful because he engages in the service of the Lord-not as a matter of show, but with love, with his mind, words and body. Nondevotees may make a show of religion, but it is not very effective because although they ostentatiously attend a temple or church, they are thinking of something else. Such persons are neglecting their religious duty and are punishable by Yamarāja. But a devotee who commits sinful acts, which he may do unwillingly or accidentally because of his former habits, is excused. That is the value of the saṅkīrtana movement.





TEXT 27



te deva-siddha-parigīta-pavitra-gāthā

ye sādhavaḥ samadṛśo bhagavat-prapannāḥ

tān nopasīdata harer gadayābhiguptān

naiṣāṁ vayaṁ na ca vayaḥ prabhavāma daṇḍe

SYNONYMS



te-they; deva-by the demigods; siddha-and the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; parigīta-sung; pavitra-gāthāḥ-whose pure narrations; ye-who; sādhavaḥ-devotees; samadṛśaḥ-who see everyone equally; bhagavat-prapannāḥ-being surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tān-them; na-not; upasīdata-should go near; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gadayā-by the club; abhiguptān-being fully protected; na-not; eṣām-of these; vayam-we; na ca-and also not; vayaḥ-unlimited time; prabhavāma-are competent; daṇḍe-in punishing.





My dear servants, please do not approach such devotees, for they have fully surrendered to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are equal to everyone, and their narrations are sung by the demigods and the inhabitants of Siddhaloka. Please do not even go near them. They are always protected by the club of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore Lord Brahmā and I and even the time factor are not competent to chastise them.





In effect, Yamarāja warned his servants, "My dear servants, despite what you may have done previously to disturb the devotees, henceforward you should stop. The actions of devotees who have surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord and who constantly chant the holy name of the Lord are praised by the demigods and the residents of Siddhaloka. Those devotees are so respectable and exalted that Lord Viṣṇu personally protects them with the club in His hand. Therefore, regardless of what you have done this time, henceforward you should not approach such devotees; otherwise you will be killed by the club of Lord Viṣṇu. This is my warning. Lord Viṣṇu has a club and cakra to punish nondevotees. Do not risk punishment by attempting to disturb the devotees. Not to speak of you, if even Lord Brahmā or I were to punish them, Lord Viṣṇu would punish us. Therefore do not disturb the devotees any further."





TEXT 28



tān ānayadhvam asato vimukhān mukunda-

pādāravinda-makaranda-rasād ajasram

niṣkiñcanaiḥ paramahaṁsa-kulair asaṅgair

juṣṭād gṛhe niraya-vartmani baddha-tṛṣṇān

SYNONYMS



tān-them; ānayadhvam-bring before me; asataḥ-nondevotees (those who have not taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness); vimukhān-who have turned against; mukunda-of Mukunda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pāda-aravinda-of the lotus feet; makaranda-of the honey; rasāt-the taste; ajasram-continuously; niṣkiñcanaiḥ-by persons completely free from material attachment; paramahaṁsa-kulaiḥ-by the paramahaṁsas, the most exalted personalities; asaṅgaiḥ-who have no material attachment; juṣṭāt-which is enjoyed; gṛhe-to household life; niraya-vartmani-the path leading to hell; baddha-tṛṣṇān-whose desires are bound.





Paramahaṁsas are exalted persons who have no taste for material enjoyment and who drink the honey of the Lord's lotus feet. My dear servants, bring to me for punishment only persons who are averse to the taste of that honey, who do not associate with paramahaṁsas and who are attached to family life and worldly enjoyment, which form the path to hell.





After warning the Yamadūtas not to approach the devotees, Yamarāja now indicates who is to be brought before him. He specifically advises the Yamadūtas to bring him the materialistic persons who are attached to household life merely for sex. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] people are attached to household life for sex only. They are always harassed in many ways by their material engagements, and their only happiness is that after working very hard all day, at night they sleep and indulge in sex. Nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ: [SB 2.1.3] at night, materialistic householders sleep or indulge in sex life. Divā cārthehayā rajan kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā: during the day they are busy trying to find out where money is, and if they get money they spend it to maintain their families. Yamarāja specifically advises his servants to bring these persons to him for punishment and not to bring the devotees, who always lick the honey at the lotus feet of the Lord, who are equal to everyone, and who try to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness because of sympathy for all living entities. Devotees are not liable to punishment by Yamarāja, but persons who have no information of Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be protected by their material life of so-called family enjoyment. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says (2.1.4):



dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv

ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api

teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ

paśyann api na paśyati





Such persons complacently believe that their nations, communities or families can protect them, unaware that all such fallible soldiers will be destroyed in due course of time. In conclusion, one should try to associate with persons who engage in devotional service twenty-four hours a day.





TEXT 29



jihvā na vakti bhagavad-guṇa-nāmadheyaṁ

cetaś ca na smarati tac-caraṇāravindam

kṛṣṇāya no namati yac-chira ekadāpi

tān ānayadhvam asato 'kṛta-viṣṇu-kṛtyān

SYNONYMS



jihvā-the tongue; na-not; vakti-chants; bhagavat-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-transcendental qualities; nāma-and the holy name; dheyam-imparting; cetaḥ-the heart; ca-also; na-not; smarati-remembers; tat-His; caraṇa-aravindam-lotus feet; kṛṣṇāya-unto Lord Kṛṣṇa through His Deity in the temple; no-not; namati-bows; yat-whose; śiraḥ-head; ekadā api-even once; tān-them; ānayadhvam-bring before me; asataḥ-the nondevotees; akṛta-not performing; viṣṇu-kṛtyān-duties toward Lord Viṣṇu.





My dear servants, please bring to me only those sinful persons who do not use their tongues to chant the holy name and qualities of Kṛṣṇa, whose hearts do not remember the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa even once, and whose heads do not bow down even once before Lord Kṛṣṇa. Send me those who do not perform their duties toward Viṣṇu, which are the only duties in human life. Please bring me all such fools and rascals.





The word viṣṇu-kṛtyān is very important in this verse because the purpose of human life is to please Lord Viṣṇu. Varṇāśrama-dharma is also meant for that purpose. As stated in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (3.8.9):



varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam





Human society is meant to follow strictly the varṇāśrama-dharma, which divides society into four social divisions (brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra) and four spiritual divisions (brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa). Varṇāśrama-dharma easily brings one nearer to Lord Viṣṇu, who is the only true objective in human society. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum: [SB 7.5.31] unfortunately, however, people do not know that their self-interest is to return home, back to Godhead, or to approach Lord Viṣṇu. Durāśayā ye bahir-artha-māninaḥ: instead, they are simply bewildered. Every human being is expected to perform duties meant for approaching Lord Viṣṇu. Therefore Yamarāja advises the Yamadūtas to bring him those persons who have forgotten their duties toward Viṣṇu (akṛta-viṣṇu-kṛtyān). One who does not chant the holy name of Viṣṇu (Kṛṣṇa), who does not bow down to the Deity of Viṣṇu, and who does not remember the lotus feet of Viṣṇu is punishable by Yamarāja. In summary, all avaiṣṇavas, persons unconcerned with Lord Viṣṇu, are punishable by Yamarāja.





TEXT 30



tat kṣamyatāṁ sa bhagavān puruṣaḥ purāṇo

nārāyaṇaḥ sva-puruṣair yad asat kṛtaṁ naḥ

svānām aho na viduṣāṁ racitāñjalīnāṁ

kṣāntir garīyasi namaḥ puruṣāya bhūmne

SYNONYMS



tat-that; kṣamyatām-let it be excused; saḥ-He; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Person; purāṇaḥ-the oldest; nārāyaṇaḥ-Lord Nārāyaṇa; sva-puruṣaiḥ-by my own servants; yat-which; asat-impudence; kṛtam-performed; naḥ-of us; svānām-of my own men; aho-alas; na viduṣām-not knowing; racita-añjalīnām-folding our hands together to beg Your pardon; kṣāntiḥ-forgiveness; garīyasi-in the glorious; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; puruṣāya-unto the person; bhūmne-supreme and all-pervading.





[Then Yamarāja, considering himself and his servants to be offenders, spoke as follows, begging pardon from the Lord.] O my Lord, my servants have surely committed a great offense by arresting a Vaiṣṇava such as Ajāmila. O Nārāyaṇa, O supreme and oldest person, please forgive us. Because of our ignorance, we failed to recognize Ajāmila as a servant of Your Lordship, and thus we have certainly committed a great offense. Therefore with folded hands we beg Your pardon. My Lord, since You are supremely merciful and are always full of good qualities, please pardon us. We offer our respectful obeisances unto You.





Lord Yamarāja took upon himself the responsibility for the offense committed by his servants. If the servant of an establishment makes a mistake, the establishment takes responsibility for it. Although Yamarāja is above offenses, his servants, practically with his permission, went to arrest Ajāmila, which was a great offense. The nyāya-śāstra confirms, bhṛtyāparādhe svāmino daṇḍaḥ: if a servant makes a mistake, the master is punishable because he is responsible for the offense. Taking this seriously, Yamarāja, along with his servants, prayed with folded hands to be excused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa.





TEXT 31



tasmāt saṅkīrtanaṁ viṣṇor

jagan-maṅgalam aṁhasām

mahatām api kauravya

viddhy aikāntika-niṣkṛtam

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; saṅkīrtanam-the congregational chanting of the holy name; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; jagat-maṅgalam-the most auspicious performance within this material world; aṁhasām-for sinful activities; mahatām api-even though very great; kauravya-O descendant of the Kuru family; viddhi-understand; aikāntika-the ultimate; niṣkṛtam-atonement.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, the chanting of the holy name of the Lord is able to uproot even the reactions of the greatest sins. Therefore the chanting of the saṅkīrtana movement is the most auspicious activity in the entire universe. Please try to understand this so that others will take it seriously.





We should note that although Ajāmila chanted the name of Nārāyaṇa imperfectly, he was delivered from all sinful reactions. The chanting of the holy name is so auspicious that it can free everyone from the reactions of sinful activities. One should not conclude that one may continue to sin with the intention of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa to neutralize the reactions. Rather, one should be very careful to be free from all sins and never think of counteracting sinful activities by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, for this is another offense. If by chance a devotee accidentally performs some sinful activity, the Lord will excuse him, but one should not intentionally perform sinful acts.





TEXT 32



śṛṇvatāṁ gṛṇatāṁ vīryāṇy

uddāmāni harer muhuḥ

yathā sujātayā bhaktyā

śuddhyen nātmā vratādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



śṛṇvatām-of those hearing; gṛṇatām-and chanting; vīryāṇi-the wonderful activities; uddāmāni-able to counteract sin; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; muhuḥ-always; yathā-as; su-jātayā-easily brought forth; bhaktyā-by devotional service; śuddhyet-may be purified; na-not; ātmā-the heart and soul; vrata-ādibhiḥ-by performing ritualistic ceremonies.





One who constantly hears and chants the holy name of the Lord and hears and chants about His activities can very easily attain the platform of pure devotional service, which can cleanse the dirt from one's heart. One cannot achieve such purification merely by observing vows and performing Vedic ritualistic ceremonies.





One may very easily practice chanting and hearing the holy name of the Lord and thus become ecstatic in spiritual life. Padma Purāṇa states:



nāmāparādha-yuktānāṁ

nāmāny eva haranty agham

aviśrānti-prayuktāni

tāny evārtha-karāṇi ca





Even if one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra offensively, one can avoid offenses by continuously chanting without deviation. One who becomes accustomed to this practice will always remain in a pure transcendental position, untouchable by sinful reactions. Śukadeva Gosvāmī especially requested King Parīkṣit to note this fact very carefully. There is no profit, however, in executing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. By performing such activities one may go to the higher planetary systems, but as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (9.21), kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti: when the period of one's enjoyment in the heavenly planets is terminated because of the limited extent of the results of one's pious activities, one must return to earth. Thus there is no use in endeavoring to travel up and down in the universe. It is better to chant the holy name of the Lord so that one may become fully purified and eligible to return home, back to Godhead. That is the aim of life, and that is the perfection of life.





TEXT 33



kṛṣṇāṅghri-padma-madhu-liṇ na punar visṛṣṭa-

māyā-guṇeṣu ramate vṛjināvaheṣu

anyas tu kāma-hata ātma-rajaḥ pramārṣṭum

īheta karma yata eva rajaḥ punaḥ syāt

SYNONYMS



kṛṣṇa-aṅghri-padma-of the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa; madhu-the honey; liṭ-one who licks; na-not; punaḥ-again; visṛṣṭa-already renounced; māyā-guṇeṣu-in the material modes of nature; ramate-desires to enjoy; vṛjina-avaheṣu-which brings distress; anyaḥ-another; tu-however; kāma-hataḥ-being enchanted by lust; ātma-rajaḥ-the sinful infection of the heart; pramārṣṭum-to cleanse; īheta-may perform; karma-activities; yataḥ-after which; eva-indeed; rajaḥ-the sinful activity; punaḥ-again; syāt-appears.





Devotees who always lick the honey from the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa do not care at all for material activities, which are performed under the three modes of material nature and which bring only misery. Indeed, devotees never give up the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa to return to material activities. Others, however, who are addicted to Vedic rituals because they have neglected the service of the Lord's lotus feet and are enchanted by lusty desires, sometimes perform acts of atonement. Nevertheless, being incompletely purified, they return to sinful activities again and again.





A devotee's duty is to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. One may sometimes chant with offenses and sometimes without offenses, but if one seriously adopts this process, he will achieve perfection, which cannot be achieved through Vedic ritualistic ceremonies of atonement. Persons who are attached to the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, but do not believe in devotional service, who advise atonement, but do not appreciate the chanting of the Lord's holy name, fail to achieve the highest perfection. Devotees, therefore, being completely detached from material enjoyment, never give up Kṛṣṇa consciousness for Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. Those who are attached to Vedic ritualistic ceremonies because of lusty desires are subjected to the tribulations of material existence again and again. Mahārāja Parīkṣit has compared their activities to kuñjara-śauca, the bathing of an elephant.





TEXT 34



itthaṁ svabhartṛ-gaditaṁ bhagavan-mahitvaṁ

saṁsmṛtya vismita-dhiyo yama-kiṅkarās te

naivācyutāśraya-janaṁ pratiśaṅkamānā

draṣṭuṁ ca bibhyati tataḥ prabhṛti sma rājan

SYNONYMS



ittham-of such power; sva-bhartṛ-gaditam-explained by their master (Yamarāja); bhagavat-mahitvam-the extraordinary glory of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His name, fame, form and attributes; saṁsmṛtya-remembering; vismita-dhiyaḥ-whose minds were struck with wonder; yama-kiṅkarāḥ-all the servants of Yamarāja; te-they; na-not; eva-indeed; acyuta-āśraya-janam-a person sheltered by the lotus feet of Acyuta, Lord Kṛṣṇa; pratiśaṅkamānāḥ-always fearing; draṣṭum-to see; ca-and; bibhyati-they are afraid; tataḥ prabhṛti-beginning from then; sma-indeed; rājan-O King.





After hearing from the mouth of their master about the extraordinary glories of the Lord and His name, fame and attributes, the Yamadūtas were struck with wonder. Since then, as soon as they see a devotee, they fear him and dare not look at him again.





Since this incident, the Yamadūtas have given up the dangerous behavior of approaching devotees. For the Yamadūtas, a devotee is dangerous.





TEXT 35



itihāsam imaṁ guhyaṁ

bhagavān kumbha-sambhavaḥ

kathayām āsa malaya

āsīno harim arcayan

SYNONYMS



itihāsam-history; imam-this; guhyam-very confidential; bhagavān-the most powerful; kumbha-sambhavaḥ-Agastya Muni, the son of Kumbha; kathayām āsa-explained; malaye-in the Malaya Hills; āsīnaḥ-residing; harim arcayan-worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





When the great sage Agastya, the son of Kumbha, was residing in the Malaya Hills and worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I approached him, and he explained to me this confidential history.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Third Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Yamarāja Instructs His Messengers."



Chapter Four



The Haṁsa-guhya Prayers





After Mahārāja Parīkṣit appealed to Śukadeva Gosvāmī to describe in further detail the creation of the living entities within this universe, Śukadeva Gosvāmī informed him that when the Pracetās, the ten sons of Prācīnabarhi, entered the sea to execute austerities, the planet earth was neglected because of the absence of a king. Naturally many weeds and unnecessary trees grew, and no food grains were produced. Indeed, all the land became like a forest. When the ten Pracetās came out of the sea and saw the entire world full of trees, they were very angry with the trees and decided to destroy them all to rectify the situation. Thus the Pracetās created wind and fire to burn the trees to ashes. Soma, however, the king of the moon and the king of all vegetation, forbade the Pracetās to destroy the trees, since the trees are the source of fruit and flowers for all living beings. Just to satisfy the Pracetās, Soma gave them a beautiful girl born of Pramlocā Apsarā. By the semen of all the Pracetās, Dakṣa was born of that girl.





In the beginning, Dakṣa created all the demigods, demons and human beings, but when he found the population not increasing properly, he took sannyāsa and went to Vindhya Mountain, where be underwent severe austerities and offered Lord Viṣṇu a particular prayer known as Haṁsa-guhya, by which Lord Viṣṇu became very pleased with him. The contents of the prayer were as follows.





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, Lord Hari, is the controller of both the living entities and the material nature. He is self-sufficient and self-effulgent. As the subject matter of perception is not the cause of our perceiving senses, so the living entity, although within his body, does not cause his eternal friend the Supersoul, who is the cause of creation of all the senses. Because of the living entity's ignorance, his senses are engaged with material objects. Since the living entity is alive, he can understand the creation of this material world to some extent, but he cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the conception of the body, mind and intelligence. Nevertheless, great sages who are always in meditation can see the personal form of the Lord within their hearts.





"Since an ordinary living being is materially contaminated, his words and intelligence are also material. Therefore he cannot ascertain the Supreme Personality of Godhead by manipulating his material senses. The conception of God derived through the material senses is inaccurate because the Supreme Lord is beyond the material senses, but when one engages his senses in devotional service, the eternal Supreme Personality of Godhead is revealed on the platform of the soul. When that Supreme Godhead becomes the aim of one's life, one is said to have attained spiritual knowledge.





"The Supreme Brahman is the cause of all causes because He originally existed before the creation. He is the original cause of everything, both material and spiritual, and His existence is independent. However, the Lord has a potency called avidyā, the illusory energy, which induces the false arguer to think himself perfect and which induces the illusory energy to bewilder the conditioned soul. That Supreme Brahman, the Supersoul, is very affectionate to His devotees. To bestow mercy upon them, He discloses His form, name, attributes and qualities to be worshiped within this material world.





"Unfortunately, however, those who are materially absorbed worship various demigods. As the air passes over a lotus flower and carries the scent of the flower with it, or as the air sometimes carries dust and therefore assumes colors, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as the various demigods according to the desires of His various foolish worshipers, but actually He is the supreme truth, Lord Viṣṇu. To fulfill the desires of His devotees, He appears in various incarnations, and therefore there is no need to worship the demigods."





Being very satisfied by the prayers of Dakṣa, Lord Viṣṇu appeared before Dakṣa with eight arms. The Lord was dressed in yellow garments and had a blackish complexion. Understanding that Dakṣa was very eager to follow the path of enjoyment, the Lord awarded him the potency to enjoy the illusory energy. The Lord offered him the daughter of Pañcajana named Asiknī, who was suitable for Mahārāja Dakṣa to enjoy in sex. Indeed, Dakṣa received his name because he was very expert in sex life. After awarding this benediction, Lord Viṣṇu disappeared.





TEXTS 1–2



śrī-rājovāca

devāsura-nṛṇāṁ sargo

nāgānāṁ mṛga-pakṣiṇām

sāmāsikas tvayā prokto

yas tu svāyambhuve 'ntare

tasyaiva vyāsam icchāmi



jñātuṁ te bhagavan yathā

anusargaṁ yayā śaktyā

sasarja bhagavān paraḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-the King said; deva-asura-nṛṇām-of the demigods, the demons and the human beings; sargaḥ-the creation; nāgānām-of the Nāgas (serpentine living entities); mṛga-pakṣiṇām-of the beasts and birds; sāmāsikaḥ-briefly; tvayā-by you; proktaḥ-described; yaḥ-which; tu-however; svāyambhuve-of Svāyambhuva Manu; antare-within the period; tasya-of this; eva-indeed; vyāsam-the detailed account; icchāmi-I wish; jñātum-to know; te-from you; bhagavan-O my lord; yathā-as well as; anusargam-the subsequent creation; yayā-by which; śaktyā-potency; sasarja-created; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paraḥ-transcendental.





The blessed King said to Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My dear lord, the demigods, demons, human beings, Nāgas, beasts and birds were created during the reign of Svāyambhuva Manu. You have spoken about this creation briefly [in the Third Canto]. Now I wish to know about it elaborately. I also wish to know about the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by which He brought about the secondary creation.





TEXT 3



śrī-sūta uvāca

iti sampraśnam ākarṇya

rājarṣer bādarāyaṇiḥ

pratinandya mahā-yogī

jagāda muni-sattamāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-sūtaḥ uvāca-Sūta Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; sampraśnam-the inquiry; ākarṇya-hearing; rājarṣeḥ-of King Parīkṣit; bādarāyaṇiḥ-Śukadeva Gosvāmī; pratinandya-praising; mahā-yogī-the great yogī; jagāda-replied; muni-sattamāḥ-O best of the sages.





Sūta Gosvāmī said: O great sages [assembled at Naimiṣāraṇya], after the great yogi Śukadeva Gosvāmī heard King Parīkṣit's inquiry, he praised it and thus replied.





TEXT 4



śrī-śuka uvāca

yadā pracetasaḥ putrā

daśa prācīnabarhiṣaḥ

antaḥ-samudrād unmagnā

dadṛśur gāṁ drumair vṛtām

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yadā-when; pracetasaḥ-the Pracetās; putrāḥ-the sons; daśa-ten; prācīnabarhiṣaḥ-of King Prācīnabarhi; antaḥ-samudrāt-from within the ocean; unmagnāḥ-emerged; dadṛśuḥ-they saw; gām-the entire planet; drumaiḥ vṛtām-covered with trees.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When the ten sons of Prācīnabarhi emerged from the waters, in which they were performing austerities, they saw that the entire surface of the world was covered by trees.





When King Prācīnabarhi was performing Vedic rituals in which the killing of animals was recommended, Nārada Muni, out of compassion, advised him to stop. Prācīnabarhi understood Nārada properly and then left the kingdom to perform austerities in the forest. His ten sons, however, were performing austerities within the water, and therefore there was no king to see to the management of the world. When the ten sons, the Pracetās, came out of the water, they saw that the earth was overrun with trees.



When the government neglects agriculture, which is necessary for the production of food, the land becomes covered with unnecessary trees. Of course, many trees are useful because they produce fruits and flowers, but many other trees are unnecessary. They could be used as fuel and the land cleared and used for agriculture. When the government is negligent, less grain is produced. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (18.44), kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva jam: the proper engagements for vaiśyas, according to their nature, are to farm and to protect cows. The duty of the government and the kṣatriyas is to see that the members of the third class, the vaiśyas, who are neither brāhmaṇas nor kṣatriyas, are thus properly engaged. Kṣatriyas are meant to protect human beings, whereas vaiśyas are meant to protect useful animals, especially cows.





TEXT 5



drumebhyaḥ krudhyamānās te

tapo-dīpita-manyavaḥ

mukhato vāyum agniṁ ca

sasṛjus tad-didhakṣayā

SYNONYMS



drumebhyaḥ-unto the trees; krudhyamānāḥ-being very angry; te-they (the ten sons of Prācīnabarhi); tapaḥ-dīpita-manyavaḥ-whose anger was inflamed because of long austerities; mukhataḥ-from the mouth; vāyum-wind; agnim-fire; ca-and; sasṛjuḥ-they created; tat-those forests; didhakṣayā-with the desire to burn.





Because of having undergone long austerities in the water, the Pracetās were very angry at the trees. Desiring to burn them to ashes, they generated wind and fire from their mouths.





Here the word tapo-dīpita-manyavaḥ indicates that persons who have undergone severe austerity (tapasya) are endowed with great mystic power, as evinced by the Pracetās, who created fire and wind from their mouths. Although devotees undergo severe tapasya, however, they are vimanyavaḥ, sādhavaḥ, which means that they are never angry. They are always decorated with good qualities. Bhāgavatam (3.25.21) states:



titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ

suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ

sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ





A sādhu, a devotee, is never angry. Actually the real feature of devotees who undergo tapasya, austerity, is forgiveness. Although a Vaiṣṇava has sufficient power in tapasya, he does not become angry when put into difficulty. If one undergoes tapasya but does not become a Vaiṣṇava, however, one does not develop good qualities. For example, Hiraṇyakaśipu and Rāvaṇa also performed great austerities, but they did so to demonstrate their demoniac tendencies. Vaiṣṇavas must meet many opponents while preaching the glories of the Lord, but Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommends that they not become angry while preaching. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given this formula: tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā/ amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ [Cc. adi 17.31]. "One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly." Those engaged in preaching the glories of the Lord should be humbler than grass and more tolerant than a tree; then they can preach the glories of the Lord without difficulty.





TEXT 6



tābhyāṁ nirdahyamānāṁs tān

upalabhya kurūdvaha

rājovāca mahān somo

manyuṁ praśamayann iva

SYNONYMS



tābhyām-by the wind and fire; nirdahyamānān-being burned; tān-them (the trees); upalabhya-seeing; kurūdvaha-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; rājā-the king of the forest; uvāca-said; mahān-the great; somaḥ-predominating deity of the moon, Somadeva; manyum-the anger; praśamayan-pacifying; iva-like.





My dear King Parīkṣit, when Soma, the king of the trees and predominating deity of the moon, saw the fire and wind burning all the trees to ashes, he felt great sympathy because he is the maintainer of all herbs and trees. To appease the anger of the Pracetās, Soma spoke as follows.





It is understood from this verse that the predominating deity of the moon is the maintainer of all the trees and plants throughout the universe. It is due to the moonshine that trees and plants grow very luxuriantly. Therefore how can we accept the so-called scientists whose moon expeditions have informed us that there are no trees or vegetation on the moon? Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, somo vṛkṣādhiṣṭhātā sa eva vṛkṣāṇāṁ rājā: Soma, the predominating deity of the moon, is the king of all vegetation. How can we believe that the maintainer of vegetation has no vegetation on his own planet?





TEXT 7



na drumebhyo mahā-bhāgā

dīnebhyo drogdhum arhatha

vivardhayiṣavo yūyaṁ

prajānāṁ patayaḥ smṛtāḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; drumebhyaḥ-the trees; mahā-bhāgāḥ-O greatly fortunate ones; dīnebhyaḥ-who are very poor; drogdhum-to burn to ashes; arhatha-you deserve; vivardhayiṣavaḥ-desiring to bring about an increase; yūyam-you; prajānām-of all living entities who have taken shelter of you; patayaḥ-the masters or protectors; smṛtāḥ-known as.





O greatly fortunate ones, you should not kill these poor trees by burning them to ashes. Your duty is to wish the citizens [prajās] all prosperity and to act as their protectors.





It is indicated herein that the government or king has the duty of protecting not only the human beings, but all other living entities, including animals, trees and plants. No living entity should be killed unnecessarily.





TEXT 8



aho prajāpati-patir

bhagavān harir avyayaḥ

vanaspatīn oṣadhīś ca

sasarjorjam iṣaṁ vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; prajāpati-patiḥ-the Lord of all the lords of created beings; bhagavān hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; avyayaḥ-indestructible; vanaspatīn-the trees and plants; oṣadhīḥ-the herbs; ca-and; sasarja-created; ūrjam-invigorating; iṣam-food; vibhuḥ-the Supreme Being.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Hari, is the master of all living entities, including all the prajāpatis, such as Lord Brahmā. Because He is the all-pervading and indestructible master, He has created all these trees and vegetables as eatables for other living entities.





Soma, the predominating deity of the moon, reminded the Pracetās that this vegetation had been created by the Lord of lords to provide food for everyone. If the Pracetās tried to kill them off, their own subjects would also suffer, for trees are also required for food.





TEXT 9



annaṁ carāṇām acarā

hy apadaḥ pāda-cāriṇām

ahastā hasta-yuktānāṁ

dvi-padāṁ ca catuṣ-padaḥ

SYNONYMS



annam-food; carāṇām-of those that move on wings; acarāḥ-the nonmoving (fruits and flowers); hi-indeed; apadaḥ-the living entities without legs, like the grass; pāda-cāriṇām-of the animals who move on legs, like the cows and buffalo; ahastāḥ-animals without hands; hasta-yuktānām-of the animals with hands, like the tigers; dvi-padām-of human beings, who have two legs; ca-and; catuḥ-padaḥ-the four-legged animals like the deer.





By nature's arrangement, fruits and flowers are considered the food of insects and birds; grass and other legless living entities are meant to be the food of four-legged animals like cows and buffalo; animals that cannot use their front legs as hands are meant to be the food of animals like tigers, which have claws; and four-legged animals like deer and goats, as well as food grains, are meant to be the food of human beings.





By nature's law, or the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one kind of living entity is eatable by other living entities. As mentioned herein, dvi-padāṁ ca catuṣ-padaḥ: the four-legged animals (catuṣ-padaḥ), as well as food grains, are eatables for human beings (dvi-padām). These four-legged animals are those such as deer and goats, not cows, which are meant to be protected. Generally the men of the higher classes of society-the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas-do not eat meat. Sometimes kṣatriyas go to the forest to kill animals like deer because they have to learn the art of killing, and sometimes they eat the animals also. Śūdras, too, eat animals such as goats. Cows, however, are never meant to be killed or eaten by human beings. In every śāstra, cow killing is vehemently condemned. Indeed, one who kills a cow must suffer for as many years as there are hairs on the body of a cow. Manu-saṁhitā says, pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā: we have many tendencies in this material world, but in human life one is meant to learn how to curb those tendencies. Those who desire to eat meat may satisfy the demands of their tongues by eating lower animals, but they should never kill cows, who are actually accepted as the mothers of human society because they supply milk. The śāstra especially recommends, kṛṣi-go-rakṣya: the vaiśya section of humanity should arrange for the food of the entire society through agricultural activities and should give full protection to the cows, which are the most useful animals because they supply milk to human society.





TEXT 10



yūyaṁ ca pitrānvādiṣṭā

deva-devena cānaghāḥ

prajā-sargāya hi kathaṁ

vṛkṣān nirdagdhum arhatha

SYNONYMS



yūyam-you; ca-also; pitrā-by your father; anvādiṣṭāḥ-ordered; deva-devena-by the Personality of Godhead, the master of the masters; ca-also; anaghāḥ-O sinless ones; prajā-sargāya-for generating the population; hi-indeed; katham-how; vṛkṣān-the trees; nirdagdhum-to burn to ashes; arhatha-are able.





O pure-hearted ones, your father, Prācīnabarhi, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead have ordered you to generate population. Therefore how can you burn to ashes these trees and herbs, which are needed for the maintenance of your subjects and descendants?





TEXT 11



ātiṣṭhata satāṁ mārgaṁ

kopaṁ yacchata dīpitam

pitrā pitāmahenāpi

juṣṭaṁ vaḥ prapitāmahaiḥ

SYNONYMS



ātiṣṭhata-just follow; satām mārgam-the path of the great saintly personalities; kopam-the anger; yacchata-subdue; dīpitam-which is now awakened; pitrā-by the father; pitāmahena api-and by the grandfather; juṣṭam-executed; vaḥ-your; prapitāmahaiḥ-by the great-grandfathers.





The path of goodness traversed by your father, grandfather and great-grandfathers is that of maintaining the subjects [prajās], including the men, animals and trees. That is the path you should follow. Unnecessary anger is contrary to your duty. Therefore I request you to control your anger.





Here the words pitrā pitāmahenāpi juṣṭaṁ vaḥ prapitāmahaiḥ depict an honest royal family, consisting of the kings, their father, their grandfather and their great-grandfathers. Such a royal family has a prestigious position because it maintains the citizens, or prajās. The word prajā refers to one who has taken birth within the jurisdiction of the government. The exalted royal families were conscious that all living beings, whether human, animal or lower than animal, should be given protection. The modern democratic system cannot be exalted in this way because the leaders elected strive only for power and have no sense of responsibility. In a monarchy, a king with a prestigious position follows the great deeds of his forefathers. Thus Soma, the king of the moon, here reminds the Pracetās about the glories of their father, grandfather and great-grandfathers.





TEXT 12



tokānāṁ pitarau bandhū

dṛśaḥ pakṣma striyāḥ patiḥ

patiḥ prajānāṁ bhikṣūṇāṁ

gṛhy ajñānāṁ budhaḥ suhṛt

SYNONYMS



tokānām-of children; pitarau-the two parents; bandhū-the friends; dṛśaḥ-of the eye; pakṣma-the eyelid; striyāḥ-of the woman; patiḥ-the husband; patiḥ-the protector; prajānām-of the subjects; bhikṣūṇām-of the beggars; gṛhī-the householder; ajñānām-of the ignorant; budhaḥ-the learned; su-hṛt-the friend.





As the father and mother are the friends and maintainers of their children, as the eyelid is the protector of the eye, as the husband is the maintainer and protector of a woman, as the householder is the maintainer and protector of beggars, and as the learned is the friend of the ignorant, so the king is the protector and giver of life to all his subjects. The trees are also subjects of the king. Therefore they should be given protection.





By the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead, there are various protectors and maintainers for helpless living entities. The trees are also considered prajās, subjects of the king, and therefore the duty of the monarch is to protect even the trees, not to speak of others. The king is duty-bound to protect the living entities in his kingdom. Thus although the parents are directly responsible for the protection and maintenance of their children, the duty of the king is to see that all parents do their duty properly. Similarly, the king is also responsible for overseeing the other protectors mentioned in this verse. It may also be noted that the beggars who should be maintained by the householders are not professional beggars, but sannyāsīs and brāhmaṇas, to whom the householders should supply food and clothing.





TEXT 13



antar deheṣu bhūtānām

ātmāste harir īśvaraḥ

sarvaṁ tad-dhiṣṇyam īkṣadhvam

evaṁ vas toṣito hy asau

SYNONYMS



antaḥ deheṣu-within the bodies (in the cores of the hearts); bhūtānām-of all living entities; ātmā-the Supersoul; āste-resides; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśvaraḥ-the Lord or director; sarvam-all; tat-dhiṣṇyam-His place of residence; īkṣadhvam-try to see; evam-in this way; vaḥ-with you; toṣitaḥ-satisfied; hi-indeed; asau-that Supreme Personality of Godhead.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated as the Supersoul within the cores of the hearts of all living entities, whether moving or nonmoving, including men, birds, animals, trees and, indeed, all living entities. Therefore you should consider every body a residence or temple of the Lord. By such vision you will satisfy the Lord. You should not angrily kill these living entities in the forms of trees.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā and confirmed by all the Vedic scriptures, īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati: [Bg. 18.61] the Supersoul is situated within everyone's heart. Therefore, since everyone's body is the residence of the Supreme Lord, one should not destroy the body because of unnecessary envy. That will dissatisfy the Supersoul. Soma told the Pracetās that because they had tried to satisfy the Supersoul, now they should not displease Him.





TEXT 14



yaḥ samutpatitaṁ deha

ākāśān manyum ulbaṇam

ātma-jijñāsayā yacchet

sa guṇān ativartate

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; samutpatitam-suddenly awakened; dehe-in the body; ākāśāt-from the sky; manyum-anger; ulbaṇam-powerful; ātma-jijñāsayā-by inquiry into spiritual realization or self-realization; yacchet-subdues; saḥ-that person; guṇān-the modes of material nature; ativartate-transcends.





One who inquires into self-realization and thus subdues his powerful anger-which awakens suddenly in the body as if falling from the sky-transcends the influence of the modes of material nature.





When one becomes angry, he forgets himself and his situation, but if one is able to consider his situation by knowledge, one transcends the influence of the modes of material nature. One is always a servant of lusty desires, anger, greed, illusion, envy and so forth, but if one obtains sufficient strength in spiritual advancement, one can control them. One who obtains such control will always be transcendentally situated, untouched by the modes of material nature. This is only possible when one fully engages in the service of the Lord. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāḥ





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the spiritual platform." By engaging one in devotional service, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement keeps one always transcendental to anger, greed, lust, envy and so forth. One must perform devotional service because otherwise one will become victimized by the modes of material nature.





TEXT 15



alaṁ dagdhair drumair dīnaiḥ

khilānāṁ śivam astu vaḥ

vārkṣī hy eṣā varā kanyā

patnītve pratigṛhyatām

SYNONYMS



alam-enough; dagdhaiḥ-with burning; drumaiḥ-the trees; dīnaiḥ-poor; khilānām-of the remainder of the trees; śivam-all good fortune; astu-let there be; vaḥ-of you; vārkṣī-raised by the trees; hi-indeed; eṣā-this; varā-choice; kanyā-daughter; patnītve-into wifehood; pratigṛhyatām-let her be accepted.





There is no need to burn these poor trees any longer. Let whatever trees still remain be happy. Indeed, you should also be happy. Now, here is a beautiful, well-qualified girl named Māriṣā, who was raised by the trees as their daughter. You may accept this beautiful girl as your wife.





TEXT 16



ity āmantrya varārohāṁ

kanyām āpsarasīṁ nṛpa

somo rājā yayau dattvā

te dharmeṇopayemire

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; āmantrya-addressing; vara-ārohām-possessing high, beautiful hips; kanyām-the girl; āpsarasīm-born of an Apsarā; nṛpa-O King; somaḥ-Soma, the predominating deity of the moon; rājā-the king; yayau-returned; dattvā-delivering; te-they; dharmeṇa-according to religious principles; upayemire-married.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, after thus pacifying the Pracetās, Soma, the king of the moon, gave them the beautiful girl born of Pramlocā Apsarā. The Pracetās all received Pramlocā's daughter, who had high, very beautiful hips, and married her according to the religious system.





TEXT 17



tebhyas tasyāṁ samabhavad

dakṣaḥ prācetasaḥ kila

yasya prajā-visargeṇa

lokā āpūritās trayaḥ

SYNONYMS



tebhyaḥ-from all the Pracetās; tasyām-in her; samabhavat-was generated; dakṣaḥ-Dakṣa, the expert in begetting children; prācetasaḥ-the son of the Pracetās; kila-indeed; yasya-of whom; prajā-visargeṇa-by the generation of living entities; lokāḥ-the worlds; āpūritāḥ-filled; trayaḥ-three.





In the womb of that girl the Pracetās all begot a son named Dakṣa, who filled the three worlds with living entities.





Dakṣa was first born during the reign of Svāyambhuva Manu, but because of offending Lord Śiva he was punished by having the head of a goat substituted for his own head. Thus insulted, he had to give up that body, and in the sixth manvantara, called the Cākṣuṣa manvantara, he was born of the womb of Māriṣā as Dakṣa. In this connection Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes this verse:



cākṣuṣe tv antare prāpte

prāk-sarge kāla-vidrute

yaḥ sasarja prajā iṣṭāḥ

sa dakṣo daiva-coditaḥ





"His previous body had been destroyed, but he, the same Dakṣa, inspired by the supreme will, created all the desired living entities in the Cākṣuṣa manvantara." (Bhāg. 4.30.49) Thus Dakṣa regained his previous opulence and again begot thousands and millions of children to fill the three worlds.





TEXT 18



yathā sasarja bhūtāni

dakṣo duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ

retasā manasā caiva

tan mamāvahitaḥ śṛṇu

SYNONYMS



yathā-as; sasarja-created; bhūtāni-the living entities; dakṣaḥ-Dakṣa; duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ-who is very affectionate to his daughters; retasā-by semen; manasā-by the mind; ca-also; eva-indeed; tat-that; mama-from me; avahitaḥ-being attentive; śṛṇu-please hear.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Please hear from me with great attention how Prajāpati Dakṣa, who was very affectionate to his daughters, created different types of living entities through his semen and through his mind.





The word duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ indicates that all the prajās were born from Dakṣa's daughters. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that apparently Dakṣa had no son.





TEXT 19



manasaivāsṛjat pūrvaṁ

prajāpatir imāḥ prajāḥ

devāsura-manuṣyādīn

nabhaḥ-sthala-jalaukasaḥ

SYNONYMS



manasā-by the mind; eva-indeed; asṛjat-created; pūrvam-in the beginning; prajāpatiḥ-the prajāpati (Dakṣa); imāḥ-these; prajāḥ-living entities; deva-the demigods; asura-the demons; manuṣya-ādīn-and other living entities, headed by the human beings; nabhaḥ-in the skies; sthala-on the land; jala-or within the water; okasaḥ-who have their abodes.





With his mind, Prajāpati Dakṣa first created all kinds of demigods, demons, human beings, birds, beasts, aquatics and so on.





TEXT 20



tam abṛṁhitam ālokya

prajā-sargaṁ prajāpatiḥ

vindhya-pādān upavrajya

so 'carad duṣkaraṁ tapaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-that; abṛṁhitam-not increasing; ālokya-seeing; prajā-sargam-the creation of the living entities; prajāpatiḥ-Dakṣa, the generator of living entities; vindhya-pādān-the mountains near the Vindhya mountain range; upavrajya-going to; saḥ-he; acarat-executed; duṣkaram-very difficult; tapaḥ-austerities.





But when Prajāpati Dakṣa saw that he was not properly generating all kinds of living entities, he approached a mountain near the Vindhya mountain range, and there he executed very difficult austerities.





TEXT 21



tatrāghamarṣaṇaṁ nāma

tīrthaṁ pāpa-haraṁ param

upaspṛśyānusavanaṁ

tapasātoṣayad dharim

SYNONYMS



tatra-there; aghamarṣaṇam-Aghamarṣaṇa; nāma-named; tīrtham-the holy place; pāpa-haram-suitable for destroying all sinful reactions; param-best; upaspṛśya-performing ācamana and bathing; anusavanam-regularly; tapasā-by austerity; atoṣayat-caused pleasure; harim-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Near that mountain was a very holy place named Aghamarṣaṇa. There Prajāpati Dakṣa executed ritualistic ceremonies and satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, by engaging in great austerities to please Him.





TEXT 22



astauṣīd dhaṁsa-guhyena

bhagavantam adhokṣajam

tubhyaṁ tad abhidhāsyāmi

kasyātuṣyad yathā hariḥ

SYNONYMS



astauṣīt-satisfied; haṁsa-guhyena-by the celebrated prayers known as Haṁsa-guhya; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhokṣajam-who is beyond the reach of the senses; tubhyam-unto you; tat-that; abhidhāsyāmi-I shall explain; kasya-with Dakṣa, the prajāpati; atuṣyat-was satisfied; yathā-how; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





My dear King, I shall fully explain to you the Haṁsa-guhya prayers, which were offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead by Dakṣa, and I shall explain how the Lord was pleased with him for those prayers.





It is to be understood that the Haṁsa-guhya prayers were not composed by Dakṣa, but were existing in the Vedic literature.





TEXT 23



śrī-prajāpatir uvāca

namaḥ parāyāvitathānubhūtaye

guṇa-trayābhāsa-nimitta-bandhave

adṛṣṭa-dhāmne guṇa-tattva-buddhibhir

nivṛtta-mānāya dadhe svayambhuve

SYNONYMS



śrī-prajāpatiḥ uvāca-the prajāpati Dakṣa said; namaḥ-all respectful obeisances; parāya-unto the Transcendence; avitatha-correct; anubhūtaye-unto Him whose spiritual potency brings about realization of Him; guṇa-traya-of the three material modes of nature; ābhāsa-of the living entities who have the appearance; nimitta-and of the material energy; bandhave-unto the controller; adṛṣṭa-dhāmne-who is not perceived in His abode; guṇa-tattva-buddhibhiḥ-by the conditioned souls whose poor intelligence dictates that real truth is found in the manifestations of the three modes of material nature; nivṛtta-mānāya-who has surpassed all material measurements and calculations; dadhe-I offer; svayambhuve-unto the Supreme Lord, who is manifest with no cause.





Prajāpati Dakṣa said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental to the illusory energy and the physical categories it produces. He possesses the potency for unfailing knowledge and supreme willpower, and He is the controller of the living entities and the illusory energy. The conditioned souls who have accepted this material manifestation as everything cannot see Him, for He is above the evidence of experimental knowledge. Self-evident and self-sufficient, He is not caused by any superior cause. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.





The transcendental position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is explained herewith. He is not perceivable by the conditioned souls, who are accustomed to material vision and cannot understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead exists in His abode, which is beyond that vision. Even if a materialistic person could count all the atoms in the universe, he would still be unable to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.34):



panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-saṁpragamyo

vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām

so 'py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





The conditioned souls may try to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead for many billions of years through their mental speculative processes, traveling at the speed of the mind or the wind, but still the Absolute Truth will remain inconceivable to them because a materialistic person cannot measure the length and breadth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's unlimited existence. If the Absolute Truth is beyond measurement, one may ask, how can one realize Him? The answer is given here by the word svayambhuve: one may understand Him or not, but nevertheless He is existing in His own spiritual potency.





TEXT 24



na yasya sakhyaṁ puruṣo 'vaiti sakhyuḥ

sakhā vasan saṁvasataḥ pure 'smin

guṇo yathā guṇino vyakta-dṛṣṭes

tasmai maheśāya namaskaromi

SYNONYMS



na-not; yasya-whose; sakhyam-fraternity; puruṣaḥ-the living entity; avaiti-knows; sakhyuḥ-of the supreme friend; sakhā-the friend; vasan-living; saṁvasataḥ-of the one living with; pure-in the body; asmin-this; guṇaḥ-the object of sense perception; yathā-just like; guṇinaḥ-of its respective sense organ; vyakta-dṛṣṭeḥ-who oversees the material manifestation; tasmai-unto Him; mahā-īśāya-unto the supreme controller; namaskaromi-I offer my obeisances.





As the sense objects [form, taste, touch, smell and sound] cannot understand how the senses perceive them, so the conditioned soul, although residing in his body along with the Supersoul, cannot understand how the supreme spiritual person, the master of the material creation, directs his senses. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto that Supreme Person, who is the supreme controller.





The individual soul and the Supreme Soul live together within the body. This is confirmed in the Upaniṣads by the analogy that two friendly birds live in one tree-one bird eating the fruit of the tree and the other simply witnessing and directing. Although the individual living being, who is compared to the bird that is eating, is sitting with his friend the Supreme Soul, the individual living being cannot see Him. Actually the Supersoul is directing the workings of his senses in the enjoyment of sense objects, but as these sense objects cannot see the senses, the conditioned soul cannot see the directing soul. The conditioned soul has desires, and the Supreme Soul fulfills them, but the conditioned soul is unable to see the Supreme Soul. Thus Prajāpati Dakṣa offers his obeisances to the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul, even though unable to see Him. Another example given is that although ordinary citizens work under the direction of the government, they cannot understand how they are being governed or what the government is. In this regard, Madhvācārya quotes the following verse from the Skanda Purāṇa:



yathā rājñaḥ priyatvaṁ tu

bhṛtyā vedena cātmanaḥ

tathā jīvo na yat-sakhyaṁ

vetti tasmai namo 'stu te





"As the various servants in the different departments of big establishments cannot see the supreme managing director under whom they are working, the conditioned souls cannot see the supreme friend sitting within their bodies. Let us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme, who is invisible to our material eyes."





TEXT 25



deho 'savo 'kṣā manavo bhūta-mātrām

ātmānam anyaṁ ca viduḥ paraṁ yat

sarvaṁ pumān veda guṇāṁś ca taj-jño

na veda sarva-jñam anantam īḍe

SYNONYMS



dehaḥ-this body; asavaḥ-the life airs; akṣāḥ-the different senses; manavaḥ-the mind, understanding, intellect and ego; bhūta-mātrām-the five gross material elements and the sense objects (form, taste, sound and so on); ātmānam-themselves; anyam-any other; ca-and; viduḥ-know; param-beyond; yat-that which; sarvam-everything; pumān-the living being; veda-knows; guṇān-the qualities of the material nature; ca-and; tat-jñaḥ-knowing those things; na-not; veda-knows; sarva-jñam-unto the omniscient; anantam-the unlimited; īḍe-I offer my respectful obeisances.





Because they are only matter, the body, the life airs, the external and internal senses, the five gross elements and the subtle sense objects [form, taste, smell, sound and touch] cannot know their own nature, the nature of the other senses or the nature of their controllers. But the living being, because of his spiritual nature, can know his body, the life airs, the senses, the elements and the sense objects, and he can also know the three qualities that form their roots. Nevertheless, although the living being is completely aware of them, he is unable to see the Supreme Being, who is omniscient and unlimited. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.





Material scientists can make an analytical study of the physical elements, the body, the senses, the sense objects and even the air that controls the vital force, but still they cannot understand that above all these is the real spirit soul. In other words, the living entity, because of his being a spirit soul, can understand all the material objects, or, when self-realized, he can understand the Paramātmā, upon whom yogīs meditate. Nevertheless, the living being, even if advanced, cannot understand the Supreme Being, the Personality of Godhead, for He is ananta, unlimited, in all six opulences.





TEXT 26



yadoparāmo manaso nāma-rūpa-

rūpasya dṛṣṭa-smṛti-sampramoṣāt

ya īyate kevalayā sva-saṁsthayā

haṁsāya tasmai śuci-sadmane namaḥ

SYNONYMS



yadā-when in trance; uparāmaḥ-complete cessation; manasaḥ-of the mind; nāma-rūpa-material names and forms; rūpasya-of that by which they appear; dṛṣṭa-of material vision; smṛti-and of remembrance; sampramoṣāt-due to the destruction; yaḥ-who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); īyate-is perceived; kevalayā-with spiritual; sva-saṁsthayā-His own original form; haṁsāya-unto the supreme pure; tasmai-unto Him; śuci-sadmane-who is realized only in the pure state of spiritual existence; namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances.





When one's consciousness is completely purified of the contamination of material existence, gross and subtle, without being agitated as in the working and dreaming states, and when the mind is not dissolved as in suṣupti, deep sleep, one comes to the platform of trance. Then one's material vision and the memories of the mind, which manifests names and forms, are vanquished. Only in such a trance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead revealed. Thus let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seen in that uncontaminated, transcendental state.





There are two stages of God realization. One is called sujñeyam, or very easily understood (generally by mental speculation), and the other is called durjñeyam, understood only with difficulty. Paramātmā realization and Brahman realization are considered sujñeyam, but realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is durjñeyam. As described here, one attains the ultimate realization of the Personality of Godhead when one gives up the activities of the mind-thinking, feeling and willing-or, in other words, when mental speculation stops. This transcendental realization is above susupti, deep sleep. In our gross conditional stage we perceive things through material experience and remembrance, and in the subtle stage we perceive the world in dreams. The process of vision also involves remembrance and also exists in a subtle form. Above gross experience and dreams is susupti, deep sleep, and when one comes to the completely spiritual platform, transcending deep sleep, he attains trance, viśuddha-sattva, or vasudeva-sattva, in which the Personality of Godhead is revealed.



Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ: [BRS. ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ





"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through his materially contaminated senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)1.2.234] as long as one is situated in duality, on the sensual platform, gross or subtle, realization of the original Personality of Godhead is impossible. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ: but when one engages his senses in the service of the Lord-specifically, when one engages the tongue in chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and tasting only Kṛṣṇa prasāda with a spirit of service-the Supreme Personality of Godhead is revealed. This is indicated in this verse by the word śuci-sadmane. Śuci means purified. By the spirit of rendering service with one's senses, one's entire existence becomes śuci-sadma, the platform of uncontaminated purity. Dakṣa therefore offers his respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is revealed on the platform of śuci-sadma. In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes the following prayer by Lord Brahmā from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.6): tathāpi bhūman mahimāguṇasya te viboddhum arhaty amalāntar-ātmabhiḥ. "One whose heart has become completely purified, my Lord, can understand the transcendental qualities of Your Lordship and can understand the greatness of Your activities."





TEXTS 27–28



manīṣiṇo 'ntar-hṛdi sanniveśitaṁ

sva-śaktibhir navabhiś ca trivṛdbhiḥ

vahniṁ yathā dāruṇi pāñcadaśyaṁ

manīṣayā niṣkarṣanti gūḍham

sa vai mamāśeṣa-viśeṣa-māyā-



niṣedha-nirvāṇa-sukhānubhūtiḥ

sa sarva-nāmā sa ca viśva-rūpaḥ

prasīdatām aniruktātma-śaktiḥ

SYNONYMS



manīṣiṇaḥ-great learned brāhmaṇas performing ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices; antaḥ-hṛdi-within the core of the heart; sanniveśitam-being situated; sva-śaktibhiḥ-with His own spiritual potencies; navabhiḥ-also with the nine different material potencies (the material nature, the total material energy, the ego, the mind and the five objects of the senses); ca-and (the five gross material elements and the ten acting and knowledge-gathering senses); trivṛdbhiḥ-by the three material modes of nature; vahnim-fire; yathā-just like; dāruṇi-within wood; pāñcadaśyam-produced by chanting the fifteen hymns known as Sāmidhenī mantras; manīṣayā-by purified intelligence; niṣkarṣanti-extract; gūḍham-although not manifesting; saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai-indeed; mama-toward me; aśeṣa-all; viśeṣa-varieties; māyā-of the illusory energy; niṣedha-by the process of negation; nirvāṇa-of liberation; sukha-anubhūtiḥ-who is realized by transcendental bliss; saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-nāmā-who is the source of all names; saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca-also; viśva-rūpaḥ-the gigantic form of the universe; prasīdatām-may He be merciful; anirukta-inconceivable; ātma-śaktiḥ-the reservoir of all spiritual potencies.





Just as great learned brāhmaṇas who are expert in performing ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices can extract the fire dormant within wooden fuel by chanting the fifteen Sāmidhenī mantras, thus proving the efficacy of the Vedic mantras, so those who are actually advanced in consciousness-in other words, those who are Kṛṣṇa conscious-can find the Supersoul, who by His own spiritual potency is situated within the heart. The heart is covered by the three modes of material nature and the nine material elements [material nature, the total material energy, the ego, the mind and the five objects of sense gratification], and also by the five material elements and the ten senses. These twenty-seven elements constitute the external energy of the Lord. Great yogīs meditate upon the Lord, who is situated as the Supersoul, Paramātmā, within the core of the heart. May that Supersoul be pleased with me. The Supersoul is realized when one is eager for liberation from the unlimited varieties of material life. One actually attains such liberation when he engages in the transcendental loving service of the Lord and realizes the Lord because of his attitude of service. The Lord may be addressed by various spiritual names, which are inconceivable to the material senses. When will that Supreme Personality of Godhead be pleased with me?





In his commentary to this verse, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura uses the word durvijñeyam, which means "very difficult to realize." The pure stage of existence is described in Bhagavad-gītā (7.28), wherein Kṛṣṇa says:



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ





"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination."



Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā (9.14) the Lord says:



satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ

yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā

nitya-yuktā upāsate





"Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion."



One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead after transcending all material impediments. Therefore Lord Kṛṣṇa also says in the Gītā (7.3):



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ





"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth."



To understand Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one must undergo severe penances and austerities, but since the path of devotional service is perfect, by following this process one can very easily come to the spiritual platform and understand the Lord. This, too, is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (18.55), wherein Kṛṣṇa says:



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram





"One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God."



Thus although the subject matter is durvijñeyam, extremely difficult to understand, it becomes easy if one follows the prescribed method. Coming in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead is possible through pure devotional service, which begins with śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23]. In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes a verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.8.5): praviṣṭaḥ karṇa-randhreṇa svānāṁ bhāva-saroruham. The process of hearing and chanting enters the core of the heart, and in this way one becomes a pure devotee. By continuing this process, one comes to the stage of transcendental love, and then he appreciates the transcendental name, form, qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, a pure devotee, by devotional service, is able to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead despite many material impediments, which are all various energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Easily making his way through these impediments, a devotee comes directly in contact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After all, the material impediments described in these verses are but various energies of the Lord. When a devotee is eager to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he prays to the Lord:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya





"O son of Mahārāja Nanda [Kṛṣṇa], I am Your eternal servitor, yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. Please pick me up from this ocean of death and place me as one of the atoms at Your lotus feet." Being pleased with the devotee, the Lord turns all his material impediments into spiritual service. In this connection Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes a verse from the Viṣṇu Purāṇa:



hlādinī sandhinī samvit

tvayy ekā sarva-saṁsthitau

hlāda-tāpa-karī miśrā

tvayi no guṇa-varjite





In the material world, the spiritual energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is manifested as tāpa-karī, which means "causing miseries." Everyone hankers for happiness, but although happiness originally comes from the pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the material world, because of material activities, the pleasure potency of the Lord becomes a source of miseries (hlāda-tāpa-karī). False happiness in the material world is the source of distress, but when one's endeavors for happiness are redirected toward the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this tāpa-karī element of misery is vanquished. An example given in this connection is that extracting fire from wood is certainly difficult, but when the fire comes out it burns the wood to ashes. In other words, experiencing the Supreme Personality of Godhead is extremely difficult for those devoid of devotional service, but everything becomes easier for a devotee, and thus he can very easily meet the Supreme Lord.



Here the prayers say that the form of the Lord is beyond the jurisdiction of material form and is therefore inconceivable. A devotee prays, however, "My dear Lord, be pleased with me so that I may very easily see Your transcendental form and potency." Nondevotees try to understand the Supreme Brahman by discussions of neti neti. Niṣedha-nirvāṇa-sukhānubhūtiḥ: a devotee, however, simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord, avoids such laborious speculations and realizes the existence of the Lord very easily.





TEXT 29



yad yan niruktaṁ vacasā nirūpitaṁ

dhiyākṣabhir vā manasota yasya

mā bhūt svarūpaṁ guṇa-rūpaṁ hi tat tat

sa vai guṇāpāya-visarga-lakṣaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



yat yat-whatever; niruktam-expressed; vacasā-by words; nirūpitam-ascertained; dhiyā-by so-called meditation or intelligence; akṣabhiḥ-by the senses; vā-or; manasā-by the mind; uta-certainly; yasya-of whom; mā bhūt-may not be; sva-rūpam-the actual form of the Lord; guṇa-rūpam-consisting of the three qualities; hi-indeed; tat tat-that; saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai-indeed; guṇa-apāya-the cause of the annihilation of everything made of the material modes of nature; visarga-and the creation; lakṣaṇaḥ-appearing as.





Anything expressed by material vibrations, anything ascertained by material intelligence and anything experienced by the material senses or concocted within the material mind is but an effect of the modes of material nature and therefore has nothing to do with the real nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is beyond the creation of this material world, for He is the source of the material qualities and creation. As the cause of all causes, He exists before the creation and after the creation. I wish to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.





One who manufactures names, forms, qualities or paraphernalia pertaining to the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot understand Him, since He is beyond creation. The Supreme Lord is the creator of everything, and this means that He existed when there was no creation. In other words, His name, form and qualities are not materially created entities; they are transcendental always. Therefore by our material concoctions, vibrations and thoughts we cannot ascertain the Supreme Lord. This is explained in the verse ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ [BRS. ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ





"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, quality and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through his materially contaminated senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed to him." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)1.2.234].



Prācetasa, Dakṣa, herein offers prayers unto the Transcendence, not to anyone within the material creation. Only fools and rascals think God a material creation. This is confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (9.11):



avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram





"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." Therefore, one must receive knowledge from a person to whom the Lord has revealed Himself; there is no value in creating an imaginary name or form for the Lord. Śrīpāda Śaṅkarācārya was an impersonalist, but nevertheless he said, nārāyaṇaḥ paro 'vyaktāt: Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is not a person of the material world. We cannot assign Nārāyaṇa a material designation, as the foolish attempt to do when they speak of daridra-nārāyaṇa (poor Nārāyaṇa). Nārāyaṇa is always transcendental, beyond this material creation. How can He become daridra-nārāyaṇa? Poverty is found within this material world, but in the spiritual world, there is no such thing as poverty. Therefore the idea of daridra-nārāyaṇa is merely a concoction.



Dakṣa very carefully points out that material designations cannot be names of the worshipable Lord: yad yan niruktaṁ vacasā nirūpitam. Nirukta refers to the Vedic dictionary. One cannot properly understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead merely by picking up expressions from a dictionary. In praying to the Lord, Dakṣa does not wish material names and forms to be the objects of his worship; rather, he wants to worship the Lord, who existed before the creation of material dictionaries and names. As confirmed in the Vedas, yato vāco nivartante/ aprāpya manasā saha: the name, form, attributes and paraphernalia of the Lord cannot be ascertained through a material dictionary. However, if one reaches the transcendental platform of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes well acquainted with everything, material and spiritual. This is confirmed in another Vedic mantra: tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti. If one can somehow or other, by the grace of the Lord, understand the transcendental position of the Lord, one becomes eternal. This is further confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Simply by understanding the Supreme Lord, one goes beyond birth, death, old age and disease. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī therefore advised Mahārāja Parīkṣit in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.1.5):



tasmād bhārata sarvātmā

bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

smartavyaś cecchatābhayam





"O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all miseries must hear, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead. who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries."





TEXT 30



yasmin yato yena ca yasya yasmai

yad yo yathā kurute kāryate ca

parāvareṣāṁ paramaṁ prāk prasiddhaṁ

tad brahma tad dhetur ananyad ekam

SYNONYMS



yasmin-in whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the supreme place of repose); yataḥ-from whom (everything emanates); yena-by whom (everything is enacted); ca-also; yasya-to whom everything belongs; yasmai-to whom (everything is offered); yat-which; yaḥ-who; yathā-as; kurute-executes; kāryate-is performed; ca-also; para-avareṣām-of both, in the material and spiritual existence; paramam-the supreme; prāk-the origin; prasiddham-well known to everyone; tat-that; brahma-the Supreme Brahman; tat hetuḥ-the cause of all causes; ananyat-having no other cause; ekam-one without a second.





The Supreme Brahman, Kṛṣṇa, is the ultimate resting place and source of everything. Everything is done by Him, everything belongs to Him, and everything is offered to Him. He is the ultimate objective, and whether acting or causing others to act, He is the ultimate doer. There are many causes, high and low, but since He is the cause of all causes, He is well known as the Supreme Brahman who existed before all activities. He is one without a second and has no other cause. I therefore offer my respects unto Him.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the original cause, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ). Even this material world, which is conducted under the modes of material nature, is caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who therefore also has an intimate relationship with the material world. If the material world were not a part of His body, the Supreme Lord, the supreme cause, would be incomplete. Therefore we hear, vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ: [Bg. 7.19] if one knows that Vāsudeva is the original cause of all causes, he becomes a perfect mahātmā.



The Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1) declares:



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam





"Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes." The Supreme Brahman (tad brahma) is the cause of all causes, but He has no cause. Anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam: [Bs. 5.1] Govinda, Kṛṣṇa, is the original cause of all causes, but He has no cause for His appearance as Govinda. Govinda expands in multifarious forms, but nevertheless they are one. As confirmed by Madhvācārya, ananyaḥ sadṛśābhāvād eko rūpādy-abhedataḥ: Kṛṣṇa has no cause nor any equal, and He is one because His various forms, as svāṁśa and vibhinnāṁśa, are nondifferent from Himself.





TEXT 31



yac-chaktayo vadatāṁ vādināṁ vai

vivāda-saṁvāda-bhuvo bhavanti

kurvanti caiṣāṁ muhur ātma-mohaṁ

tasmai namo 'nanta-guṇāya bhūmne

SYNONYMS



yat-śaktayaḥ-whose multifarious potencies; vadatām-speaking different philosophies; vādinām-of the speakers; vai-indeed; vivāda-of argument; saṁvāda-and agreement; bhuvaḥ-the causes; bhavanti-are; kurvanti-create; ca-and; eṣām-of them (the theorists); muhuḥ-continuously; ātma-moham-bewilderment regarding the existence of the soul; tasmai-unto Him; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; ananta-unlimited; guṇāya-possessing transcendental attributes; bhūmne-the all-pervading Godhead.





Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, who possesses unlimited transcendental qualities. Acting from within the cores of the hearts of all philosophers, who propagate various views, He causes them to forget their own souls while sometimes agreeing and sometimes disagreeing among themselves. Thus He creates within this material world a situation in which they are unable to come to a conclusion. I offer my obeisances unto Him.





Since time immemorial or since the creation of the cosmic manifestation, the conditioned souls have formed various parties of philosophical speculation, but this is not true of the devotees. Nondevotees have different ideas of creation, maintenance and annihilation, and therefore they are called vādīs and prativādīs-proponents and counterproponents. It is understood from the statement of Mahābhārata that there are many munis, or speculators:



tarko 'pratiṣṭhaḥ śrutayo vibhinnā

nāsāv ṛṣir yasya mataṁ na bhinnam





All speculators must disagree with other speculators; otherwise, why should there be so many opposing parties concerned with ascertaining the supreme cause?



Philosophy means finding the ultimate cause. As Vedānta-sūtra very reasonably says, athāto brahma jijñāsā: human life is meant for understanding the ultimate cause. Devotees accept that the ultimate cause is Kṛṣṇa because this conclusion is supported by all Vedic literature and also by Kṛṣṇa Himself, who says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: "I am the source of everything." Devotees have no problem understanding the ultimate cause of everything, but nondevotees must face many opposing elements because everyone who wants to be a prominent philosopher invents his own way. In India there are many parties of philosophers, such as the dvaita-vādīs, advaita-vādīs, vaiśeṣikas, mīmāṁsakas, Māyāvādīs and svabhāva-vādīs, and each of them opposes the others. Similarly, in the Western countries there are also many philosophers with different views of creation, life, maintenance and annihilation. Thus it is undoubtedly a fact that there are countless philosophers throughout the world, each of them contradicting the others.



Now, one might ask why there are so many philosophers if the ultimate goal of philosophy is one. Undoubtedly the ultimate cause is one-the Supreme Brahman. As Arjuna told Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā (10.12):



paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum





"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty." Nondevotee speculators, however, do not accept an ultimate cause (sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]). Because they are ignorant and bewildered concerning the soul and its activities, even though some of them have a vague idea of the soul, many controversies arise, and the philosophical speculators can never reach a conclusion. All of these speculators are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (16.19–20):



tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān

saṁsāreṣu narādhamān

kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān

āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu





āsurīṁ yonim āpannā

mūḍhā janmani janmani

mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya

tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim





"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life. Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of existence." Because of their envy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nondevotees are born in demoniac families life after life. They are great offenders, and because of their offenses the Supreme Lord keeps them always bewildered. Kurvanti caiṣāṁ muhur ātma-moham: the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, purposely keeps them in darkness (ātma-moham).



The great authority Parāśara, the father of Vyāsadeva, explains the Supreme Personality of Godhead thus:



jñāna-śakti-balaiśvarya-

vīrya-tejāṁsy aśeṣataḥ

bhagavac-chabda-vācyāni

vinā heyair guṇādibhiḥ





The demoniac speculators cannot understand the transcendental qualities, form, pastimes, strength, knowledge and opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which are all free from material contamination (vinā heyair guṇādibhiḥ). These speculators are envious of the existence of the Lord. Jagad āhur anīśvaram: their conclusion is that the entire cosmic manifestation has no controller, but is just working naturally. Thus they are kept in constant darkness, birth after birth, and cannot understand the real cause of all causes. This is the reason why there are so many schools of philosophical speculation.





TEXT 32



astīti nāstīti ca vastu-niṣṭhayor

eka-sthayor bhinna-viruddha-dharmaṇoḥ

avekṣitaṁ kiñcana yoga-sāṅkhyayoḥ

samaṁ paraṁ hy anukūlaṁ bṛhat tat

SYNONYMS



asti-there is; iti-thus; na-not; asti-there is; iti-thus; ca-and; vastu-niṣṭhayoḥ-professing knowledge of the ultimate cause; eka-sthayoḥ-with one and the same subject matter, establishing Brahman; bhinna-demonstrating different; viruddha-dharmaṇoḥ-and opposing characteristics; avekṣitam-perceived; kiñcana-that something which; yoga-sāṅkhyayoḥ-of mystic yoga and the Sāṅkhya philosophy (analysis of the ways of nature); samam-the same; param-transcendental; hi-indeed; anukūlam-dwelling place; bṛhat tat-that ultimate cause.





There are two parties-namely, the theists and the atheists. The theist, who accepts the Supersoul, finds the spiritual cause through mystic yoga. The Sāṅkhyite, however, who merely analyzes the material elements, comes to a conclusion of impersonalism and does not accept a supreme cause-whether Bhagavān, Paramātmā or even Brahman. Instead, he is preoccupied with the superfluous, external activities of material nature. Ultimately, however, both parties demonstrate the Absolute Truth because although they offer opposing statements, their object is the same ultimate cause. They are both approaching the same Supreme Brahman, to whom I offer my respectful obeisances.





Actually there are two sides to this argument. Some say that the Absolute has no form (nirākāra), and others say that the Absolute has a form (sākāra). Therefore the word form is the common factor, although some accept it (asti or astika) whereas others try to negate it (nāsti or nāstika). Since the devotee considers the word "form" (ākāra) the common factor for both, he offers his respectful obeisances to the form, although others may go on arguing about whether the Absolute has a form or not.



In this verse the word yoga-sāṅkhyayoḥ is very important. Yoga means bhakti-yoga because yogīs also accept the existence of the all-pervading Supreme Soul and try to see that Supreme Soul within their hearts. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.13.1), dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ. The devotee tries to come directly in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas the yogī tries to find the Supersoul within the heart by meditation. Thus, both directly and indirectly, yoga means bhakti-yoga. Sāṅkhya, however, means physical study of the cosmic situation through speculative knowledge. This is generally known as jñāna-śāstra. The Sāṅkhyites are attached to the impersonal Brahman, but the Absolute Truth is known in three ways. Brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate: the Absolute Truth is one, but some accept Him as impersonal Brahman, some as the Supersoul existing everywhere, and some as Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The central point is the Absolute Truth.



Although the impersonalists and personalists fight with one another, they focus upon the same Parabrahman, the same Absolute Truth. In the yoga-śāstras, Kṛṣṇa is described as follows: kṛṣṇaṁ piśaṅgāmbaram ambujekṣaṇaṁ catur-bhujaṁ śaṅkha-gadādy-udāyudham. Thus the pleasing appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's bodily features, His limbs and His dress are described. The sāṅkhya-śāstra, however, denies the existence of the Lord's transcendental form. The sāṅkhya-śāstra says that the Supreme Absolute Truth has no hands, no legs and no name: hy anāma-rūpa-guṇa-pāṇi-pādam acakṣur aśrotram ekam advitīyam api nāma-rūpādikaṁ nāsti. The Vedic mantras say, apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā: the Supreme Lord has no legs and hands, but He can accept whatever is offered to Him. Actually such statements accept that the Supreme has hands and legs, but deny that He has material hands and legs. This is why the Absolute is called aprākṛta. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has a sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], a form of eternity, knowledge and bliss, not a material form. The Sāṅkhyites, or jñānīs, deny the material form, and the devotees also know very well that the Absolute Truth, Bhagavān, has no material form.



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam

[Bs. 5.1]





"Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes." The conception of the Absolute without hands and legs and the conception of the Absolute with hands and legs are apparently contradictory, but they both coincide with the same truth about the Supreme Absolute Person. Therefore the word vastu-niṣṭhayoḥ, which is used herein, indicates that both the yogīs and Sāṅkhyites have faith in the reality, but are arguing about it from the different viewpoints of material and spiritual identities. Parabrahman, or bṛhat, is the common point. The Sāṅkhyites and yogīs are both situated in that same Brahman, but they differ because of different angles of vision.



The directions given by the bhakti-śāstra point one in the perfect direction because the Supreme Personality of Godhead says in Bhagavad-gītā, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] "Only by devotional service am I to be known." The bhaktas know that the Supreme Person has no material form, whereas the jñānīs simply deny the material form. One should therefore take shelter of the bhakti-mārga, the path of devotion; then everything will be clear. Jñānīs concentrate on the virāṭ-rūpa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord. This is a good system in the beginning for those who are extremely materialistic, but there is no need to think continuously of the virāṭ-rūpa. When Arjuna was shown the virāṭ-rūpa of Kṛṣṇa, he saw it, but he did not want to see it perpetually. He therefore requested the Lord to return to His original form as two-armed Kṛṣṇa. In conclusion, learned scholars find no contradictions in the devotees' concentration upon the spiritual form of the Lord (īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]). In this regard, Śrīla Madhvācārya says that less intelligent nondevotees think that their conclusion is the ultimate, but because devotees are completely learned, they can understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal.





TEXT 33



yo 'nugrahārthaṁ bhajatāṁ pāda-mūlam

anāma-rūpo bhagavān anantaḥ

nāmāni rūpāṇi ca janma-karmabhir

bheje sa mahyaṁ paramaḥ prasīdatu

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); anugraha-artham-to show His causeless mercy; bhajatām-to the devotees who always render devotional service; pāda-mūlam-to His transcendental lotus feet; anāma-with no material name; rūpaḥ-or material form; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantaḥ-unlimited, all-pervading and eternally existing; nāmāni-transcendental holy names; rūpāṇi-His transcendental forms; ca-also; janma-karmabhiḥ-with His transcendental birth and activities; bheje-manifests; saḥ-He; mahyam-unto me; paramaḥ-the Supreme; prasīdatu-may He be merciful.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inconceivably opulent, who is devoid of all material names, forms and pastimes, and who is all-pervading, is especially merciful to the devotees who worship His lotus feet. Thus He exhibits transcendental forms and names with His different pastimes. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose form is eternal and full of knowledge and bliss, be merciful to me.





In regard to the significant word anāma-rūpaḥ, Śrī Śrīdhara Svāmī says, prākṛta-nāma-rūpa-rahito 'pi. The word anāma, which means "having no name," indicates that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material name. Simply by chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa to call his son, Ajāmila attained salvation. This means that Nārāyaṇa is not an ordinary mundane name; it is nonmaterial. The word anāma, therefore, indicates that the names of the Supreme Lord do not belong to this material world. The vibration of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is not a material sound, and similarly the form of the Lord and His appearance and activities are all nonmaterial. To show His causeless mercy to the devotees, as well as to the nondevotees, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appears in this material world with names, forms and pastimes, all of which are transcendental. Unintelligent men who cannot understand this think that these names, forms and pastimes are material, and therefore they deny that He has a name or a form.



Considered with scrutiny, the conclusion of nondevotees, who say that God has no name, and that of devotees, who know that His name is not material, are practically the same. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material name, form, birth, appearance or disappearance, but nevertheless, He takes His birth (janma). As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.6):



ajo 'pi sann avyayātmā

bhūtānām īśvaro 'pi san

prakṛtiṁ svām adhiṣṭhāya

sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā





Although the Lord is unborn (aja) and His body never undergoes material changes, He nevertheless appears as an incarnation, maintaining Himself always in the transcendental stage (śuddha-sattva). Thus He exhibits His transcendental forms, names and activities. That is His special mercy toward His devotees. Others may continue merely arguing about whether the Absolute Truth has form or not, but when a devotee, by the grace of the Lord, sees the Lord personally, he becomes spiritually ecstatic.



Unintelligent persons say that the Lord does nothing. Actually He has nothing to do, but nevertheless He has to do everything, because without His sanction no one can do anything. The unintelligent, however, cannot see how He is working and how the entire material nature is working under His direction. His different potencies work perfectly.



na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca





(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8)



He has nothing to do personally, for since His potencies are perfect, everything is immediately done by His will. Persons to whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not revealed cannot see how He is working, and therefore they think that even if there is God, He has nothing to do or has no particular name.



Actually the Lord's name already exists because of His transcendental activities. The Lord is sometimes called guṇa-karma-nāma because He is named according to His transcendental activities. For example, Kṛṣṇa means "all-attractive." This is the Lord's name because His transcendental qualities make Him very attractive. As a small boy He lifted Govardhana Hill, and in His childhood He killed many demons. Such activities are very attractive, and therefore He is sometimes called Giridhārī, Madhusūdana, Agha-niṣūdana and so on. Because He acted as the son of Nanda Mahārāja, He is called Nanda-tanuja. These names already exist, but since nondevotees cannot understand the names of the Lord, He is sometimes called anāma, or nameless. This means that He has no material names. All His activities are spiritual, and therefore He has spiritual names.



Generally, less intelligent men are under the impression that the Lord has no form. Therefore He appears in His original form as Kṛṣṇa, sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], to carry out His mission of participating in the Battle of Kurukṣetra and pastimes to protect the devotees and vanquish the demons (paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]). This is His mercy. For those who think that He has no form and no work to do, Kṛṣṇa comes to show that indeed He works. He works so gloriously that no one else can perform such uncommon acts. Although He appeared as a human being, He married 16,108 wives, which is impossible for a human being to do. The Lord performs such activities to show people how great He is, how affectionate He is and how merciful He is. Although His original name is Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam), He acts in unlimited ways, and therefore according to His work He has many, many thousands of names.





TEXT 34



yaḥ prākṛtair jñāna-pathair janānāṁ

yathāśayaṁ deha-gato vibhāti

yathānilaḥ pārthivam āśrito guṇaṁ

sa īśvaro me kurutāṁ manoratham

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-who; prākṛtaiḥ-lower grade; jñāna-pathaiḥ-by the paths of worship; janānām-of all living entities; yathā-āśayam-according to the desire; deha-gataḥ-situated within the core of the heart; vibhāti-manifests; yathā-just as; anilaḥ-the air; pārthivam-earthly; āśritaḥ-receiving; guṇam-the quality (like flavor and color); saḥ-He; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; me-my; kurutām-may He fulfill; manoratham-desire (for devotional service).





As the air carries various characteristics of the physical elements, like the aroma of a flower or colors resulting from a mixture of dust in the air, the Lord appears through lower systems of worship according to one's desires, although He appears as the demigods and not in His original form. What is the use of these other forms? May the original Supreme Personality of Godhead please fulfill my desires.





The impersonalists imagine the various demigods to be forms of the Lord. For example, the Māyāvādīs worship five demigods (pañcopāsanā). They do not actually believe in the form of the Lord, but for the sake of worship they imagine some form to be God. Generally they imagine a form of Viṣṇu, a form of Śiva, and forms of Gaṇeśa, the sun-god and Durgā. This is called pañcopāsanā. Dakṣa, however, wanted to worship not an imaginary form, but the supreme form of Lord Kṛṣṇa.



In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes the difference between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and an ordinary living being. As pointed out in a previous verse, sarvaṁ pumān veda guṇāṁś ca taj-jño na veda sarva jñam anantam īḍe: the omnipotent Supreme Lord knows everything, but the living being does not actually know the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā, "I know everything, but no one knows Me." This is the difference between the Supreme Lord and an ordinary living being. In a prayer in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Queen Kuntī says, "My dear Lord, You exist inside and outside, yet no one can see You."



The conditioned soul cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by speculative knowledge or by imagination. One must therefore know the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He reveals Himself, but He cannot be understood by speculation. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.29):



athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan





"My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years."



This is the verdict of the śāstra. An ordinary man may be a great philosopher and may speculate upon what the Absolute Truth is, what His form is and where He is existing, but be cannot understand these truths. Sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ: one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead only through devotional service. This is also explained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (18.55). Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ: "One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only by devotional service." Unintelligent persons want to imagine or concoct a form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but devotees want to worship the actual Personality of Godhead. Therefore Dakṣa prays, "One may think of You as personal, impersonal or imaginary, but I wish to pray to Your Lordship that You fulfill my desires to see You as You actually are."



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that this verse is especially meant for the impersonalist, who thinks that he himself is the Supreme because there is no difference between the living being and God. The Māyāvādī philosopher thinks that there is only one Supreme Truth and that he is also that Supreme Truth. Actually this is not knowledge but foolishness, and this verse is especially meant for such fools, whose knowledge has been stolen by illusion (māyayāpahṛta jñānāḥ). Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that such persons, jñāni-māninaḥ, think themselves very advanced, but actually they are unintelligent.



In regard to this verse, Śrīla Madhvācārya says:



svadeha-sthaṁ hariṁ prāhur

adhamā jīvam eva tu

madhyamāś cāpy anirṇītaṁ

jīvād bhinnaṁ janārdanam





There are three classes of men-the lowest (adhama), those in the middle (madhyama), and the best (uttama). The lowest (adhama) think that there is no difference between God and the living entity except that the living entity is under designations whereas the Absolute Truth has no designations. In their opinion, as soon as the designations of the material body are dissolved, the jīva, the living entity, will mix with the Supreme. They give the argument of ghaṭākāśa-paṭākāśa, in which the body is compared to a pot with the sky within and the sky without. When the pot breaks, the sky inside becomes one with the sky outside, and so the impersonalists say that the living being becomes one with the Supreme. This is their argument, but Śrīla Madhvācārya says that such an argument is put forward by the lowest class of men. Another class of men cannot ascertain what the actual form of the Supreme is, but they agree that there is a Supreme who controls the activities of the ordinary living being. Such philosophers are accepted as mediocre. The best, however. are those who understand the Supreme Lord (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]). Pūrṇānandādi-guṇakaṁ sarva jīva-vilakṣaṇam: His form is completely spiritual, full of bliss, and completely distinct from that of the conditioned soul or any other living entity. Uttamās tu hariṁ prāhus tāratamyena teṣu ca: such philosophers are the best because they know that the Supreme Personality of Godhead reveals Himself differently to worshipers in various modes of material nature. They know that there are thirty-three million demigods just to convince the conditioned soul that there is a supreme power and to induce him to agree to worship one of these demigods so that by the association of devotees he may be able to understand that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: [Bg. 7.7] "There is no truth superior to Me." Aham ādir hi devānām: "I am the origin of all the demigods." Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: "I am superior to everyone, even Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the other demigods." These are the conclusions of the śāstra, and one who accepts these conclusions should be considered a first-class philosopher. Such a philosopher knows that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord of the demigods (deva-deveśvaraṁ sūtram ānandaṁ prāṇa-vedinaḥ).





TEXTS 35–39



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti stutaḥ saṁstuvataḥ

sa tasminn aghamarṣaṇe

prādurāsīt kuru-śreṣṭha

bhagavān bhakta-vatsalaḥ

kṛta-pādaḥ suparṇāṁse



pralambāṣṭa-mahā-bhujaḥ

cakra-śaṅkhāsi-carmeṣu-

dhanuḥ-pāśa-gadā-dharaḥ

pīta-vāsā ghana-śyāmaḥ



prasanna-vadanekṣaṇaḥ

vana-mālā-nivītāṅgo

lasac-chrīvatsa-kaustubhaḥ

mahā-kirīṭa-kaṭakaḥ



sphuran-makara-kuṇḍalaḥ

kāñcy-aṅgulīya-valaya-

nūpurāṅgada-bhūṣitaḥ

trailokya-mohanaṁ rūpaṁ



bibhrat tribhuvaneśvaraḥ

vṛto nārada-nandādyaiḥ

pārṣadaiḥ sura-yūthapaiḥ

stūyamāno 'nugāyadbhiḥ

siddha-gandharva-cāraṇaiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; stutaḥ-being praised; saṁstuvataḥ-of Dakṣa, who was offering prayers; saḥ-that Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmin-in that; aghamarṣaṇe-holy place celebrated as Aghamarṣaṇa; prādurāsīt-appeared; kuru-śreṣṭha-O best of the Kuru dynasty; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhakta-vatsalaḥ-who is very kind to His devotees; kṛta-pādaḥ-whose lotus feet were placed; suparṇa-aṁse-on the shoulders of His carrier, Garuḍa; pralamba-very long; aṣṭa-mahā-bhujaḥ-possessing eight mighty arms; cakra-disc; śaṅkha-conchshell; asi-sword; carma-shield; iṣu-arrow; dhanuḥ-bow; pāśa-rope; gadā-club; dharaḥ-holding; pīta-vāsāḥ-with yellow garments; ghana-śyāmaḥ-whose bodily hue was intense blue-black; prasanna-very cheerful; vadana-whose face; īkṣaṇaḥ-and glance; vana-mālā-by a garland of forest flowers; nivīta-aṅgaḥ-whose body was adorned from the neck down to the feet; lasat-shining; śrīvatsa-kaustubhaḥ-the jewel known as Kaustubha and the mark of Śrīvatsa; mahā-kirīṭa-of a very large and gorgeous helmet; kaṭakaḥ-a circle; sphurat-glittering; makara-kuṇḍalaḥ-earrings resembling sharks; kāñcī-with a belt; aṅgulīya-finger rings; valaya-bracelets; nūpura-ankle bells; aṅgada-upper-arm bracelets; bhūṣitaḥ-decorated; trai-lokya-mohanam-captivating the three worlds; rūpam-His bodily features; bibhrat-shining; tri-bhuvana-of the three worlds; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Lord; vṛtaḥ-surrounded; nārada-by exalted devotees, headed by Nārada; nanda-ādyaiḥ-and others, like Nanda; pārṣadaiḥ-who are all eternal associates; sura-yūthapaiḥ-as well as by the heads of the demigods; stūyamānaḥ-being glorified; anugāyadbhiḥ-singing after Him; siddha-gandharva-cāraṇaiḥ-by the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Cāraṇas.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is extremely affectionate to His devotees, was very pleased by the prayers offered by Dakṣa, and thus He appeared at that holy place known as Aghamarṣaṇa. O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Kuru dynasty, the Lord's lotus feet rested on the shoulders of His carrier, Garuḍa, and He appeared with eight long, mighty, very beautiful arms. In His hands He held a disc, conchshell, sword, shield, arrow, bow, rope and club-in each hand a different weapon, all brilliantly shining. His garments were yellow and His bodily hue deep bluish. His eyes and face were very cheerful, and from His neck to His feet hung a long garland of flowers. His chest was decorated with the Kaustubha jewel and the mark of Śrīvatsa. On His head was a gorgeous round helmet, and His ears were decorated with earrings resembling sharks. All these ornaments were uncommonly beautiful. The Lord wore a golden belt on His waist, bracelets on His arms, rings on His fingers, and ankle bells on His feet. Thus decorated by various ornaments, Lord Hari, who is attractive to all the living entities of the three worlds, is known as Puruṣottama, the best personality. He was accompanied by great devotees like Nārada, Nanda and all the principal demigods, led by the heavenly king, Indra, and the residents of various upper planetary systems such as Siddhaloka, Gandharvaloka and Cāraṇaloka. Situated on both sides of the Lord and behind Him as well, these devotees offered Him prayers continuously.





TEXT 40



rūpaṁ tan mahad-āścaryaṁ

vicakṣyāgata-sādhvasaḥ

nanāma daṇḍavad bhūmau

prahṛṣṭātmā prajāpatiḥ

SYNONYMS



rūpam-transcendental form; tat-that; mahat-āścaryam-greatly wonderful; vicakṣya-seeing; āgata-sādhvasaḥ-in the beginning becoming afraid; nanāma-offered obeisances; daṇḍa-vat-like a stick; bhūmau-on the ground; prahṛṣṭa-ātmā-being pleased in his body, mind and soul; prajāpatiḥ-the prajāpati known as Dakṣa.





Seeing that wonderful and effulgent form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Prajāpati Dakṣa was first somewhat afraid, but then he was very pleased to see the Lord, and he fell to the ground like a stick [daṇḍavat] to offer his respects to the Lord.





TEXT 41



na kiñcanodīrayitum

aśakat tīvrayā mudā

āpūrita-manodvārair

hradinya iva nirjharaiḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; kiñcana-anything; udīrayitum-to speak; aśakat-he was able; tīvrayā-by very great; mudā-happiness; āpūrita-filled; manaḥ-dvāraiḥ-by the senses; hradinyaḥ-the rivers; iva-like; nirjharaiḥ-by torrents from the mountain.





As rivers are filled by water flowing from a mountain, all of Dakṣa's senses were filled with pleasure. Because of his highly elevated happiness, Dakṣa could not say anything, but simply remained flat on the ground.





When one actually realizes or sees the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is filled with complete happiness. For example, when Dhruva Mahārāja saw the Lord in his presence, he said, svāmin kṛtārtho'smi varaṁ na yāce: "My dear Lord, I have nothing to ask from You. Now I am completely satisfied." Similarly, when Prajāpati Dakṣa saw the Supreme Lord in his presence, he simply fell flat, unable to speak or ask Him for anything.





TEXT 42



taṁ tathāvanataṁ bhaktaṁ

prajā-kāmaṁ prajāpatim

citta-jñaḥ sarva-bhūtānām

idam āha janārdanaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Prajāpati Dakṣa); tathā-in that way; avanatam-prostrated before Him; bhaktam-a great devotee; prajā-kāmam-desiring to increase the population; prajāpatim-unto the prajāpati (Dakṣa); citta-jñaḥ-who can understand the hearts; sarva-bhūtānām-of all living entities; idam-this; āha-said; janārdanaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can appease everyone's desires.





Although Prajāpati Dakṣa could not say anything, when the Lord, who knows everyone's heart, saw His devotee prostrate in that manner and desiring to increase the population, He addressed him as follows.





TEXT 43



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

prācetasa mahā-bhāga

saṁsiddhas tapasā bhavān

yac chraddhayā mat-parayā

mayi bhāvaṁ paraṁ gataḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prācetasa-O My dear Prācetasa; mahā-bhāga-O you who are so fortunate; saṁsiddhaḥ-perfected; tapasā-by your austerities; bhavān-your good self; yat-because; śraddhayā-by great faith; mat-parayā-whose object is Me; mayi-in Me; bhāvam-ecstasy; param-supreme; gataḥ-attained.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O most fortunate Prācetasa, because of your great faith in Me, you have attained the supreme devotional ecstasy. Indeed, because of your austerities, combined with exalted devotion, your life is now successful. You have achieved complete perfection.





As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (8.15), one reaches the highest perfection when he attains the fortune of realizing the Supreme Personality of Godhead:



mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ





"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection." Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement teaches one to follow the path toward the topmost perfection simply by performing devotional service.





TEXT 44



prīto 'haṁ te prajā-nātha

yat te 'syodbṛṁhaṇaṁ tapaḥ

mamaiṣa kāmo bhūtānāṁ

yad bhūyāsur vibhūtayaḥ

SYNONYMS



prītaḥ-very much pleased; aham-I; te-with you; prajā-nātha-O king of population; yat-because; te-your; asya-of this material world; udbṛṁhaṇam-causing increase; tapaḥ-austerity; mama-My; eṣaḥ-this; kāmaḥ-desire; bhūtānām-of the living entities; yat-which; bhūyāsuḥ-may there be; vibhūtayaḥ-advancement in all respects.





My dear Prajāpati Dakṣa, you have performed extreme austerities for the welfare and growth of the world. My desire also is that everyone within this world be happy. I am therefore very pleased with you because you are endeavoring to fulfill My desire for the welfare of the entire world.





After every dissolution of the material cosmos, all the living entities take shelter in the body of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and when creation takes place again, they come forth from His body in their various species to resume their activities. Why does the creation take place in such a way that the living entities are put into conditioned life to suffer the threefold miseries imposed upon them by the material nature? Here the Lord says to Dakṣa, "You desire to benefit all living entities, and that is also My desire." The living entities who come in contact with the material world are meant to be corrected. All the living entities within this material world have revolted against the service of the Lord, and therefore they remain within this material world as ever conditioned, nitya-baddha, taking birth again and again. There is a chance, of course, of their being liberated, but nevertheless the conditioned souls, not taking advantage of this opportunity, continue in a life of sense enjoyment, and thus they are punished by birth and death again and again. This is the law of nature. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14):



daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te





"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7) the Lord says:



mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati





"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind." The living entity's struggle for existence within the material world is due to his rebellious nature. Unless a living entity surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, he must continue this life of struggle.



The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not a fad. It is a bona fide movement intended to promote the welfare of all conditioned souls by trying to elevate everyone to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one does not come to this platform, he must continue in material existence perpetually, sometimes in the upper planets and sometimes in the lower planets. As confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 20.118), kabhu svarge uṭhāya, kabhu narake ḍubāya: the conditioned soul sometimes descends into nescience and sometimes gets some relief by being relatively freed from it. This is the life of the conditioned soul.



Prajāpati Dakṣa is trying to benefit the conditioned souls by begetting them to give them a life with a chance for liberation. Liberation means surrender to Kṛṣṇa. If one begets children with the purpose of training them to surrender to Kṛṣṇa, fatherhood is very good. Similarly, when the spiritual master trains the conditioned souls to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, his position is successful. If one gives the conditioned souls a chance to become Kṛṣṇa conscious, all his activities are approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is extremely pleased, as stated here (prīto 'ham). Following the examples of the previous ācāryas, all the members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should try to benefit the conditioned souls by inducing them to become Kṛṣṇa conscious and giving them all facilities to do so. Such activities constitute real welfare work. By such activities, a preacher or anyone who endeavors to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness is recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (18.68–69):



ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā

mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ





na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

bhavitā na ca me tasmād

anyaḥ priyataro bhuvi





"For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear."





TEXT 45



brahmā bhavo bhavantaś ca

manavo vibudheśvarāḥ

vibhūtayo mama hy etā

bhūtānāṁ bhūti-hetavaḥ

SYNONYMS



brahmā-Lord Brahmā; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; bhavantaḥ-all of you prajāpatis; ca-and; manavaḥ-the Manus; vibudha-īśvarāḥ-all the different demigods (such as the sun, the moon, Venus, Mars and Jupiter, who are all in charge of various activities for the welfare of the world); vibhūtayaḥ-expansions of energy; mama-My; hi-indeed; etāḥ-all these; bhūtānām-of all the living entities; bhūti-of welfare; hetavaḥ-causes.





Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, the Manus, all the other demigods in the higher planetary systems, and you prajāpatis, who are increasing the population, are working for the benefit of all living entities. Thus you expansions of My marginal energy are incarnations of My various qualities.





There are various types of incarnations or expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The expansions of His personal self, or viṣṇu-tattva, are called svāṁśa expansions, whereas the living entities, who are not viṣṇu-tattva but jīva-tattva, are called vibhinnāṁśa, separated expansions. Although Prajāpati Dakṣa is not on the same level as Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, he is compared to them because he engages in the service of the Lord. In the service of the Personality of Godhead, it is not that Lord Brahmā is considered very great while an ordinary human being trying to preach the glories of the Lord is considered very low. There are no such distinctions. Regardless of whether materially high or materially low, anyone engaged in the service of the Lord is spiritually very dear to Him. In this regard, Śrīla Madhvācārya gives this quotation from the Tantra-nirṇaya:



viśeṣa-vyakti-pātratvād

brahmādyās tu vibhūtayaḥ

tad-antaryāmiṇaś caiva

matsyādyā vibhavāḥ smṛtāḥ





From Lord Brahmā down, all the living entities engaged in the service of the Lord are extraordinary and are called vibhūti. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (10.41):



yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ

śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā

tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ

mama tejo-'ṁśa-sambhavam





"Know that all beautiful, glorious and mighty creations spring from but a spark of My splendor." A living entity especially empowered to act on behalf of the Lord is called vibhūti, whereas the viṣṇu-tattva incarnations of the Lord, such as the Matsya avatāra (keśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagad-īśa hare), are called vibhava.





TEXT 46



tapo me hṛdayaṁ brahmaṁs

tanur vidyā kriyākṛtiḥ

aṅgāni kratavo jātā

dharma ātmāsavaḥ surāḥ

SYNONYMS



tapaḥ-austerities like mental control, mystic yoga and meditation; me-My; hṛdayam-heart; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; tanuḥ-the body; vidyā-the knowledge derived from Vedic scripture; kriyā-spiritual activities; ākṛtiḥ-form; aṅgāni-the limbs of the body; kratavaḥ-the ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices mentioned in the Vedic literature; jātāḥ-completed; dharmaḥ-the religious principles for executing the ritualistic ceremonies; ātmā-My soul; asavaḥ-life airs; surāḥ-the demigods who execute My orders in different departments of the material world.





My dear brāhmaṇa, austerity in the form of meditation is My heart, Vedic knowledge in the form of hymns and mantras constitutes My body, and spiritual activities and ecstatic emotions are My actual form. The ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices, when properly conducted, are the various limbs of My body, the unseen good fortune proceeding from pious or spiritual activities constitutes My mind, and the demigods who execute My orders in various departments are My life and soul.





Sometimes atheists argue that since God is invisible to their eyes, they do not believe in God. For them the Supreme Lord is describing a method by which one can see God in His impersonal form. Intelligent persons can see God in His personal form, as stated in the śāstras, but if one is very eager to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately, face to face, he can see the Supreme Lord through this description, which portrays the various internal and external parts of His body.



To engage in tapasya, or denial of material activities, is the first principle of spiritual life. Then there are spiritual activities, such as the performance of Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, study of the Vedic knowledge, meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. One should also respect the demigods and understand how they are situated, how they act and how they manage the activities of the various departments of this material world. In this way one can see how God is existing and how everything is managed perfectly because of the presence of the Supreme Lord. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10):



mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ

sūyate sa-carācaram

hetunānena kaunteya

jagad viparivartate





"This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and nonmoving beings. By its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again." If one is unable to see the Supreme Lord although He is present as Kṛṣṇa in His various incarnations, one may see the Supreme Lord's impersonal feature, according to the direction of the Vedas, by seeing the activities of material nature.



Anything done under the direction of the Vedic injunctions is called dharma, as described by the order carriers of Yamarāja (Bhāg. 6.1.40):



veda-praṇihito dharmo

hy adharmas tad-viparyayaḥ

vedo nārāyaṇaḥ sākṣāt

svayambhūr iti śuśruma





"That which is prescribed in the Vedas constitutes dharma, the religious principles, and the opposite of that is irreligion. The Vedas are directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, and are self-born. This we have heard from Yamarāja."



In this connection, Śrīla Madhvācārya comments:



tapo 'bhimānī rudras tu

viṣṇor hṛdayam āśritaḥ

vidyā rūpā tathaivomā

viṣṇos tanum upāśritā





śṛṅgārādy-ākṛti-gataḥ

kriyātmā pāka-śāsanaḥ

aṅgeṣu kratavaḥ sarve

madhya-dehe ca dharma-rāṭ

prāṇo vāyuś citta-gato

brahmādyāḥ sveṣu devatāḥ





The various demigods are all acting under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and according to their various actions the demigods are differently named.





TEXT 47



aham evāsam evāgre

nānyat kiñcāntaraṁ bahiḥ

saṁjñāna-mātram avyaktaṁ

prasuptam iva viśvataḥ

SYNONYMS



aham-I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva-only; āsam-was; eva-certainly; agre-in the beginning, before the creation; na-not; anyat-other; kiñca-anything; antaram-besides Me; bahiḥ-external (since the cosmic manifestation is external to the spiritual world, the spiritual world existed when there was no material world); saṁjñāna-mātram-only the consciousness of the living entities; avyaktam-unmanifested; prasuptam-sleeping; iva-like; viśvataḥ-all over.





Before the creation of this cosmic manifestation, I alone existed with My specific spiritual potencies. Consciousness was then unmanifested, just as one's consciousness is unmanifested during the time of sleep.





The word aham indicates a person. As explained in the Vedas, nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām: the Lord is the supreme eternal among innumerable eternals and the supreme living being among the innumerable living beings. The Lord is a person who also has impersonal features. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11):



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate





"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān." Consideration of the Paramātmā and impersonal Brahman arose after the creation; before the creation, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead existed. As firmly declared in Bhagavad-gītā (18.55), the Lord can be understood only by bhakti-yoga. The ultimate cause, the supreme cause of creation, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can be understood only by bhakti-yoga. He cannot be understood by speculative philosophical research or by meditation, since all such processes came into existence after the material creation. The impersonal and localized conceptions of the Supreme Lord are more or less materially contaminated. The real spiritual process, therefore, is bhakti-yoga. As the Lord says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] "Only by devotional service can I be understood." Before the creation, the Lord existed as a person, as indicated here by the word aham. When Prajāpati Dakṣa saw Him as a person, who was beautifully dressed and ornamented, he actually experienced the meaning of this word aham through devotional service.



Each person is eternal. Because the Lord says that He existed as a person before the creation (agre) and will also exist after the annihilation, the Lord is a person eternally. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura therefore quotes these verses from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.13–14):



na cāntar na bahir yasya

na pūrvaṁ nāpi cāparam

pūrvāparaṁ bahiś cāntar

jagato yo jagac ca yaḥ





taṁ matvātmajam avyaktaṁ

martya-liṅgam adhokṣajam

gopikolūkhale dāmnā

babandha prākṛtaṁ yathā





The Personality of Godhead appeared in Vṛndāvana as the son of mother Yaśodā, who bound the Lord with rope just as an ordinary mother binds a material child. There are actually no divisions of external and internal for the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]), but when He appears in His own form the unintelligent think Him an ordinary person. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] although He comes in His own body, which never changes. mūḍhas, the unintelligent, think that the impersonal Brahman has assumed a material body to come in the form of a person. Ordinary living beings assume material bodies, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme consciousness, it is stated herein that saṁjñāna-mātram, the original consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, was unmanifested before the creation, although the consciousness of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the origin of everything. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (2.12), "Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be." Thus the Lord's person is the Absolute Truth in the past, present and future.



In this regard, Madhvācārya quotes two verses from the Matsya Purāṇa:



nānā-varṇo haris tv eko

bahu-śīrṣa-bhujo rūpāt

āsīl laye tad-anyat tu

sūkṣma-rūpaṁ śriyaṁ vinā





asuptaḥ supta iva ca

mīlitākṣo 'bhavad dhariḥ

anyatrānādarād viṣṇau

śrīś ca līneva kathyate

sūkṣmatvena harau sthānāl

līnam anyad apīṣyate





After the annihilation of everything, the Supreme Lord, because of His sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], remains in His original form, but since the other living entities have material bodies, the matter merges into matter, and the subtle form of the spirit soul remains within the body of the Lord. The Lord does not sleep, but the ordinary living entities remain asleep until the next creation. An unintelligent person thinks that the opulence of the Supreme Lord is nonexistent after the annihilation, but that is not a fact. The opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains as it is in the spiritual world; only in the material world is everything dissolved. Brahma-līna, merging into the Supreme Brahman, is not actual līna, or annihilation, for the subtle form remaining in the Brahman effulgence will return to the material world after the material creation and again assume a material form. This is described as bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate. When the material body is annihilated, the spirit soul remains in a subtle form, which later assumes another material body. This is true for the conditioned souls, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead remains eternally in His original consciousness and spiritual body.





TEXT 48



mayy ananta-guṇe 'nante

guṇato guṇa-vigrahaḥ

yadāsīt tata evādyaḥ

svayambhūḥ samabhūd ajaḥ

SYNONYMS



mayi-in Me; ananta-guṇe-possessing unlimited potency; anante-unlimited; guṇataḥ-from My potency known as māyā; guṇa-vigrahaḥ-the universe, which is a result of the modes of nature; yadā-when; āsīt-it came into existence; tataḥ-therein; eva-indeed; ādyaḥ-the first living being; svayambhūḥ-Lord Brahmā; samabhūt-was born; ajaḥ-although not from a material mother.





I am the reservoir of unlimited potency, and therefore I am known as unlimited or all-pervading. From My material energy the cosmic manifestation appeared within Me, and in this universal manifestation appeared the chief being, Lord Brahmā, who is your source and is not born of a material mother.





This is a description of the history of the universal creation. The first cause is the Lord Himself, the Supreme Person. From Him, Brahmā is created, and Brahmā takes charge of the affairs of the universe. The universal affairs of the material creation depend upon the material energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is therefore the cause of the material creation. The entire cosmic manifestation is described herein as guṇa-vigrahaḥ, the form of the Lord's qualities. From the cosmic universal form, the first creation is Lord Brahmā, who is the cause of all living entities. In this regard, Śrīla Madhvācārya describes the unlimited attributes of the Lord:



praty-ekaśo guṇānāṁ tu

niḥsīmatvam udīryate

tadānantyaṁ tu guṇatas

te cānantā hi saṅkhyayā

ato 'nanta-guṇo viṣṇur

guṇato 'nanta eva ca





Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate: the Lord has innumerable potencies, all of which are unlimited. Therefore the Lord Himself and all His qualities, forms, pastimes and paraphernalia are also unlimited. Because Lord Viṣṇu has unlimited attributes, He is known as Ananta.





TEXTS 49–50



sa vai yadā mahādevo

mama vīryopabṛṁhitaḥ

mene khilam ivātmānam

udyataḥ svarga-karmaṇi

atha me 'bhihito devas



tapo 'tapyata dāruṇam

nava viśva-sṛjo yuṣmān

yenādāv asṛjad vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that Lord Brahmā; vai-indeed; yadā-when; mahā-devaḥ-the chief of all the demigods; mama-My; vīrya-upabṛṁhitaḥ-being increased by the potency; mene-thought; khilam-incapable; iva-as if; ātmānam-himself; udyataḥ-attempting; svarga-karmaṇi-in the creation of the universal affairs; atha-at that time; me-by Me; abhihitaḥ-advised; devaḥ-that Lord Brahmā; tapaḥ-austerity; atapyata-performed; dāruṇam-extremely difficult; nava-nine; viśva-sṛjaḥ-important personalities to create the universe; yuṣmān-all of you; yena-by whom; ādau-in the beginning; asṛjat-created; vibhuḥ-the great.





When the chief lord of the universe, Lord Brahmā [Svayambhū], having been inspired by My energy, was attempting to create, he thought himself incapable. Therefore I gave him advice, and in accordance with My instructions he underwent extremely difficult austerities. Because of these austerities, the great Lord Brahmā was able to create nine personalities, including you, to help him in the functions of creation.





Nothing is possible without tapasya. Lord Brahmā, however, was empowered to create this entire universe because of his austerities. The more we engage in austerities, the more we become powerful by the grace of the Lord. Therefore Ṛṣabhadeva advised His sons, tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ śuddhyed: "One should engage in penance and austerity to attain the divine position of devotional service. By such activity, one's heart is purified." (Bhāg. 5.5.1) In our material existence we are impure, and therefore we cannot do anything wonderful, but if we purify our existence by tapasya, we can do wonderful things by the grace of the Lord. Therefore tapasya is very important, as stressed in this verse.





TEXT 51



eṣā pañcajanasyāṅga

duhitā vai prajāpateḥ

asiknī nāma patnītve

prajeśa pratigṛhyatām

SYNONYMS



eṣā-this; pañcajanasya-of Pañcajana; aṅga-O My dear son; duhitā-the daughter; vai-indeed; prajāpateḥ-another prajāpati; asiknī nāma-of the name Asiknī; patnītve-as your wife; prajeśa-O prajāpati; pratigṛhyatām-let her be accepted.





O My dear son Dakṣa, Prajāpati Pañcajana has a daughter named Asiknī, whom I offer to you so that you may accept her as your wife.





TEXT 52



mithuna-vyavāya-dharmas tvaṁ

prajā-sargam imaṁ punaḥ

mithuna-vyavāya-dharmiṇyāṁ

bhūriśo bhāvayiṣyasi

SYNONYMS



mithuna-of man and woman; vyavāya-sexual activities; dharmaḥ-who accepts by religious performance; tvam-you; prajā-sargam-creation of living entities; imam-this; punaḥ-again; mithuna-of man and woman united; vyavāya-dharmiṇyām-in her according to the religious performance of sexual intercourse; bhūriśaḥ-manifold; bhāvayiṣyasi-you will cause to be.





Now unite in sexual life as man and woman, and in this way, by sexual intercourse, you will be able to beget hundreds of children in the womb of this girl to increase the population.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.11), dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu kāmo 'smi: "I am sex that is not contrary to religious principles." Sexual intercourse ordained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is dharma, a religious principle, but it is not intended for sense enjoyment. Indulgence in sense enjoyment through sexual intercourse is not allowed by the Vedic principles. One may follow the natural tendency for sex life only to beget children. Therefore the Lord told Dakṣa in this verse, "This girl is offered to you only for sex life to beget children, not for any other purpose. She is very fertile, and therefore you will be able to have as many children as you can beget."



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks in this connection that Dakṣa was given the facility for unlimited sexual intercourse. In Dakṣa's previous life he was also known as Dakṣa, but in the course of performing sacrifices he offended Lord Śiva, and thus his head was replaced with that of a goat. Then Dakṣa gave up his life because of his degraded condition, but because he maintained the same unlimited sexual desires, he underwent austerities by which he satisfied the Supreme Lord, who then gave him unlimited potency for sexual intercourse.



It should be noted that although such a facility for sexual intercourse is achieved by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this facility is not offered to advanced devotees, who are free from material desires (anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Madhya 19.167]). In this connection it may be noted that if the American boys and girls engaged in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement want to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness to achieve the supreme benefit of loving service to the Lord, they should refrain from indulging in this facility for sex life. Therefore we advise that one should at least refrain from illicit sex. Even if there are opportunities for sex life, one should voluntarily accept the limitation of having sex only for progeny, not for any other purpose. Kardama Muni was also given the facility for sex life, but he had only a slight desire for it. Therefore after begetting children in the womb of Devahūti, Kardama Muni became completely renounced. The purport is that if one wants to return home, back to Godhead, one should voluntarily refrain from sex life. Sex should be accepted only as much as needed, not unlimitedly.



One should not think that Dakṣa received the favor of the Lord by receiving the facilities for unlimited sex. Later verses will reveal that Dakṣa again committed an offense, this time at the lotus feet of Nārada. Therefore although sex life is the topmost enjoyment in the material world and although one may have an opportunity for sexual enjoyment by the grace of God, this entails a risk of committing offenses. Dakṣa was open to such offenses, and therefore, strictly speaking, he was not actually favored by the Supreme Lord. One should not seek the favor of the Lord for unlimited potency in sex life.





TEXT 53



tvatto 'dhastāt prajāḥ sarvā

mithunī-bhūya māyayā

madīyayā bhaviṣyanti

hariṣyanti ca me balim

SYNONYMS



tvattaḥ-you; adhastāt-after; prajāḥ-the living entities; sarvāḥ-all; mithunī-bhūya-having sex life; māyayā-because of the influence or facilities given by the illusory energy; madīyayā-My; bhaviṣyanti-they will become; hariṣyanti-they will offer; ca-also; me-unto Me; balim-presentations.





After you give birth to many hundreds and thousands of children, they will also be captivated by My illusory energy and will engage, like You, in sexual intercourse. But because of My mercy to you and them, they will also be able to give Me presentations in devotion.





TEXT 54



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity uktvā miṣatas tasya

bhagavān viśva-bhāvanaḥ

svapnopalabdhārtha iva

tatraivāntardadhe hariḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; iti-thus; uktvā-saying; miṣataḥ tasya-while he (Dakṣa) was personally looking on; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viśva-bhāvanaḥ-who creates the universal affairs; svapna-upalabdha-arthaḥ-an object obtained in dreaming; iva-like; tatra-there; eva-certainly; antardadhe-disappeared; hariḥ-the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After the creator of the entire universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, had spoken in this way in the presence of Prajāpati Dakṣa, He immediately disappeared as if He were an object experienced in a dream.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Haṁsa-guhya Prayers Offered to the Lord by Prajāpati Dakṣa."



Chapter Five



Nārada Muni Cursed by Prajāpati Dakṣa





This chapter relates how all the sons of Dakṣa were delivered from the clutches of the material energy by following the advice of Nārada, who was therefore cursed by Dakṣa.





Influenced by the external energy of Lord Viṣṇu, Prajāpati Dakṣa begot ten thousand sons in the womb of his wife, Pāñcajanī. These sons, who were all of the same character and mentality, were known as the Haryaśvas. Ordered by their father to create more and more population, the Haryaśvas went west to the place where the River Sindhu (now the Indus) meets the Arabian Sea. In those days this was the site of a holy lake named Nārāyaṇa-saras, where there were many saintly persons. The Haryaśvas began practicing austerities, penances and meditation, which are the engagements of the highly exalted renounced order of life. However, when Śrīla Nārada Muni saw these boys engaged in such commendable austerities simply for material creation, he thought it better to release them from this tendency. Nārada Muni described to the boys their ultimate goal of life and advised them not to become ordinary karmīs to beget children. Thus all the sons of Dakṣa became enlightened and left, never to return.





Prajāpati Dakṣa, who was very sad at the loss of his sons, begot one thousand more sons in the womb of his wife, Pāñcajanī, and ordered them to increase progeny. These sons, who were named the Savalāśvas, also engaged in worshiping Lord Viṣṇu to beget children, but Nārada Muni convinced them to become mendicants and not beget children. Foiled twice in his attempts to increase population, Prajāpati Dakṣa became most angry at Nārada Muni and cursed him, saying that in the future he would not be able to stay anywhere. Since Nārada Muni, being fully qualified, was fixed in tolerance, he accepted Dakṣa's curse.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tasyāṁ sa pāñcajanyāṁ vai

viṣṇu-māyopabṛṁhitaḥ

haryaśva-saṁjñān ayutaṁ

putrān ajanayad vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasyām-in her; saḥ-Prajāpati Dakṣa; pāñcajanyām-his wife named Pāñcajanī; vai-indeed; viṣṇu-māyā-upabṛṁhitaḥ-being made capable by the illusory energy of Lord Viṣṇu; haryaśva-saṁjñān-named the Haryaśvas; ayutam-ten thousand; putrān-sons; ajanayat-begot; vibhuḥ-being powerful.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Impelled by the illusory energy of Lord Viṣṇu, Prajāpati Dakṣa begot ten thousand sons in the womb of Pāñcajanī [Asiknī]. My dear King, these sons were called the Haryaśvas.





TEXT 2



apṛthag-dharma-śīlās te

sarve dākṣāyaṇā nṛpa

pitrā proktāḥ prajā-sarge

pratīcīṁ prayayur diśam

SYNONYMS



apṛthak-alike in; dharma-śīlāḥ-good character and behavior; te-they; sarve-all; dākṣāyaṇāḥ-the sons of Dakṣa; nṛpa-O King; pitrā-by their father; proktāḥ-ordered; prajā-sarge-to increase the population; pratīcīm-we stern; prayayuḥ-they went to; diśam-the direction.





My dear King, all the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa were alike in being very gentle and obedient to the orders of their father. When their father ordered them to beget children, they all went in the western direction.





TEXT 3



tatra nārāyaṇa-saras

tīrthaṁ sindhu-samudrayoḥ

saṅgamo yatra sumahan

muni-siddha-niṣevitam

SYNONYMS



tatra-in that direction; nārāyaṇa-saraḥ-the lake named Nārāyaṇa-saras; tīrtham-very holy place; sindhu-samudrayoḥ-of the River Sindhu and the sea; saṅgamaḥ-confluence; yatra-where; su-mahat-very great; muni-by sages; siddha-and perfected human beings; niṣevitam-frequented.





In the west, where the River Sindhu meets the sea, there is a great place of pilgrimage known as Nārāyaṇa-saras. Many sages and others advanced in spiritual consciousness live there.





TEXTS 4–5



tad-upasparśanād eva

vinirdhūta-malāśayāḥ

dharme pāramahaṁsye ca

protpanna-matayo 'py uta

tepire tapa evograṁ



pitrādeśena yantritāḥ

prajā-vivṛddhaye yattān

devarṣis tān dadarśa ha

SYNONYMS



tat-of that holy place; upasparśanāt-from bathing in that water or touching it; eva-only; vinirdhūta-completely washed away; mala-āśayāḥ-whose impure desires; dharme-to the practices; pāramahaṁsye-executed by the topmost class of sannyāsīs; ca-also; protpanna-highly inclined; matayaḥ-whose minds; api uta-although; tepire-they executed; tapaḥ-penances; eva-certainly; ugram-severe; pitṛ-ādeśena-by the order of their father; yantritāḥ-engaged; prajā-vivṛddhaye-for the purpose of increasing the population; yattān-ready; devarṣiḥ-the great sage Nārada; tān-them; dadarśa-visited; ha-indeed.





In that holy place, the Haryaśvas began regularly touching the lake's waters and bathing in them. Gradually becoming very much purified, they became inclined toward the activities of paramahaṁsas. Nevertheless, because their father had ordered them to increase the population, they performed severe austerities to fulfill his desires. One day, when the great sage Nārada saw those boys performing such fine austerities to increase the population, Nārada approached them.





TEXTS 6–8



uvāca cātha haryaśvāḥ

kathaṁ srakṣyatha vai prajāḥ

adṛṣṭvāntaṁ bhuvo yūyaṁ

bāliśā bata pālakāḥ

tathaika-puruṣaṁ rāṣṭraṁ



bilaṁ cādṛṣṭa-nirgamam

bahu-rūpāṁ striyaṁ cāpi

pumāṁsaṁ puṁścalī-patim

nadīm ubhayato vāhāṁ



pañca-pañcādbhutaṁ gṛham

kvacid dhaṁsaṁ citra-kathaṁ

kṣaura-pavyaṁ svayaṁ bhrami

SYNONYMS



uvāca-he said; ca-also; atha-thus; haryaśvāḥ-O Haryaśvas, sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa; katham-why; srakṣyatha-you will beget; vai-indeed; prajāḥ-progeny; adṛṣṭvā-having not seen; antam-the end; bhuvaḥ-of this earth; yūyam-all of you; bāliśāḥ-inexperienced; bata-alas; pālakāḥ-although ruling princes; tathā-so also; eka-one; puruṣam-man; rāṣṭram-kingdom; bilam-the hole; ca-also; adṛṣṭa-nirgamam-from which there is no coming out; bahu-rūpām-taking many forms; striyam-the woman; ca-and; api-even; pumāṁsam-the man; puṁścalī-patim-the husband of a prostitute; nadīm-a river; ubhayataḥ-in both ways; vāhām-which flows; pañca-pañca-of five multiplied by five (twenty-five); adbhutam-a wonder; gṛham-the house; kvacit-somewhere; haṁsam-a swan; citra-katham-whose story is wonderful; kṣaura-pavyam-made of sharp razors and thunderbolts; svayam-itself; bhrami-revolving.





The great sage Nārada said: My dear Haryaśvas, you have not seen the extremities of the earth. There is a kingdom where only one man lives and where there is a hole from which, having entered, no one emerges. A woman there who is extremely unchaste adorns herself with various attractive dresses, and the man who lives there is her husband. In that kingdom, there is a river flowing in both directions, a wonderful home made of twenty-five materials, a swan that vibrates various sounds, and an automatically revolving object made of sharp razors and thunderbolts. You have not seen all this, and therefore you are inexperienced boys without advanced knowledge. How, then, will you create progeny?





Nārada Muni saw that the boys known as the Haryaśvas were already purified because of living in that holy place and were practically ready for liberation. Why then should they be encouraged to become entangled in family life, which is so dark that once having entered it one cannot leave it? Through this analogy, Nārada Muni asked them to consider why they should follow their father's order to be entangled in family life. Indirectly, he asked them to find within the cores of their hearts the situation of the Supersoul, Lord Viṣṇu, for then they would truly be experienced. In other words, one who is too involved in his material environment and does not look within the core of his heart is increasingly entangled in the illusory energy. Nārada Muni's purpose was to get the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa to divert their attention toward spiritual realization instead of involving themselves in the ordinary but complicated affairs of propagation. The same advice was given by Prahlāda Mahārāja to his father (Bhāg. 7.5.5):



tat sādhu manye 'sura-varya dehināṁ

sadā samudvigna-dhiyām asad-grahāt

hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta





In the dark well of family life, one is always full of anxiety because of having accepted a temporary body. If one wants to free himself from this anxiety, one should immediately leave family life and take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Vṛndāvana. Nārada Muni advised the Haryaśvas not to enter household life. Since they were already advanced in spiritual knowledge, why should they be entangled in that way?





TEXT 9



kathaṁ sva-pitur ādeśam

avidvāṁso vipaścitaḥ

anurūpam avijñāya

aho sargaṁ kariṣyatha

SYNONYMS



katham-how; sva-pituḥ-of your own father; ādeśam-the order; avidvāṁsaḥ-ignorant; vipaścitaḥ-who knows everything; anurūpam-suitable for you; avijñāya-without knowing; aho-alas; sargam-the creation; kariṣyatha-you will perform.





Alas, your father is omniscient, but you do not know his actual order. Without knowing the actual purpose of your father, how will you create progeny?





TEXT 10



śrī-śuka uvāca

tan niśamyātha haryaśvā

autpattika-manīṣayā

vācaḥ kūṭaṁ tu devarṣeḥ

svayaṁ vimamṛśur dhiyā

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tat-that; niśamya-hearing; atha-thereafter; haryaśvāḥ-all the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa; autpattika-naturally awakened; manīṣayā-by possessing the power to consider; vācaḥ-of the speech; kūṭam-the enigma; tu-but; devarṣeḥ-of Nārada Muni; svayam-themselves; vimamṛśuḥ-reflected upon; dhiyā-with full intelligence.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hearing these enigmatic words of Nārada Muni, the Haryaśvas considered them with their natural intelligence, without help from others.





TEXT 11



bhūḥ kṣetraṁ jīva-saṁjñaṁ yad

anādi nija-bandhanam

adṛṣṭvā tasya nirvāṇaṁ

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



bhūḥ-the earth; kṣetram-the field of activities; jīva-saṁjñam-the designation of the spiritual living being who is bound by different results of activity; yat-which; anādi-existing since time immemorial; nija-bandhanam-causing his own bondage; adṛṣṭvā-without seeing; tasya-of this; nirvāṇam-the cessation; kim-what benefit; asat-karmabhiḥ-with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet-there can be.





[The Haryaśvas understood the meaning of Nārada's words as follows.] The word "bhūḥ" ["the earth"] refers to the field of activities. The material body, which is a result of the living being's actions, is his field of activities, and it gives him false designations. Since time immemorial, he has received various types of material bodies, which are the roots of bondage to the material world. If one foolishly engages in temporary fruitive activities and does not look toward the cessation of this bondage, what will be the benefit of his actions?





Nārada Muni spoke to the Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, about ten allegorical subjects-the king, the kingdom, the river, the house, the physical elements and so forth. After considering these by themselves, the Haryaśvas could understand that the living entity encaged in his body seeks happiness, but takes no interest in how to become free from his encagement. This is a very important verse, since all the living entities in the material world are very active, having obtained their particular types of bodies. A man works all day and night for sense gratification, and animals like hogs and dogs also work for sense gratification all day and night. Birds, beasts and all other conditioned living entities engage in various activities without knowledge of the soul encaged within the body. Especially in the human form of body, one's duty is to act in such a way that he can release himself from his encagement, but without the instructions of Nārada or his representative in the disciplic succession, people blindly engage in bodily activities to enjoy māyā-sukha-flickering, temporary happiness. They do not know how to become free from their material encagement. Ṛṣabhadeva therefore said that such activity is not at all good, since it encages the soul again and again in a body subjected to the threefold miseries of the material condition.



The Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, could immediately understand the purport of Nārada's instructions. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is especially meant for such enlightenment. We are trying to enlighten humanity so that people may come to the understanding that they should work hard in tapasya for self-realization and freedom from the continuous bondage of birth, death, old age and disease in one body after another. Māyā, however, is very strong; she is expert in putting impediments in the way of this understanding. Therefore sometimes one comes to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement but again falls into the clutches of māyā, not understanding the importance of this movement.





TEXT 12



eka eveśvaras turyo

bhagavān svāśrayaḥ paraḥ

tam adṛṣṭvābhavaṁ puṁsaḥ

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



ekaḥ-one; eva-indeed; īśvaraḥ-supreme controller; turyaḥ-the fourth transcendental category; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sva-āśrayaḥ-independent, being His own shelter; paraḥ-beyond this material creation; tam-Him; adṛṣṭvā-not seeing; abhavam-who is not born or created; puṁsaḥ-of a man; kim-what benefit; asat-karmabhiḥ-with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet-there can be.





[Nārada Muni had said that there is a kingdom where there is only one male. The Haryaśvas realized the purport of this statement.] The only enjoyer is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who observes everything, everywhere. He is full of six opulences and fully independent of everyone else. He is never subject to the three modes of material nature, for He is always transcendental to this material creation. If the members of human society do not understand Him, the Supreme, through their advancement in knowledge and activities, but simply work very hard like cats and dogs all day and night for temporary happiness, what will be the benefit of their activities?





Nārada Muni had mentioned a kingdom where there is only one king with no competitor. The complete spiritual world, and specifically the cosmic manifestation, has only one proprietor or enjoyer-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond this material manifestation. The Lord has therefore been described as turya, existing on the fourth platform. He has also been described as abhava. The word bhava, which means "takes birth," comes from the word bhū, "to be." As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (8.19), bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate: the living entities in the material world must be repeatedly born and destroyed. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, is neither bhūtvā nor pralīyate; He is eternal. In other words, He is not obliged to take birth like human beings or animals, which repeatedly take birth and die because of ignorance of the soul. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is not subjected to such changes of body, and one who thinks otherwise is considered a fool (avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]). Nārada Muni advises that human beings not waste their time simply jumping like cats and monkeys, without real benefit. The duty of the human being is to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 13



pumān naivaiti yad gatvā

bila-svargaṁ gato yathā

pratyag-dhāmāvida iha

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



pumān-a human being; na-not; eva-indeed; eti-comes back; yat-to which; gatvā-having gone; bila-svargam-to the region of the lower planetary system known as Pātāla; gataḥ-gone; yathā-like; pratyak-dhāma-the effulgent spiritual world; avidaḥ-of the unintelligent man; iha-in this material world; kim-what benefit; asat-karmabhiḥ-with temporary fruitive activities; bhavet-there can be.





[Nārada Muni had described that there is a bila, or hole, from which, having entered, one does not return. The Haryaśvas understood the meaning of this allegory.] Hardly once has a person who has entered the lower planetary system called Pātāla been seen to return. Similarly, if one enters the Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma [pratyag-dhāma], he does not return to this material world. If there is such a place, from which, having gone, one does not return to the miserable material condition of life, what is the use of jumping like monkeys in the temporary material world and not seeing or understanding that place? What will be the profit?





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (15.6), yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama: there is a region from which, having gone, one does not return to the material world. This region has been repeatedly described. Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9), Kṛṣṇa says:



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."



If one can properly understand Kṛṣṇa, who has already been described as the Supreme King, he does not return here after giving up his material body. This fact has been described in this verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Pumān naivaiti yad gatvā: he does not return to this material world, but returns home, back to Godhead, to live an eternally blissful life of knowledge. Why do people not care about this? What will be the benefit of taking birth again in this material world, sometimes as a human being, sometimes a demigod and sometimes a cat or dog? What is the benefit of wasting time in this way? Kṛṣṇa has very definitely asserted in Bhagavad-gītā (8.15):



mām upetya punar janma

duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam

nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ

saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ





"After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection." One's real concern should be to free himself from the repetition of birth and death and attain the topmost perfection of life by living with the Supreme King in the spiritual world. In these verses the sons of Dakṣa repeatedly say, kim asat-karmabhir bhavet: "What is the use of impermanent fruitive activities?"





TEXT 14



nānā-rūpātmano buddhiḥ

svairiṇīva guṇānvitā

tan-niṣṭhām agatasyeha

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



nānā-various; rūpā-who has forms or dresses; ātmanaḥ-of the living entity; buddhiḥ-the intelligence; svairiṇī-a prostitute who freely decorates herself with different types of cloths and ornaments; iva-like; guṇa-anvitā-endowed with the mode of passion, and so on; tat-niṣṭhām-the cessation of that; agatasya-of one who has not obtained; iha-in this material world; kim asat-karmabhiḥ bhavet-what is the use of performing temporary fruitive activities.





[Nārada Muni had described a woman who is a professional prostitute. The Haryaśvas understood the identity of this woman.] Mixed with the mode of passion, the unsteady intelligence of every living entity is like a prostitute who changes dresses just to attract one's attention. If one fully engages in temporary fruitive activities, not understanding how this is taking place, what does he actually gain?





A woman who has no husband declares herself independent, which means that she becomes a prostitute. A prostitute generally dresses herself in various fashions intended to attract a man's attention to the lower part of her body. Today it has become a much advertised fashion for a woman to go almost naked, covering the lower part of her body only slightly, in order to draw the attention of a man to her private parts for sexual enjoyment. The intelligence engaged to attract a man to the lower part of the body is the intelligence of a professional prostitute. Similarly, the intelligence of a living entity who does not turn his attention toward Kṛṣṇa or the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement simply changes dresses like a prostitute. What is the benefit of such foolish intelligence? One should be intelligently conscious in such a way that he need no longer change from one body to another.



Karmīs change their professions at any moment, but a Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not change his profession, for his only profession is to attract the attention of Kṛṣṇa by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and living a very simple life, without following daily changes of fashion. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, fashionable persons are taught to adopt one fashion-the dress of a Vaiṣṇava with a shaved head and tilaka. They are taught to be always clean in mind, dress and eating in order to be fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. What is the use of changing one's dress, sometimes wearing long hair and a long beard and sometimes dressing otherwise? This is not good. One should not waste his time in such frivolous activities. One should always be fixed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and take the cure of devotional service with firm determination.





TEXT 15



tat-saṅga-bhraṁśitaiśvaryaṁ

saṁsarantaṁ kubhāryavat

tad-gatīr abudhasyeha

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



tat-saṅga-by association with the prostitute of intelligence; bhraṁśita-taken away; aiśvaryam-the opulence of independence; saṁsarantam-undergoing the material way of life; ku-bhārya-vat-exactly like a person who has a polluted wife; tat-gatīḥ-the movements of the polluted intelligence; abudhasya-of one who does not know; iha-in this world; kim asat-karmabhiḥ bhavet-what can be the benefit of performing temporary fruitive activities.





[Nārada Muni had also spoken of a man who is the husband of the prostitute. The Haryaśvas understood this as follows.] If one becomes the husband of a prostitute, he loses all independence. Similarly, if a living entity has polluted intelligence, he prolongs his materialistic life. Frustrated by material nature, he must follow the movements of the intelligence, which brings various conditions of happiness and distress. If one performs fruitive activities under such conditions, what will be the benefit?





Polluted intelligence has been compared to a prostitute. One who has not purified his intelligence is said to be controlled by that prostitute. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (2.41), vyavasāyātmikā buddhir ekeha kuru-nandana: those who are actually serious are conducted by one kind of intelligence, namely, intelligence in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Bahu-śākhā hy anantāś ca buddhayo 'vyavasāyinām: one who is not fixed in proper intelligence discovers many modes of life. Thus involved in material activities, he is exposed to the different modes of material nature and subjected to varieties of so-called happiness and distress. If a man becomes the husband of a prostitute, he cannot be happy, and similarly one who follows the dictations of material intelligence and material consciousness will never be happy.



One must judiciously understand the activities of material nature. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.27):



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are in actuality carried out by nature." Although one follows the dictations of material nature, he happily thinks himself the master or husband of material nature. Scientists, for example, try to be the masters of material nature, life after life, not caring to understand the Supreme Person, under whose direction everything within this material world is moving. Trying to be the masters of material nature, they are imitation gods who declare to the public that scientific advancement will one day be able to avoid the so-called control of God. In fact, however, the living being, unable to control the rulings of God, is forced to associate with the prostitute of polluted intelligence and accept various material bodies. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (13.22):



puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi

bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān

kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya

sad-asad-yoni-janmasu





"The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various species." If one fully engages in temporary fruitive activities and does not solve this real problem, what profit will he gain?





TEXT 16



sṛṣṭy-apyaya-karīṁ māyāṁ

velā-kūlānta-vegitām

mattasya tām avijñasya

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



sṛṣṭi-creation; apyaya-dissolution; karīm-one who causes; māyām-the illusory energy; velā-kūla-anta-near the banks; vegitām-being very rapid; mattasya-of one who is mad; tām-that material nature; avijñasya-who does not know; kim asat-karmabhiḥ bhavet-what benefit can there be by performing temporary fruitive activities.





[Nārada Muni had said that there is a river flowing in both directions. The Haryaśvas understood the purport of this statement.] Material nature functions in two ways-by creation and dissolution. Thus the river of material nature flows both ways. A living entity who unknowingly falls in this river is submerged in its waves, and since the current is swifter near the banks of the river, he is unable to get out. What will be the benefit of performing fruitive activities in that river of māyā?





One may be submerged in the waves of the river of māyā, but one may also get free from the waves by coming to the banks of knowledge and austerity. Near these banks, however, the waves are very strong. If one does not understand how he is being tossed by the waves, but simply engages in temporary fruitive activities, what benefit will he derive?



In the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.44) there is this statement:



sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā





The māyā-śakti, Durgā, is in charge of sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya, creation and dissolution, and she acts under the direction of the Supreme Lord (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]). When one falls in the river of nescience, he is always tossed here and there by the waves, but the same māyā can also save him when be surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, or becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is knowledge and austerity. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person takes knowledge from the Vedic literature, and at the same time he must practice austerities.



To attain freedom from material life, one must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Otherwise, if one very busily engages in the so-called advancement of science, what benefit will he derive? If one is carried away by the waves of nature, what is the meaning of being a great scientist or philosopher? Mundane science and philosophy are also material creations. One must understand how māyā works and how one can be released from the tossing waves of the river of nescience. That is one's first duty.





TEXT 17



pañca-viṁśati-tattvānāṁ

puruṣo 'dbhuta-darpaṇaḥ

adhyātmam abudhasyeha

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



pañca-viṁśati-twenty-five; tattvānām-of the elements; puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adbhuta-darpaṇaḥ-the wonderful manifester; adhyātmam-the overseer of all causes and effects; abudhasya-of one who does not know; iha-in this world; kim asat-karmabhiḥ bhavet-what can be the benefit of engaging in temporary fruitive activities.





[Nārada Muni had said that there is a house made of twenty-five elements. The Haryaśvas understood this analogy.] The Supreme Lord is the reservoir of the twenty-five elements, and as the Supreme Being, the conductor of cause and effect, He causes their manifestation. If one engages in temporary fruitive activities, not knowing that Supreme Person, what benefit will he derive?





Philosophers and scientists conduct scholarly research to find the original cause, but they should do so scientifically, not whimsically or through fantastic theories. The science of the original cause is explained in various Vedic literatures. Athāto brahma jijñāsā/janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. The Vedānta-sūtra explains that one should inquire about the Supreme Soul. Such inquiry about the Supreme is called brahma jijñāsā. The Absolute Truth, tattva, is explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11):



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate





"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān." The Absolute Truth appears to neophytes as impersonal Brahman and to advanced mystic yogīs as Paramātmā, the Supersoul, but devotees, who are further advanced, understand the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu.



This material cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the energy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, or Lord Viṣṇu.



eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner

jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis

tathedam akhilaṁ jagat





"Whatever we see in this world is but an expansion of various energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is like a fire that spreads illumination for a long distance although it is situated in one place." (Viṣṇu Purāṇa) The entire cosmic manifestation is an expansion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if one does not conduct research to find the supreme cause, but instead falsely engages in frivolous, temporary activities, what is the use of demanding recognition as an important scientist or philosopher? If one does not know the ultimate cause, what is the use of his scientific and philosophical research?



The puruṣa, the original person-Bhagavān, Viṣṇu-can be understood only by devotional service. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ: [Bg. 18.55] only by devotional service can one understand the Supreme Person, who is behind everything. One must try to understand that the material elements are the separated, inferior energy of the Lord and that the living entity is the Lord's spiritual energy. Whatever we experience, including matter and the spirit soul, the living force, is but a combination of two energies of Lord Viṣṇu-the inferior energy and the superior energy. One should seriously study the facts concerning creation, maintenance and devastation, as well as the permanent place from which one never need return (yad gatvā na nivartante [Bg. 15.6]). Human society should study this, but instead of culturing such knowledge, people are attracted to temporary happiness and sense gratification, culminating in bottomless, topless passion. There is no profit in such activities; one must engage himself in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.





TEXT 18



aiśvaraṁ śāstram utsṛjya

bandha-mokṣānudarśanam

vivikta-padam ajñāya

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



aiśvaram-bringing understanding of God, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness; śāstram-the Vedic literature; utsṛjya-giving up; bandha-of bondage; mokṣa-and of liberation; anudarśanam-informing about the ways; vivikta-padam-distinguishing spirit from matter; ajñāya-not knowing; kim asat-karmabhiḥ bhavet-what can be the use of temporary fruitive activities.





[Nārada Muni had spoken of a swan. That swan is explained in this verse.] The Vedic literatures [śāstras] vividly describe how to understand the Supreme Lord, the source of all material and spiritual energy. Indeed, they elaborately explain these two energies. The swan [haṁsa] is one who discriminates between matter and spirit, who accepts the essence of everything, and who explains the means of bondage and the means of liberation. The words of scriptures consist of variegated vibrations. If a foolish rascal leaves aside the study of these śāstras to engage in temporary activities, what will be the result?





The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very eager to present Vedic literature in modern languages, especially Western languages such as English, French and German. The leaders of the Western world, the Americans and Europeans, have become the idols of modern civilization because the Western people are very sophisticated in temporary activities for the advancement of material civilization. A sane man, however, can see that all such grand activities, although perhaps very important for temporary life, have nothing to do with eternal life. The entire world is imitating the materialistic civilization of the West, and therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very much interested in giving the Western people knowledge by translating the original Sanskrit Vedic literatures into Western languages.



The word vivikta-padam refers to the path of logical discourses concerning the aim of life. If one does not discuss that which is important in life, one is put into darkness and must struggle for existence. What, then, is the benefit of his advancement in knowledge? The people of the West are seeing their students becoming hippies, despite gorgeous arrangements for university education. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, however, is trying to convert misguided, drug-addicted students to the service of Kṛṣṇa and engage them in the best welfare activities for human society.





TEXT 19



kāla-cakraṁ bhrami tīkṣṇaṁ

sarvaṁ niṣkarṣayaj jagat

svatantram abudhasyeha

kim asat-karmabhir bhavet

SYNONYMS



kāla-cakram-the wheel of eternal time; bhrami-revolving automatically; tīkṣṇam-very sharp; sarvam-all; niṣkarṣayat-driving; jagat-the world; sva-tantram-independent, not caring for the so-called scientists and philosophers; abudhasya-of one who does not know (this principle of time); iha-in this material world; kim asat-karmabhiḥ bhavet-what is the use of engaging in temporary fruitive activities.





[Nārada Muni had spoken of a physical object made of sharp blades and thunderbolts. The Haryaśvas understood this allegory as follows.] Eternal time moves very sharply, as if made of razors and thunderbolts. Uninterrupted and fully independent, it drives the activities of the entire world. If one does not try to study the eternal element of time, what benefit can he derive from performing temporary material activities?





This verse explains the words kṣaura-pavyaṁ svayaṁ bhrami, which especially refer to the orbit of eternal time. It is said that time and tide wait for no man. According to the moral instructions of the great politician Cāṇakya Paṇḍita:



āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi

na labhyaḥ svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ

na cen nirarthakaṁ nītiḥ

kā ca hānis tato 'dhikā





Even a moment of one's lifetime could not be returned in exchange for millions of dollars. Therefore one should consider how much loss one suffers if he wastes even a moment of his life for nothing. Living like an animal, not understanding the goal of life, one foolishly thinks that there is no eternity and that his life span of fifty, sixty, or, at the most, one hundred years, is everything. This is the greatest foolishness. Time is eternal, and in the material world one passes through different phases of his eternal life. Time is compared herein to a sharp razor. A razor is meant to shave the hair from one's face, but if not carefully handled, the razor will cause disaster. One is advised not to create a disaster by misusing his lifetime. One should be extremely careful to utilize the span of his life for spiritual realization, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 20



śāstrasya pitur ādeśaṁ

yo na veda nivartakam

kathaṁ tad-anurūpāya

guṇa-visrambhy upakramet

SYNONYMS



śāstrasya-of the scriptures; pituḥ-of the father; ādeśam-the instruction; yaḥ-one who; na-not; veda-understands; nivartakam-which brings about the cessation of the material way of life; katham-how; tat-anurūpāya-to follow the instruction of the śāstras; guṇa-visrambhī-a person entangled in the three modes of material nature; upakramet-can engage in the creation of progeny.





[Nārada Muni had asked how one could ignorantly defy one's own father. The Haryaśvas understood the meaning of this question.] One must accept the original instructions of the śāstra. According to Vedic civilization, one is offered a sacred thread as a sign of second birth. One takes his second birth by dint of having received instructions in the śāstra from a bona fide spiritual master. Therefore, śāstra, scripture, is the real father. All the śāstras instruct that one should end his material way of life. If one does not know the purpose of the father's orders, the śāstras, he is ignorant. The words of a material father who endeavors to engage his son in material activities are not the real instructions of the father.





Bhagavad-gītā (16.7) says, pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca janā na vidur āsurāḥ: demons, who are less than human beings but are not called animals, do not know the meaning of pravṛtti and nivṛtti, work to be done and work not to be done. In the material world, every living entity has a desire to lord it over the material world as much as possible. This is called pravṛtti-mārga. All the śāstras, however, advise nivṛtti-mārga, or release from the materialistic way of life. Apart from the śāstras of the Vedic civilization, which is the oldest of the world, other śāstras agree on this point. For example, in the Buddhist śāstras Lord Buddha advises that one achieve nirvāṇa by giving up the materialistic way of life. In the Bible, which is also śāstra, one will find the same advice: one should cease materialistic life and return to the kingdom of God. In any śāstra one may examine, especially the Vedic śāstra, the same advice is given: one should give up his materialistic life and return to his original, spiritual life. Śaṅkarācārya also propounds the same conclusion. Brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: this material world or materialistic life is simply illusion, and therefore one should stop his illusory activities and come to the platform of Brahman.



The word śāstra refers to the scriptures, particularly the Vedic books of knowledge. The Vedas-Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva-and any other books deriving knowledge from these Vedas are considered Vedic literatures. Bhagavad-gītā is the essence of all Vedic knowledge, and therefore it is the scripture whose instructions should be especially accepted. In this essence of all śāstras, Kṛṣṇa personally advises that one give up all other duties and surrender unto Him (sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]).



One should be initiated into following the principles of śāstra. In offering initiation, our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement asks one to come to the conclusion of śāstra by taking the advice of the supreme speaker of the śāstra, Kṛṣṇa, forgetting the principles of the materialistic way of life. Therefore the principles we advise are no illicit sex, no intoxication, no gambling and no meat-eating. These four types of engagement will enable an intelligent person to get free from the materialistic life and return home, back to Godhead.



In regard to the instructions of the father and mother, it may be said that every living entity, including even the insignificant cats, dogs and serpents, takes birth of a father and mother. Therefore, getting a material father and mother is not a problem. In every form of life, birth after birth, the living entity gets a father and mother. In human society, however, if one is satisfied with his material father and mother and their instructions and does not make further progress by accepting a spiritual master and being educated in the śāstras, he certainly remains in darkness. The material father and mother are important only if they are interested in educating their son to become free from the clutches of death. As instructed by Ṛṣabhadeva (Bhāg. 5.5.18): pitā na sa syāj jananī na sā syāt/ na mocayed yaḥ samupeta-mṛtyum. One should not strive to become a mother or father if one cannot save one's dependent son from the impending danger of death. A parent who does not know how to save his son has no value because such fathers and mothers may be had in any form of life, even among the cats, dogs and so on. Only a father and mother who can elevate their son to the spiritual platform are bona fide parents. Therefore according to the Vedic system it is said, janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ: one is born of a material father and mother as a śūdra. The purpose of life, however, is to become a brāhmaṇa, a first-class man.



A first-class intelligent man is called a brāhmaṇa because he knows the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth. According to the Vedic instructions, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet: [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12] to know this science, one must approach a bona fide guru, a spiritual master who will initiate the disciple with the sacred thread so that he may understand the Vedic knowledge. Janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ saṁskārād dhi bhaved dvijaḥ. Becoming a brāhmaṇa through the endeavor of a bona fide spiritual master is called saṁskāra. After initiation, one is engaged in study of the śāstra, which teaches the student how to gain release from materialistic life and return home, back to Godhead.



The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching this higher knowledge of retiring from materialistic life to return to Godhead, but unfortunately many parents are not very satisfied with this movement. Aside from the parents of our students, many businessmen are also dissatisfied because we teach our students to abandon intoxication, meat-eating, illicit sex and gambling. If the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement spreads, the so-called businessmen will have to close their slaughterhouses, breweries and cigarette factories. Therefore they are also very much afraid. However, we have no alternative than to teach our disciples to free themselves from materialistic life. We must instruct them in the opposite of material life to save them from the repetition of birth and death.



Nārada Muni, therefore, advised the Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, that instead of begetting progeny, it would be better to leave and achieve the perfection of spiritual understanding according to the instructions of the śāstras. The importance of the śāstras is mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā (16.23):



yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya

vartate kāma-kārataḥ

na sa siddhim avāpnoti

na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim





"One who disregards the injunctions of the śāstras and acts whimsically, as he likes, never achieves the perfection of life, not to speak of happiness. Nor does he return home to the spiritual world."





TEXT 21



iti vyavasitā rājan

haryaśvā eka-cetasaḥ

prayayus taṁ parikramya

panthānam anivartanam

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; vyavasitāḥ-being fully convinced by the instructions of Nārada Muni; rājan-O King; haryaśvāḥ-the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa; eka-cetasaḥ-all being of the same opinion; prayayuḥ-left; tam-Nārada Muni; parikramya-circumambulating; panthānam-on the path; anivartanam-which does not bring one back again to this material world.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, after hearing the instructions of Nārada, the Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, were firmly convinced. They all believed in his instructions and reached the same conclusion. Having accepted him as their spiritual master, they circumambulated that great sage and followed the path by which one never returns to this world.





From this verse we can understand the meaning of initiation and the duties of a disciple and spiritual master. The spiritual master never instructs his disciple, "Take a mantra from me, pay me some money, and by practicing this yoga system you will become very expert in materialistic life." This is not the duty of a spiritual master. Rather, the spiritual master teaches the disciple how to give up materialistic life, and the disciple's duty is to assimilate his instructions and ultimately follow the path back home, back to Godhead, from whence no one returns to this material world.



After hearing the instructions of Nārada Muni, the Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, decided not to be entangled in materialistic life by begetting hundreds of children and having to take care of them. This would have been unnecessarily entangling. The Haryaśvas did not consider pious and impious activities. Their materialistic father had instructed them to increase the population, but because of the words of Nārada Muni, they could not heed that instruction. Nārada Muni, as their spiritual master, gave them the śāstric instructions that they should give up this material world, and as bona fide disciples they followed his instructions. One should not endeavor to wander to different planetary systems within this universe, for even if one goes to the topmost planetary system, Brahmaloka, one must return again (kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti [Bg. 9.21]). The endeavors of karmīs are a useless waste of time. One should endeavor to return home, back to Godhead. This is the perfection of life. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (8.16):



ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ

punar āvartino 'rjuna

mām upetya tu kaunteya

punar janma na vidyate





"From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kuntī, never takes birth again."





TEXT 22



svara-brahmaṇi nirbhāta-

hṛṣīkeśa-padāmbuje

akhaṇḍaṁ cittam āveśya

lokān anucaran muniḥ

SYNONYMS



svara-brahmaṇi-in spiritual sound; nirbhāta-placing clearly before the mind; hṛṣīkeśa-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the master of the senses; padāmbuje-the lotus feet; akhaṇḍam-unbroken; cittam-consciousness; āveśya-engaging; lokān-all the planetary systems; anucarat-traveled around; muniḥ-the great sage Nārada Muni.





The seven musical notes-ṣa, ṛ, gā, ma, pa, dha and ni-are used in musical instruments, but originally they come from the Sāma Veda. The great sage Nārada vibrates sounds describing the pastimes of the Supreme Lord. By such transcendental vibrations, such as Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, he fixes his mind at the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus he directly perceives Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses. After delivering the Haryaśvas, Nārada Muni continued traveling throughout the planetary systems, his mind always fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord.





The goodness of the great sage Nārada Muni is described herewith. He always chants about the pastimes of the Lord and delivers the fallen souls back to Godhead. In this regard, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has sung:



nārada-muni, bājāya vīṇā,

'rādhikā-ramaṇa'-nāme

nāma amani, udita haya,

bhakata-gīta-sāme

amiya-dhārā, variṣe ghana,

śravaṇa-yugale giyā

bhakata-jana, saghane nāce,

bhariyā āpana hiyā

mādhurī-pūra, āsaba paśi',

mātāya jagata-jane

keha vā kāṅde, keha vā nāce,

keha māte mane mane

pañca-vadana, nārade dhari',

premera saghana rola

kamalāsana, nāciyā bale,

'bola bola hari bola'

sahasrānana, parama-sukhe,

'hari hari' bali' gāya

nāma-prabhāve, mātila viśva,

nāma-rasa sabe pāya

śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, rasane sphuri',

purā'la āmāra āśa

śrī-rūpa-pade, yācaye ihā,

bhakativinoda dāsa

The purport of this song is that Nārada Muni, the great soul, plays a stringed instrument called a vīṇā, vibrating the sound rādhikā-ramaṇa, which is another name for Kṛṣṇa. As soon as he strokes the strings, all the devotees begin responding, making a very beautiful vibration. Accompanied by the stringed instrument, the singing seems like a shower of nectar, and all the devotees dance in ecstasy to the fullest extent of their satisfaction. While dancing, they appear madly intoxicated with ecstasy, as if drinking the beverage called mādhurī-pūra. Some of them cry, some of them dance, and some of them, although unable to dance publicly, dance within their hearts. Lord Śiva embraces Nārada Muni and begins talking in an ecstatic voice, and seeing Lord Śiva dancing with Nārada, Lord Brahmā also joins, saying, "All of you kindly chant 'Hari bol! Hari bol!' " The King of heaven, Indra, also gradually joins with great satisfaction and begins dancing and chanting "Hari bol! Hari bol!" In this way, by the influence of the transcendental vibration of the holy name of God, the whole universe becomes ecstatic. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, "When the universe becomes ecstatic, my desire is satisfied. I therefore pray unto the lotus feet of Rūpa Gosvāmī that this chanting of harer nāma [Adi 17.21] may go on nicely like this."



Lord Brahmā is the guru of Nārada Muni, who is the guru of Vyāsadeva, and Vyāsadeva is the guru of Madhvācārya. Thus the Gauḍīya-Mādhva-sampradāya is in the disciplic succession from Nārada Muni. The members of this disciplic succession-in other words, the members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement-should follow in the footsteps of Nārada Muni by chanting the transcendental vibration Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. They should go everywhere to deliver the fallen souls by vibrating the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and the instructions of Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Caitanya-caritāmṛta. That will please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can spiritually advance if one actually follows the instructions of Nārada Muni. If one pleases Nārada Muni, then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hṛṣīkeśa, is also pleased (yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ ). The immediate spiritual master is the representative of Nārada Muni; there is no difference between the instructions of Nārada Muni and those of the present spiritual master. Both Nārada Muni and the present spiritual master speak the same teachings of Kṛṣṇa, who says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.65–66):

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo 'si me





sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ





"Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend. Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear."





TEXT 23



nāśaṁ niśamya putrāṇāṁ

nāradāc chīla-śālinām

anvatapyata kaḥ śocan

suprajastvaṁ śucāṁ padam

SYNONYMS



nāśam-the loss; niśamya-hearing of; putrāṇām-of his sons; nāradāt-from Nārada; śīla-śālinām-who were the best of well-behaved persons; anvatapyata-suffered; kaḥ-Prajāpati Dakṣa; śocan-lamenting; su-prajastvam-having ten thousand well-behaved sons; śucām-of lamentation; padam-position.





The Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, were very well behaved, cultured sons, but unfortunately, because of the instructions of Nārada Muni, they deviated from the order of their father. When Dakṣa heard this news, which was brought to him by Nārada Muni, he began to lament. Although he was the father of such good sons, he had lost them all. Certainly this was lamentable.





The Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, were certainly well behaved, learned and advanced, and in accordance with the order of their father they went to perform austerities to beget good sons for their family. But Nārada Muni took advantage of their good behavior and culture to properly direct them not to be involved with this material world, but to use their culture and knowledge to end their material affairs. The Haryaśvas abided by the order of Nārada Muni, but when news of this was brought to Prajāpati Dakṣa, the prajāpati, instead of being happy with the actions of Nārada Muni, was extremely sorrowful. Similarly, we are trying to bring as many young men as possible to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement for their ultimate benefit, but the parents of the young men joining this movement, being very sorry, are lamenting and making counterpropaganda. Of course, Prajāpati Dakṣa did not make propaganda against Nārada Muni, but later, as we shall see, Dakṣa cursed Nārada Muni for his benevolent activities. This is the way of materialistic life. A materialistic father and mother want to engage their sons in begetting children, striving for improved economic conditions and rotting in materialistic life. They are not unhappy when their children become spoiled, useless citizens, but they lament when they join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to achieve the ultimate goal of life. This animosity between parents and the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has existed since time immemorial. Even Nārada Muni was condemned, not to speak of others. Nevertheless, Nārada Muni never gives up his mission. To deliver as many fallen souls as possible, he continues playing his musical instrument and vibrating the transcendental sound Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.





TEXT 24



sa bhūyaḥ pāñcajanyāyām

ajena parisāntvitaḥ

putrān ajanayad dakṣaḥ

savalāśvān sahasriṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Prajāpati Dakṣa; bhūyaḥ-again; pāñcajanyāyām-in the womb of his wife Asiknī, or Pāñcajanī; ajena-by Lord Brahmā; parisāntvitaḥ-being pacified; putrān-sons; ajanayat-begot; dakṣaḥ-Prajāpati Dakṣa; savalāśvān-named the Savalāśvas; sahasriṇaḥ-numbering one thousand.





When Prajāpati Dakṣa was lamenting for his lost children, Lord Brahmā pacified him with instructions, and thereafter Dakṣa begot one thousand more children in the womb of his wife, Pāñcajanī. This time his sons were known as the Savalāśvas.





Prajāpati Dakṣa was so named because he was very expert in begetting children. (The word dakṣa means "expert.") First he begot ten thousand children in the womb of his wife, and when the children were lost-when they returned home, back to Godhead-he begot another set of children, known as the Savalāśvas. Prajāpati Dakṣa is very expert in begetting children, and Nārada Muni is very expert in delivering all the conditioned souls back home, back to Godhead. Therefore the materialistic experts do not agree with the spiritual expert Nārada Muni. but this does not mean that Nārada Muni will give up his engagement of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.





TEXT 25



te ca pitrā samādiṣṭāḥ

prajā-sarge dhṛta-vratāḥ

nārāyaṇa-saro jagmur

yatra siddhāḥ sva-pūrvajāḥ

SYNONYMS



te-these sons (the Savalāśvas); ca-and; pitrā-by their father; samādiṣṭāḥ-being ordered; prajā-sarge-in increasing progeny or population; dhṛta-vratāḥ-accepted vows; nārāyaṇa-saraḥ-the holy lake named Nārāyaṇa-saras; jagmuḥ-went to; yatra-where; siddhāḥ-perfected; sva-pūrva-jāḥ-their older brothers, who had previously gone there.





In accordance with their father's order to beget children, the second group of sons also went to Nārāyaṇa-saras, the same place where their brothers had previously attained perfection by following the instructions of Nārada. Undertaking great vows of austerity, the Savalāśvas remained at that holy place.





Prajāpati Dakṣa sent his second group of sons to the same place where his previous sons had attained perfection. He did not hesitate to send his second group of sons to the same place, although they too might become victims of Nārada's instructions. According to the Vedic culture, one should be trained in spiritual understanding as a brahmacārī before entering household life to beget children. This is the Vedic system. Thus Prajāpati Dakṣa sent his second group of sons for cultural improvement, despite the risk that because of the instructions of Nārada they might become as intelligent as their older brothers. As a dutiful father, he did not hesitate to allow his sons to receive cultural instructions concerning the perfection of life; he depended upon them to choose whether to return home, back to Godhead, or to rot in this material world in various species of life. In all circumstances, the duty of the father is to give cultural education to his sons, who must later decide which way to go. Responsible fathers should not hinder their sons who are making cultural advancement in association with the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. This is not a father's duty. The duty of a father is to give his son complete freedom to make his choice after becoming spiritually advanced by following the instructions of the spiritual master.





TEXT 26



tad-upasparśanād eva

vinirdhūta-malāśayāḥ

japanto brahma paramaṁ

tepus tatra mahat tapaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-of that holy place; upasparśanāt-by bathing regularly in the water; eva-indeed; vinirdhūta-completely purified; mala-āśayāḥ-of all the dirt within the heart; japantaḥ-chanting or murmuring; brahma-mantras beginning with oṁ (such as oṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ); paramam-the ultimate goal; tepuḥ-performed; tatra-there; mahat-great; tapaḥ-penances.





At Nārāyaṇa-saras, the second group of sons performed penances in the same way as the first. They bathed in the holy water, and by its touch all the dirty material desires in their hearts were cleansed away. They murmured mantras beginning with oṁkāra and underwent a severe course of austerities.





Every Vedic mantra is called brahma because each mantra is preceded by the brahmākṣara (aum or oṁkāra). For example, oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.8), praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣu: "In all the Vedic mantras, I am represented by praṇava, or oṁkāra." Thus chanting of the Vedic mantras beginning with oṁkāra is directly chanting of Kṛṣṇa's name. There is no difference. Whether one chants oṁkāra or addresses the Lord as "Kṛṣṇa," the meaning is the same, but Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has recommended that in this age one chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra (harer nāma eva kevalam [Adi 17.21]). Although there is no difference between Hare Kṛṣṇa and the Vedic mantras beginning with oṁkāra, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the leader of the spiritual movement for this age, has recommended that one chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.





TEXTS 27–28



ab-bhakṣāḥ katicin māsān

katicid vāyu-bhojanāḥ

ārādhayan mantram imam

abhyasyanta iḍaspatim

oṁ namo nārāyaṇāya



puruṣāya mahātmane

viśuddha-sattva-dhiṣṇyāya

mahā-haṁsāya dhīmahi

SYNONYMS



ap-bhakṣāḥ-drinking only water; katicit māsān-for some months; katicit-for some; vāyu-bhojanāḥ-merely breathing, or eating air; ārādhayan-worshiped; mantram imam-this mantra, which is nondifferent from Nārāyaṇa; abhyasyantaḥ-practicing; iḍaḥ-patim-the master of all mantras, Lord Viṣṇu; oṁ-O Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; nārāyaṇāya-unto Lord Nārāyaṇa; puruṣāya-the Supreme Person; mahā-ātmane-the exalted Supersoul; viśuddha-sattva-dhiṣṇyāya-who is always situated in the transcendental abode; mahā-haṁsāya-the great swanlike Personality of Godhead; dhīmahi-we always offer.





For a few months the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa drank only water and ate only air. Thus undergoing great austerities, they recited this mantra: "Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always situated in His transcendental abode. Since He is the Supreme Person [paramahaṁsa], let us offer our respectful obeisances unto Him."





From these verses it is apparent that the chanting of the mahā-mantra or the Vedic mantras must be accompanied by severe austerities. In Kali-yuga, people cannot undergo severe austerities like those mentioned herein-drinking only water and eating only air for many months. One cannot imitate such a process. But at least one must undergo some austerity by giving up four unwanted principles, namely illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. Anyone can easily practice this tapasya, and then the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra will be effective without delay. One should not give up the process of austerity. If possible, one should bathe in the waters of the Ganges or Yamunā, or in the absence of the Ganges and Yamunā one may bathe in the water of the sea. This is an item of austerity. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has therefore established two very large centers, one in Vṛndāvana and another in Māyāpur, Navadvīpa. There one may bathe in the Ganges or Yamunā, chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and thus become perfect and return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 29



iti tān api rājendra

prajā-sarga-dhiyo muniḥ

upetya nāradaḥ prāha

vācaḥ kūṭāni pūrvavat

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; tān-them (the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa known as the Savalāśvas); api-also; rājendra-O King Parīkṣit; prajā-sarga-dhiyaḥ-who were under the impression that begetting children was the most important duty; muniḥ-the great sage; upetya-approaching; nāradaḥ-Nārada; prāha-said; vācaḥ-words; kūṭāni-enigmatic; pūrva-vat-as he had done previously.





O King Parīkṣit, Nārada Muni approached these sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, who were engaged in tapasya to beget children, and spoke enigmatic words to them just as he had spoken to their elder brothers.





TEXT 30



dākṣāyaṇāḥ saṁśṛṇuta

gadato nigamaṁ mama

anvicchatānupadavīṁ

bhrātṝṇāṁ bhrātṛ-vatsalāḥ

SYNONYMS



dākṣāyaṇāḥ-O sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa; saṁśṛṇuta-please hear with attention; gadataḥ-who am speaking; nigamam-instruction; mama-my; anvicchata-follow; anupadavīm-the path; bhrātṝṇām-of your brothers; bhrātṛ-vatsalāḥ-O you who are very much affectionate to your brothers.





O sons of Dakṣa, please hear my words of instruction attentively. You are all very affectionate to your elder brothers, the Haryaśvas. Therefore you should follow their path.





Nārada Muni encouraged Prajāpati Dakṣa's second group of sons by awakening their natural affinity for their brothers. He urged them to follow their older brothers if they were at all affectionate toward them. Family affection is very strong, and therefore Nārada Muni followed this tactic of reminding them of their family relationship with the Haryaśvas. Generally the word nigama refers to the Vedas, but here nigama refers to the instructions contained in the Vedas. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says, nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam: [SB 1.1.3] the Vedic instructions are like a tree, of which Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the ripened fruit. Nārada Muni is engaged in distributing this fruit, and therefore he instructed Vyāsadeva to write this Mahā-Purāṇa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, for the benefit of ignorant human society.



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām





"The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth." (Bhāg. 1.7.6) People are suffering because of ignorance and are following a wrong path for happiness. This is called anartha. These material activities will never make them happy, and therefore Nārada instructed Vyāsadeva to record the instructions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Vyāsadeva actually followed Nārada and did this. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the supreme instruction of the Vedas. Galitaṁ phalam: the ripened fruit of the Vedas is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.





TEXT 31



bhrātṝṇāṁ prāyaṇaṁ bhrātā

yo 'nutiṣṭhati dharmavit

sa puṇya-bandhuḥ puruṣo

marudbhiḥ saha modate

SYNONYMS



bhrātṝṇām-of elder brothers; prāyaṇam-the path; bhrātā-a faithful brother; yaḥ-one who; anutiṣṭhati-follows; dharma-vit-knowing the religious principles; saḥ-that; puṇya-bandhuḥ-highly pious; puruṣaḥ-person; marudbhiḥ-the demigods of the winds; saha-with; modate-enjoys life.





A brother aware of the principles of religion follows in the footsteps of his elder brothers. Because of being highly elevated, such a pious brother gets the opportunity to associate and enjoy with demigods like the Maruts, who are all affectionate to their brothers.





According to their belief in various material relationships, people are promoted to various planets. Here it is said that one who is very faithful to his brothers should follow a path similar to theirs and get the opportunity for promotion to Marudloka. Nārada Muni advised Prajāpati Dakṣa's second group of sons to follow their elder brothers and be promoted to the spiritual world.





TEXT 32



etāvad uktvā prayayau

nārado 'mogha-darśanaḥ

te 'pi cānvagaman mārgaṁ

bhrātṝṇām eva māriṣa

SYNONYMS



etāvat-this much; uktvā-speaking; prayayau-departed from that place; nāradaḥ-the great sage Nārada; amogha-darśanaḥ-whose glance is all-auspicious; te-they; api-also; ca-and; anvagaman-followed; mārgam-the path; bhrātṝṇām-of their previous brothers; eva-indeed; māriṣa-O great Āryan king.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O best of the advanced Āryans, after saying this much to the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, Nārada Muni, whose merciful glance never goes in vain, left as he had planned. The sons of Dakṣa followed their elder brothers. Not attempting to produce children, they engaged themselves in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 33



sadhrīcīnaṁ pratīcīnaṁ

parasyānupathaṁ gatāḥ

nādyāpi te nivartante

paścimā yāminīr iva

SYNONYMS



sadhrīcīnam-completely correct; pratīcīnam-obtainable by adopting a mode of life aimed at the highest goal, devotional service; parasya-of the Supreme Lord; anupatham-the pathway; gatāḥ-taking to; na-not; adya api-even until today; te-they (the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa); nivartante-have come back; paścimāḥ-western (those that have past); yāminīḥ-nights; iva-like.





The Savalāśvas took to the correct path, which is obtainable by a mode of life meant to achieve devotional service, or the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Like nights that have gone to the west, they have not returned even until now.





TEXT 34



etasmin kāla utpātān

bahūn paśyan prajāpatiḥ

pūrvavan nārada-kṛtaṁ

putra-nāśam upāśṛṇot

SYNONYMS



etasmin-at this; kāle-time; utpātān-disturbances; bahūn-many; paśyan-seeing; prajāpatiḥ-Prajāpati Dakṣa; pūrva-vat-like before; nārada-by the great sage Nārada Muni; kṛtam-done; putra-nāśam-the loss of his children; upāśṛṇot-he heard of.





At this time, Prajāpati Dakṣa observed many inauspicious signs, and he heard from various sources that his second group of sons, the Savalāśvas, had followed the path of their elder brothers in accordance with the instructions of Nārada.





TEXT 35



cukrodha nāradāyāsau

putra-śoka-vimūrcchitaḥ

devarṣim upalabhyāha

roṣād visphuritādharaḥ

SYNONYMS



cukrodha-became very angry; nāradāya-at the great sage Nārada Muni; asau-that one (Dakṣa); putra-śoka-due to lamentation for the loss of his children; vimūrcchitaḥ-almost fainting; devarṣim-the great sage Devarṣi Nārada; upalabhya-seeing; āha-he said; roṣāt-out of great anger; visphurita-trembling; adharaḥ-whose lips.





When he heard that the Savalāśvas had also left this world to engage in devotional service, Dakṣa was angry at Nārada, and he almost fainted due to lamentation. When Dakṣa met Nārada, Dakṣa's lips began trembling in anger, and he spoke as follows.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that Nārada Muni had delivered the entire family of Svāyambhuva Manu, beginning with Priyavrata and Uttānapāda. He had delivered Uttānapāda's son Dhruva and had even delivered Prācīnabarhi, who was engaged in fruitive activities. Nevertheless, he could not deliver Prajāpati Dakṣa. Prajāpati Dakṣa saw Nārada before him because Nārada had personally come to deliver him. Nārada Muni took the opportunity to approach Prajāpati Dakṣa in his bereavement because the time of bereavement is a suitable time for appreciating bhakti-yoga. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.16), four kinds of men-ārta (one who is distressed), arthārthī (one in need of money), jijñāsu (one who is inquisitive) and jñānī (a person in knowledge)-try to understand devotional service. Prajāpati Dakṣa was in great distress because of the loss of his sons, and therefore Nārada took the opportunity to instruct him regarding liberation from material bondage.





TEXT 36



śrī-dakṣa uvāca

aho asādho sādhūnāṁ

sādhu-liṅgena nas tvayā

asādhv akāry arbhakāṇāṁ

bhikṣor mārgaḥ pradarśitaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-dakṣaḥ uvāca-Prajāpati Dakṣa said; aho asādho-O greatly dishonest nondevotee; sādhūnām-of the society of devotees and great sages; sādhu-liṅgena-wearing the dress of a saintly person; naḥ-unto us; tvayā-by you; asādhu-a dishonesty; akāri-has been done; arbhakāṇām-of poor boys who were very inexperienced; bhikṣoḥ mārgaḥ-the path of a beggar or mendicant sannyāsī; pradarśitaḥ-shown.





Prajāpati Dakṣa said: Alas, Nārada Muni, you wear the dress of a saintly person, but you are not actually a saint. Indeed, although I am now in gṛhastha life, I am a saintly person. By showing my sons the path of renunciation, you have done me an abominable injustice.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, sannyāsīra alpa chidra sarva-loke gāya (Cc. Madhya 12.51). In society one will find many sannyāsīs, vānaprasthas, gṛhasthas and brahmacārīs, but if all of them properly live in accordance with their duties, they are understood to be sādhus. Prajāpati Dakṣa was certainly a sādhu because he had executed such great austerities that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, had appeared before him. Nevertheless, he had a fault-finding mentality. He improperly thought Nārada Muni to be asādhu, or nonsaintly, because Nārada had foiled his intentions. Desiring to train his sons to become gṛhasthas fully equipped with knowledge, Dakṣa had sent them to execute austerities by Nārāyaṇa-saras. Nārada Muni, however, taking advantage of their highly elevated position in austerity, instructed them to become Vaiṣṇavas in the renounced order. This is the duty of Nārada Muni and his followers. They must show everyone the path of renouncing this material world and returning home, back to Godhead. Prajāpati Dakṣa, however, could not see the exaltedness of the duties Nārada Muni performed in relation to his sons. Unable to appreciate Nārada Muni's behavior, Dakṣa accused Nārada of being asādhu.



The words bhikṣor mārga, "the path of the renounced order," are very significant in this regard. A sannyāsī is called tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu because his duty is to beg alms from the homes of gṛhasthas and to give the gṛhasthas spiritual instructions. A sannyāsī is allowed to beg from door to door, but a gṛhastha cannot do so. Gṛhasthas may earn their living according to the four divisions of spiritual life. A brāhmaṇa gṛhastha may earn his livelihood by becoming a learned scholar and teaching people in general how to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He may also assume the duty of worship himself. Therefore it is said that only brāhmaṇas may engage in Deity worship, and they may accept as prasāda whatever people offer the Deity. Although a brāhmaṇa may sometimes accept charity, it is not for his personal maintenance but for the worship of the Deity. Thus a brāhmaṇa does not stock anything for his future use. Similarly, kṣatriyas may collect taxes from the citizens, and they must also protect the citizens, enforce rules and regulations, and maintain law and order. Vaiśyas should earn their livelihood through agriculture and cow protection, and śūdras should maintain their livelihood by serving the three higher classes. Unless one becomes a brāhmaṇa, one cannot take sannyāsa. Sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs may beg alms door to door, but a gṛhastha cannot.



Prajāpati Dakṣa condemned Nārada Muni because Nārada, a brahmacārī who could beg from door to door, had made sannyāsīs of Dakṣa's sons, who were being trained to be gṛhasthas. Dakṣa was extremely angry at Nārada because he thought that Nārada had done him a great injustice. According to Dakṣa's opinion, Nārada Muni had misled Dakṣa's inexperienced sons (asādhv akāry arbhakāṇām). Dakṣa regarded his sons as innocent boys who had been misled when Nārada showed them the renounced order of life. Because of all these considerations, Prajāpati Dakṣa charged that Nārada Muni was asādhu and should not have adopted the dress of a sādhu.



Sometimes a saintly person is misunderstood by gṛhasthas, especially when he instructs their young sons to accept Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Generally a gṛhastha thinks that unless one enters gṛhastha life he cannot properly enter the renounced order. If a young man immediately adopts the path of the renounced order in accordance with the instructions of Nārada or a member of his disciplic succession, his parents become very angry. This same phenomenon is occurring in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement because we are instructing all the young boys in the Western countries to follow the path of renunciation. We allow gṛhastha life, but a gṛhastha also follows the path of renunciation. Even a gṛhastha has to give up so many bad habits that his parents think his life has been practically destroyed. We allow no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling and no intoxication, and consequently the parents wonder how, if there are so many no's, one's life can be positive. In the Western countries especially, these four prohibited activities practically constitute the life and soul of the modern population. Therefore parents sometimes dislike our movement, just as Prajāpati Dakṣa disliked the activities of Nārada and accused Nārada of dishonesty. Nevertheless, although parents may be angry at us, we must perform our duty without hesitation because we are in the disciplic succession from Nārada Muni.



People addicted to householder life wonder how one can give up the enjoyment of gṛhastha life, which is a concession for sex enjoyment, simply to become a mendicant in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They do not know that the householder's concession for sex life cannot be regulated unless one accepts the life of a mendicant. The Vedic civilization therefore enjoins that at the end of one's fiftieth year one must give up household life. This is compulsory. However, because modern civilization is misled, householders want to remain in family life until death, and therefore they are suffering. In such cases, the disciples of Nārada Muni advise all the members of the younger generation to join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement immediately. There is nothing wrong in this.





TEXT 37



ṛṇais tribhir amuktānām

amīmāṁsita-karmaṇām

vighātaḥ śreyasaḥ pāpa

lokayor ubhayoḥ kṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



ṛṇaiḥ-from the debts; tribhiḥ-three; amuktānām-of persons not freed; amīmāṁsita-not considering; karmaṇām-the path of duty; vighātaḥ-ruin; śreyasaḥ-of the path of good fortune; pāpa-O most sinful (Nārada Muni); lokayoḥ-of the worlds; ubhayoḥ-both; kṛtaḥ-done.





Prajāpati Dakṣa said: My sons were not at all freed from their three debts. Indeed, they did not properly consider their obligations. O Nārada Muni, O personality of sinful action, you have obstructed their progress toward good fortune in this world and the next because they are still indebted to the saintly persons, the demigods and their father.





As soon as a brāhmaṇa takes birth, he assumes three kinds of debts-debts to great saints, debts to the demigods and debts to his father. The son of a brāhmaṇa must undergo celibacy (brahmacarya) to clear his debts to the saintly persons, he must perform ritualistic ceremonies to clear his debts to the demigods, and he must beget children to become free from his debts to his father. Prajāpati Dakṣa argued that although the renounced order is recommended for liberation, one cannot attain liberation unless one fulfills his obligations to the demigods, the saints and his father. Since Dakṣa's sons had not liberated themselves from these three debts, how could Nārada Muni have led them to the renounced order of life? Apparently, Prajāpati Dakṣa did not know the final decision of the śāstras. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.41):



devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam





Everyone is indebted to the demigods, to living entities in general, to his family, to the pitās and so on, but if one fully surrenders to Kṛṣṇa, Mukunda, who can give one liberation, even if one performs no yajñas, one is freed from all debts. Even if one does not repay his debts, he is freed from all debts if he renounces the material world for the sake of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose lotus feet are the shelter of everyone. This is the verdict of the śāstra. Therefore Nārada Muni was completely right in instructing the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa to renounce this material world immediately and take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Unfortunately, Prajāpati Dakṣa, the father of the Haryaśvas and Savalāśvas, did not understand the great service rendered by Nārada Muni. Dakṣa therefore addressed him as pāpa (the personality of sinful activities) and asādhu (a nonsaintly person). Since Nārada Muni was a great saint and Vaiṣṇava, he tolerated all such accusations from Prajāpati Dakṣa. He merely performed his duty as a Vaiṣṇava by delivering all the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, enabling them to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 38



evaṁ tvaṁ niranukrośo

bālānāṁ mati-bhid dhareḥ

pārṣada-madhye carasi

yaśo-hā nirapatrapaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; tvam-you (Nārada); niranukrośaḥ-without compassion; bālānām-of innocent, inexperienced boys; mati-bhit-contaminating the consciousness; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pārṣada-madhye-among the personal associates; carasi-travel; yaśaḥ-hā-defaming the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nirapatrapaḥ-(although you do not know what you are doing, you are executing sinful activities) without shame.





Prajāpati Dakṣa continued: Thus committing violence against other living entities and yet claiming to be an associate of Lord Viṣṇu, you are defaming the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You needlessly created a mentality of renunciation in innocent boys, and therefore you are shameless and devoid of compassion. How could you travel with the personal associates of the Supreme Lord ?





This mentality of Prajāpati Dakṣa still continues even today. When young boys join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, their fathers and so-called guardians are very angry at the propounder of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement because they think that their sons have been unnecessarily induced to deprive themselves of the material enjoyments of eating, drinking and merrymaking. Karmīs, fruitive workers, think that one should fully enjoy his present life in this material world and also perform some pious activities to be promoted to higher planetary systems for further enjoyment in the next life. A yogī, however, especially a bhakti-yogī, is callous to the opinions of this material world. He is not interested in traveling to the higher planetary systems of the demigods to enjoy a long life in an advanced materialistic civilization. As stated by Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tridaśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate: for a devotee, merging into the Brahman existence is hellish, and life in the higher planetary systems of the demigods is a will-o'-the-wisp, a phantasmagoria with no real existence at all. A pure devotee is not interested in yogic perfection, travel to higher planetary systems, or oneness with Brahman. He is interested only in rendering service to the Personality of Godhead. Since Prajāpati Dakṣa was a karmī, he could not appreciate the great service Nārada Muni had rendered his eleven thousand sons. Instead, he accused Nārada Muni of being sinful and charged that because Nārada Muni was associated with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord would also be defamed. Thus Dakṣa criticized that Nārada Muni was an offender to the Lord although he was known as an associate of the Lord.





TEXT 39



nanu bhāgavatā nityaṁ

bhūtānugraha-kātarāḥ

ṛte tvāṁ sauhṛda-ghnaṁ vai

vairaṅ-karam avairiṇām

SYNONYMS



nanu-now; bhāgavatāḥ-devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nityam-eternally; bhūta-anugraha-kātarāḥ-very much anxious to bestow benedictions upon the fallen conditioned souls; ṛte-except; tvām-yourself; sauhṛda-ghnam-a breaker of friendship (therefore not countable among the bhāgavatas, or devotees of the Lord); vai-indeed; vairam-karam-you create enmity; avairiṇām-toward persons who are not enemies.





All the devotees of the Lord but you are very kind to the conditioned souls and are eager to benefit others. Although you wear the dress of a devotee, you create enmity with people who are not your enemies, or you break friendship and create enmity between friends. Are you not ashamed of posing as a devotee while performing these abominable actions?





Such are the criticisms that must be borne by the servants of Nārada Muni in the disciplic succession. Through the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are trying to train young people to become devotees and return home, back to Godhead, by following rigid regulative principles, but our service is appreciated neither in India nor abroad in the Western countries where we are endeavoring to spread this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. In India the caste brāhmaṇas have become enemies of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement because we elevate foreigners, who are supposed to be mlecchas and yavanas, to the position of brāhmaṇas. We train them in austerities and penances and recognize them as brāhmaṇas by awarding them sacred threads. Thus the caste brāhmaṇas of India are very displeased by our activities in the Western world. In the West also, the parents of the young people who join this movement have also become enemies. We have no business creating enemies, but the process is such that nondevotees will always be inimical toward us. Nevertheless, as stated in the śāstras, a devotee should be both tolerant and merciful. Devotees engaged in preaching should be prepared to be accused by ignorant persons, and yet they must be very merciful to the fallen conditioned souls. If one can execute his duty in the disciplic succession of Nārada Muni, his service will surely be recognized. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.68–69):



ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā

mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ





na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu

kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ

bhavitā na ca me tasmād

anyaḥ priyataro bhuvi





"For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me. There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear." Let us continue preaching the message of Lord Kṛṣṇa and not be afraid of enemies. Our only duty is to satisfy the Lord by this preaching, which will be accepted as service by Lord Caitanya and Lord Kṛṣṇa. We must sincerely serve the Lord and not be deterred by so-called enemies.



In this verse the word sauhṛda-ghnam ("a breaker of friendship") is used. Because Nārada Muni and the members of his disciplic succession disrupt friendships and family life, they are sometimes accused of being sauhṛda-ghnam, creators of enmity between relatives. Actually such devotees are friends of every living entity (suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānām), but they are misunderstood to be enemies. Preaching can be a difficult, thankless task, but a preacher must follow the orders of the Supreme Lord and be unafraid of materialistic persons.





TEXT 40



netthaṁ puṁsāṁ virāgaḥ syāt

tvayā kevalinā mṛṣā

manyase yady upaśamaṁ

sneha-pāśa-nikṛntanam

SYNONYMS



na-not; ittham-in this way; puṁsām-of persons; virāgaḥ-renunciation; syāt-is possible; tvayā-by you; kevalinā mṛṣā-possessing knowledge falsely; manyase-you think; yadi-if; upaśamam-renunciation of material enjoyment; sneha-pāśa-the bonds of affection; nikṛntanam-cutting.





Prajāpati Dakṣa continued: If you think that simply awakening the sense of renunciation will detach one from the material world, I must say that unless full knowledge is awakened, simply changing dresses as you have done cannot possibly bring detachment.





Prajāpati Dakṣa was correct in stating that changing one's dress cannot detach one from this material world. The sannyāsīs of Kali-yuga who change their robes from white to saffron and then think they can do whatever they like are more abominable than materialistic gṛhasthas. This is not recommended anywhere. Prajāpati Dakṣa was right in pointing out this defect, but he did not know that Nārada Muni had aroused the spirit of renunciation in the Haryaśvas and Savalāśvas through full knowledge. Such enlightened renunciation is desirable. One should enter the renounced order with full knowledge (jñāna-vairāgya), for the perfection of life is possible for one who renounces this material world in that way. This elevated stage can be reached very easily, as supported by the statements of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.7):



vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam





"By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the world." If one seriously engages in devotional service to Lord Vāsudeva, jñāna and vairāgya are automatically manifest in one's person. There is no doubt of this. Prajāpati Dakṣa's accusation that Nārada had not actually elevated his sons to the platform of knowledge was not factual. All the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa had first been raised to the platform of jñāna and had then automatically renounced this world. In summary, unless one's knowledge is awakened, renunciation cannot take place, for without elevated knowledge one cannot give up attachment for material enjoyment.





TEXT 41



nānubhūya na jānāti

pumān viṣaya-tīkṣṇatām

nirvidyate svayaṁ tasmān

na tathā bhinna-dhīḥ paraiḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; anubhūya-experiencing; na-not; jānāti-knows; pumān-a person; viṣaya-tīkṣṇatām-the sharpness of material enjoyment; nirvidyate-becomes aloof; svayam-himself; tasmāt-from that; na tathā-not like that; bhinna-dhīḥ-whose intelligence is changed; paraiḥ-by others.





Material enjoyment is indeed the cause of all unhappiness, but one cannot give it up unless one has personally experienced how much suffering it is. Therefore one should be allowed to remain in so-called material enjoyment while simultaneously advancing in knowledge to experience the misery of this false material happiness. Then, without help from others, one will find material enjoyment detestful. Those whose minds are changed by others do not become as renounced as those who have personal experience.





It is said that unless a woman becomes pregnant, she cannot understand the trouble of giving birth to a child. Bandhyā ki bujhibe prasava-vedanā. The word bandhyā means a sterile woman. Such a woman cannot give birth to a child. How, then, can she perceive the pain of delivery? According to the philosophy of Prajāpati Dakṣa, a woman should first become pregnant and then experience the pain of childbirth. Then, if she is intelligent, she will not want to be pregnant again. Actually. however. this is not a fact. Sex enjoyment is so strong that a woman becomes pregnant and suffers at the time of childbirth. but she becomes pregnant again, despite her experience. According to Dakṣa's philosophy. one should become implicated in material enjoyment so that after experiencing the distress of such enjoyment. one will automatically renounce. Material nature, however. is so strong that although a man suffers at every step, he will not cease his attempts to enjoy (tṛpyanti neha kṛpaṇa-bahu-duḥkha-bhājaḥ). Under the circumstances, unless one gets the association of a devotee like Nārada Muni or his servant in the disciplic succession, one's dormant spirit of renunciation cannot be awakened. It is not a fact that because material enjoyment involves so many painful conditions one will automatically become detached. One needs the blessings of a devotee like Nārada Muni. Then one can renounce his attachment for the material world. The young boys and girls of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement have given up the spirit of material enjoyment not because of practice but by the mercy of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His servants.





TEXT 42



yan nas tvaṁ karma-sandhānāṁ

sādhūnāṁ gṛhamedhinām

kṛtavān asi durmarṣaṁ

vipriyaṁ tava marṣitam

SYNONYMS



yat-which; naḥ-unto us; tvam-you; karma-sandhānām-who strictly follow the fruitive ritualistic ceremonies according to Vedic injunctions; sādhūnām-who are honest (because we honestly seek elevated social standards and bodily comfort); gṛha-medhinām-although situated with a wife and children; kṛtavān asi-have created; durmarṣam-unbearable; vipriyam-wrong; tava-your; marṣitam-forgiven.





Although I live in household life with my wife and children, I honestly follow the Vedic injunctions by engaging in fruitive activities to enjoy life without sinful reactions. I have performed all kinds of yajñas, including the deva-yajña, ṛṣi-yajña, pitṛ-yajña and nṛ-yajña. Because these yajñas are called vratas [vows], I am known as a gṛhavrata. Unfortunately, you have given me great displeasure by misguiding my sons, for no reason, to the path of renunciation. This can be tolerated once.





Prajāpati Dakṣa wanted to prove that he had been most tolerant in not having said anything when Nārada Muni, for no reason, induced his ten thousand innocent sons to adopt the path of renunciation. Sometimes householders are accused of being gṛhamedhīs, for gṛhamedhīs are satisfied with family life without spiritual advancement. Gṛhasthas, however, are different because although gṛhasthas live in householder life with their wives and children, they are eager for spiritual advancement. Wanting to prove that he had been magnanimous to Nārada Muni, Prajāpati Dakṣa stressed that when Nārada had misled his first sons, Dakṣa had taken no action; he had been kind and tolerant. He was aggrieved, however, because Nārada Muni had misled his sons for a second time. Therefore he wanted to prove that Nārada Muni, although dressed like a sādhu, was not actually a sādhu; he himself, although a householder, was a greater sādhu than Nārada Muni.





TEXT 43



tantu-kṛntana yan nas tvam

abhadram acaraḥ punaḥ

tasmāl lokeṣu te mūḍha

na bhaved bhramataḥ padam

SYNONYMS



tantu-kṛntana-O mischief-monger who have mercilessly separated my sons from me; yat-which; naḥ-unto us; tvam-you; abhadram-an inauspicious thing; acaraḥ-have done; punaḥ-again; tasmāt-therefore; lokeṣu-in all the planetary systems within the universe; te-of you; mūḍha-O rascal not knowing how to act; na-not; bhavet-there may be; bhramataḥ-who are wandering; padam-an abode.





You have made me lose my sons once, and now you have again done the same inauspicious thing. Therefore you are a rascal who does not know how to behave toward others. You may travel all over the universe, but I curse you to have no residence anywhere.





Because Prajāpati Dakṣa was a gṛhamedhī who wanted to remain in household life, he thought that if Nārada Muni could not remain in one place, but had to travel all over the world, that would be a great punishment for him. Actually, however, such a punishment is a boon for a preacher. A preacher is known as parivrājakācārya-an ācārya, or teacher, who always travels for the benefit of human society. Prajāpati Dakṣa cursed Nārada Muni by saying that although he had the facility to travel all over the universe, he would never be able to stay in one place. In the paramparā system from Nārada Muni, I have also been cursed. Although I have many centers that would be suitable places of residence, I cannot stay anywhere, for I have been cursed by the parents of my young disciples. Since the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement was started, I have traveled all over the world two or three times a year, and although I am provided comfortable places to stay wherever I go, I cannot stay anywhere for more than three days or a week. I do not mind this curse by the parents of my disciples, but now it is necessary that I stay in one place to finish another task-this translation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. If my young disciples, especially those who have taken sannyāsa, take charge of traveling all over the world, it may be possible for me to transfer the curse of the parents to these young preachers. Then I may sit down conveniently in one place for the work of translation.





TEXT 44



śrī-śuka uvāca

pratijagrāha tad bāḍhaṁ

nāradaḥ sādhu-sammataḥ

etāvān sādhu-vādo hi

titikṣeteśvaraḥ svayam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pratijagrāha-accepted; tat-that; bāḍham-so be it; nāradaḥ-Nārada Muni; sādhu-sammataḥ-who is an approved sādhu; etāvān-this much; sādhu-vādaḥ-appropriate for a saintly person; hi-indeed; titikṣeta-he may tolerate; īśvaraḥ-although able to curse Prajāpati Dakṣa; svayam-himself.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, since Nārada Muni is an approved saintly person, when cursed by Prajāpati Dakṣa he replied, "tad bāḍham: Yes, what you have said is good. I accept this curse." He could have cursed Prajāpati Dakṣa in return, but because he is a tolerant and merciful sādhu, he took no action.





As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.21):



titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ

suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām

ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ

sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ





"The symptoms of a sādhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime." Because Nārada Muni is the most elevated of sādhus, devotees, to deliver Prajāpati Dakṣa he silently tolerated the curse. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has taught this principle to all His devotees:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

[Cc. adi 17.31]





"One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should be more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and should be ready to offer all respects to others. In such a state of mind one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly." Following the orders of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, one who preaches the glories of the Lord all over the world or all over the universe should be humbler than grass and more tolerant than a tree because a preacher cannot live an easygoing life. Indeed, a preacher must face many impediments. Not only is he sometimes cursed, but sometimes he must also suffer personal injury. For example, when Nityānanda Prabhu went to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness to the two roguish brothers Jagāi and Mādhāi, they injured Him and made His head bleed, but nevertheless, He tolerantly delivered the two rogues, who became perfect Vaiṣṇavas. This is the duty of a preacher. Lord Jesus Christ even tolerated crucifixion. Therefore the curse against Nārada was not very astonishing, and he tolerated it.



Now, it may be asked why Nārada Muni stayed in the presence of Prajāpati Dakṣa and tolerated all his accusations and curses. Was that for Dakṣa's deliverance? The answer is yes. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that after being insulted by Prajāpati Dakṣa, Nārada Muni should have left immediately, but he purposely stayed to hear all Dakṣa's strong words so that Dakṣa might be relieved of his anger. Prajāpati Dakṣa was not an ordinary man; he had accumulated the results of many pious activities. Therefore Nārada Muni expected that after delivering his curse, Dakṣa, satisfied and freed from anger, would repent his misbehavior and thus get a chance to become a Vaiṣṇava and be delivered. When Jagāi and Mādhāi offended Lord Nityānanda, Lord Nityānanda stood tolerantly, and therefore both brothers fell at His lotus feet and repented. Consequently they later became perfect Vaiṣṇavas.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. entitled "Nārada Muni Cursed by Prajāpati Dakṣa."



Chapter Six



The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakṣa





As described in this chapter, Prajāpati Dakṣa begot sixty daughters in the womb of his wife Asiknī. These daughters were given in charity to various persons to increase the population. Since these offspring of Dakṣa were women, Nārada Muni did not try to lead them toward the renounced order of life. Thus the daughters were saved from Nārada Muni. Ten of the daughters were given in marriage to Dharmarāja, thirteen to Kaśyapa Muni, and twenty-seven to the moon-god, Candra. In this way fifty daughters were distributed, and of the other ten daughters, four were given to Kaśyapa and two each to Bhūta, Aṅgirā and Kṛśāśva. One should know that it is because of the union of these sixty daughters with various exalted personalities that the entire universe was filled with various kinds of living entities, such as human beings, demigods, demons, beasts, birds and serpents.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tataḥ prācetaso 'siknyām

anunītaḥ svayambhuvā

ṣaṣṭiṁ sañjanayām āsa

duhitṝḥ pitṛ-vatsalāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tataḥ-after that incident; prācetasaḥ-Dakṣa; asiknyām-in his wife named Asiknī; anunītaḥ-pacified; svayambhuvā-by Lord Brahmā; ṣaṣṭim-sixty; sañjanayām āsa-begot; duhitṝḥ-daughters; pitṛ-vatsalāḥ-all very affectionate to their father.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmā, Prajāpati Dakṣa, who is known as Prācetasa, begot sixty daughters in the womb of his wife Asiknī. All the daughters were very affectionate toward their father.





After the incidents concerning the loss of his many sons, Dakṣa repented his misunderstanding with Nārada Muni. Lord Brahmā then saw Dakṣa and instructed him to beget children again. This time Dakṣa was very cautious to beget female children instead of male children so that Nārada Muni would not disturb them by urging them to accept the renounced order. Females are not meant for the renounced order of life; they should be faithful to their good husbands, for if a husband is competent for liberation, his wife will also achieve liberation with him. As stated in the śāstra, the results of a husband's pious activities are shared by his wife. Therefore a woman's duty is to be very chaste and faithful to her husband. Then without separate endeavor she will share in all the profit the husband earns.





TEXT 2



daśa dharmāya kāyādād

dvi-ṣaṭ tri-ṇava cendave

bhūtāṅgiraḥ-kṛśāśvebhyo

dve dve tārkṣyāya cāparāḥ

SYNONYMS



daśa-ten; dharmāya-unto King Dharma, Yamarāja; kāya-unto Kaśyapa; adāt-gave; dvi-ṣaṭ-twice six and one (thirteen); tri-nava-thrice nine (twenty-seven); ca-also; indave-unto the moon-god; bhūta-aṅgiraḥ-kṛśāśvebhyaḥ-unto Bhūta, Aṅgirā and Kṛśāśva; dve dve-two each; tārkṣyāya-again unto Kaśyapa; ca-and; aparāḥ-the balance.





He gave ten daughters in charity to Dharmarāja [Yamarāja], thirteen to Kaśyapa [first twelve and then one more], twenty-seven to the moon-god, and two each to Aṅgirā, Kṛśāśva and Bhūta. The other four daughters were given to Kaśyapa. [Thus Kaśyapa received seventeen daughters in all.]





TEXT 3



nāmadheyāny amūṣāṁ tvaṁ

sāpatyānāṁ ca me śṛṇu

yāsāṁ prasūti-prasavair

lokā āpūritās trayaḥ

SYNONYMS



nāmadheyāni-the different names; amūṣām-of them; tvam-you; sa-apatyānām-with their offspring; ca-and; me-from me; śṛṇu-please hear; yāsām-of all of whom; prasūti-prasavaiḥ-by so many children and descendants; lokāḥ-the worlds; āpūritāḥ-populated; trayaḥ-three (the upper, middle and lower worlds).





Now please hear from me the names of all these daughters and their descendants, who filled all the three worlds.





TEXT 4



bhānur lambā kakud yāmir

viśvā sādhyā marutvatī

vasur muhūrtā saṅkalpā

dharma-patnyaḥ sutāñ śṛṇu

SYNONYMS



bhānuḥ-Bhānu; lambā-Lambā; kakut-Kakud; yāmiḥ-Yāmi; viśvā-Viśvā; sādhyā-Sādhyā; marutvatī-Marutvatī; vasuḥ-Vasu; muhūrtā-Muhūrtā; saṅkalpā-Saṅkalpā; dharma-patnyaḥ-the wives of Yamarāja; sutān-their sons; śṛṇu-now hear of.





The ten daughters given to Yamarāja were named Bhānu, Lambā, Kakud, Yāmi, Viśvā, Sādhyā, Marutvatī, Vasu, Muhūrtā and Saṅkalpā. Now hear the names of their sons.





TEXT 5



bhānos tu deva-ṛṣabha

indrasenas tato nṛpa

vidyota āsīl lambāyās

tataś ca stanayitnavaḥ

SYNONYMS



bhānoḥ-from the womb of Bhānu; tu-of course; deva-ṛṣabhaḥ-Deva-ṛṣabha; indrasenaḥ-Indrasena; tataḥ-from him (Deva-ṛṣabha); nṛpa-O King; vidyotaḥ-Vidyota; āsīt-appeared; lambāyāḥ-from the womb of Lambā; tataḥ-from him; ca-and; stanayitnavaḥ-all the clouds.





O King, a son named Deva-ṛṣabha was born from the womb of Bhānu, and from him came a son named Indrasena. From the womb of Lambā came a son named Vidyota, who generated all the clouds.





TEXT 6



kakudaḥ saṅkaṭas tasya

kīkaṭas tanayo yataḥ

bhuvo durgāṇi yāmeyaḥ

svargo nandis tato 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



kakudaḥ-from the womb of Kakud; saṅkaṭaḥ-Saṅkaṭa; tasya-from him; kīkaṭaḥ-Kīkaṭa; tanayaḥ-son; yataḥ-from whom; bhuvaḥ-of the earth; durgāṇi-many demigods, protectors of this universe (which is called Durgā); yāmeyaḥ-of Yāmi; svargaḥ-Svarga; nandiḥ-Nandi; tataḥ-from him (Svarga); abhavat-was born.





From the womb of Kakud came the son named Saṅkaṭa, whose son was named Kīkaṭa. From Kīkaṭa came the demigods named Durgā. From Yāmi came the son named Svarga, whose son was named Nandi.





TEXT 7



viśve-devās tu viśvāyā

aprajāṁs tān pracakṣate

sādhyo-gaṇaś ca sādhyāyā

arthasiddhis tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



viśve-devāḥ-the demigods named the Viśvadevas; tu-but; viśvāyāḥ-from Viśvā; aprajān-without sons; tān-them; pracakṣate-it is said; sādhyaḥ-gaṇaḥ-the demigods named the Sādhyas; ca-and; sādhyāyāḥ-from the womb of Sādhya-; arthasiddhiḥ-Arthasiddhi; tu-but; tat-sutaḥ-the son of the Sādhyas.





The sons of Viśvā were the Viśvadevas, who had no progeny. From the womb of Sādhyā came the Sādhyas, who had a son named Arthasiddhi.





TEXT 8



marutvāṁś ca jayantaś ca

marutvatyā babhūvatuḥ

jayanto vāsudevāṁśa

upendra iti yaṁ viduḥ

SYNONYMS



marutvān-Marutvān; ca-also; jayantaḥ-Jayanta; ca-and; marutvatyāḥ-from Marutvatī; babhūvatuḥ-took birth; jayantaḥ-Jayanta; vāsudeva-aṁśaḥ-an expansion of Vāsudeva; upendraḥ-Upendra; iti-thus; yam-whom; viduḥ-they know.





The two sons who took birth from the womb of Marutvatī were Marutvān and Jayanta. Jayanta, who is an expansion of Lord Vāsudeva, is known as Upendra.





TEXT 9



mauhūrtikā deva-gaṇā

muhūrtāyāś ca jajñire

ye vai phalaṁ prayacchanti

bhūtānāṁ sva-sva-kālajam

SYNONYMS



mauhūrtikāḥ-Mauhūrtikas; deva-gaṇāḥ-the demigods; muhūrtāyāḥ-from the womb of Muhūrtā; ca-and; jajñire-took birth; ye-all of whom; vai-indeed; phalam-result; prayacchanti-deliver; bhūtānām-of the living entities; sva-sva-their own; kāla-jam-born of time.





The demigods named the Mauhūrtikas took birth from the womb of Muhūrtā. These demigods deliver the results of actions to the living entities of their respective times.





TEXTS 10–11



saṅkalpāyās tu saṅkalpaḥ

kāmaḥ saṅkalpajaḥ smṛtaḥ

vasavo 'ṣṭau vasoḥ putrās

teṣāṁ nāmāni me śṛṇu

droṇaḥ prāṇo dhruvo 'rko 'gnir



doṣo vāstur vibhāvasuḥ

droṇasyābhimateḥ patnyā

harṣa-śoka-bhayādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



saṅkalpāyāḥ-from the womb of Saṅkalpā; tu-but; saṅkalpaḥ-Saṅkalpa; kāmaḥ-Kāma; saṅkalpa-jaḥ-the son of Saṅkalpā; smṛtaḥ-known; vasavaḥ aṣṭau-the eight Vasus; vasoḥ-of Vasu; putrāḥ-the sons; teṣām-of them; nāmāni-the names; me-from me; śṛṇu-just hear; droṇaḥ-Droṇa; prāṇaḥ-Prāṇa; dhruvaḥ-Dhruva; arkaḥ-Arka; agniḥ-Agni; doṣaḥ-Doṣa; vāstuḥ-Vāstu; vibhāvasuḥ-Vibhāvasu; droṇasya-of Droṇa; abhimateḥ-from Abhimati; patnyāḥ-the wife; harṣa-śoka-bhaya-ādayaḥ-the sons named Harṣa, Śoka, Bhaya and so on.





The son of Saṅkalpā was known as Saṅkalpa, and from him lust was born. The sons of Vasu were known as the eight Vasus. Just hear their names from me: Droṇa, Prāṇa, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, Doṣa, Vāstu and Vibhāvasu. From Abhimati, the wife of the Vasu named Droṇa, were generated the sons named Harṣa, Śoka, Bhaya and so on.





TEXT 12



prāṇasyorjasvatī bhāryā

saha āyuḥ purojavaḥ

dhruvasya bhāryā dharaṇir

asūta vividhāḥ puraḥ

SYNONYMS



prāṇasya-of Prāna; ūrjasvatī-Ūrjasvatī; bhāryā-the wife; sahaḥ-Saha; āyuḥ-Āyus; purojavaḥ-Purojava; dhruvasya-of Dhruva; bhāryā-the wife; dharaṇiḥ-Dharaṇi; asūta-gave birth to; vividhāḥ-the various; puraḥ-cities and towns.





Ūrjasvatī, the wife of Prāṇa, gave birth to three sons, named Saha, Āyus and Purojava. The wife of Dhruva was known as Dharaṇi, and from her womb various cities took birth.





TEXT 13



arkasya vāsanā bhāryā

putrās tarṣādayaḥ smṛtāḥ

agner bhāryā vasor dhārā

putrā draviṇakādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



arkasya-of Arka; vāsanā-Vāsanā; bhāryā-the wife; putrāḥ-the sons; tarṣa-ādayaḥ-named Tarṣa and so on; smṛtāḥ-celebrated; agneḥ-of Agni; bhāryā-wife; vasoḥ-the Vasu; dhārā-Dhārā; putrāḥ-the sons; draviṇaka-ādayaḥ-known as Draviṇaka and so on.





From the womb of Vāsanā, the wife of Arka, came many sons, headed by Tarṣa. Dhārā, the wife of the Vasu named Agni, gave birth to many sons, headed by Draviṇaka.





TEXT 14



skandaś ca kṛttikā-putro

ye viśākhādayas tataḥ

doṣasya śarvarī-putraḥ

śiśumāro hareḥ kalā

SYNONYMS



skandaḥ-Skanda; ca-also; kṛttikā-putraḥ-the son of Kṛttikā; ye-all of whom; viśākha-ādayaḥ-headed by Viśākha; tataḥ-from him (Skanda); doṣasya-of Doṣa; śarvarī-putraḥ-the son of his wife Śarvarī; śiśumāraḥ-Śiśumāra; hareḥ kalā-an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





From Kṛttikā, another wife of Agni, came the son named Skanda, Kārttikeya, whose sons were headed by Viśākha. From the womb of Śarvarī, the wife of the Vasu named Doṣa, came the son named Śiśumāra, who was an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 15



vāstor āṅgirasī-putro

viśvakarmākṛtī-patiḥ

tato manuś cākṣuṣo 'bhūd

viśve sādhyā manoḥ sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



vāstoḥ-of Vāstu; āṅgirasī-of his wife named Āṅgirasī; putraḥ-the son; viśvakarmā-Viśvakarmā; ākṛtī-patiḥ-the husband of Ākṛtī; tataḥ-from them; manuḥ cākṣuṣaḥ-the Manu named Cākṣuṣa; abhūt-was born; viśve-the Viśvadevas; sādhyāḥ-the Sādhyas; manoḥ-of Manu; sutāḥ-the sons.





From Āṅgirasī, the wife of the Vasu named Vāstu, was born the great architect Viśvakarmā. Viśvakarmā became the husband of Ākṛtī, from whom the Manu named Cākṣuṣa was born. The sons of Manu were known as the Viśvadevas and Sādhyas.





TEXT 16



vibhāvasor asūtoṣā

vyuṣṭaṁ rociṣam ātapam

pañcayāmo 'tha bhūtāni

yena jāgrati karmasu

SYNONYMS



vibhāvasoḥ-of Vibhāvasu; asūta-gave birth to; ūṣā-named Ūṣā; vyuṣṭam-Vyuṣṭa; rociṣam-Rociṣa; ātapam-Ātapa; pañcayāmaḥ-Pañcayāma; atha-thereafter; bhūtāni-the living entities; yena-by whom; jāgrati-are awakened; karmasu-in material activities.





Ūṣā, the wife of Vibhāvasu, gave birth to three sons-Vyuṣṭa, Rociṣa and Ātapa. From Ātapa came Pañcayāma, the span of day, who awakens all living entities to material activities.





TEXTS 17–18



sarūpāsūta bhūtasya

bhāryā rudrāṁś ca koṭiśaḥ

raivato 'jo bhavo bhīmo

vāma ugro vṛṣākapiḥ

ajaikapād ahirbradhno



bahurūpo mahān iti

rudrasya pārṣadāś cānye

ghorāḥ preta-vināyakāḥ

SYNONYMS



sarūpā-Sarūpā; asūta-gave birth; bhūtasya-of Bhūta; bhāryā-the wife; rudrān-Rudras; ca-and; koṭiśaḥ-ten million; raivataḥ-Raivata; ajaḥ-Aja; bhavaḥ-Bhava; bhīmaḥ-Bhīma; vāmaḥ-Vāma; ugraḥ-Ugra; vṛṣākapiḥ-Vṛṣākapi; ajaikapāt-Ajaikapāt; ahirbradhnaḥ-Ahirbradhna; bahurūpaḥ-Bahurūpa; mahān-Mahān; iti-thus; rudrasya-of these Rudras; pārṣadāḥ-their associates; ca-and; anye-other; ghorāḥ-very fearful; preta-ghosts; vināyakāḥ-and hobgoblins.





Sarūpā, the wife of Bhūta, gave birth to the ten million Rudras, of whom the eleven principle Rudras were Raivata, Aja, Bhava, Bhīma, Vāma, Ugra, Vṛṣākapi, Ajaikapāt, Ahirbradhna, Bahurūpa and Mahān. Their associates, the ghosts and goblins, who are very fearful, were born of the other wife of Bhūta.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that Bhūta had two wives. One of them, Sarūpā, gave birth to the eleven Rudras, and the other wife gave birth to the associates of the Rudras known as the ghosts and hobgoblins.





TEXT 19



prajāpater aṅgirasaḥ

svadhā patnī pitṝn atha

atharvāṅgirasaṁ vedaṁ

putratve cākarot satī

SYNONYMS



prajāpateḥ aṅgirasaḥ-of another prajāpati, known as Aṅgirā; svadhā-Svadhā; patnī-his wife; pitṝn-the Pitās; atha-thereafter; atharva-āṅgirasam-Atharvāṅgirasa; vedam-the personified Veda; putratve-as the son; ca-and; akarot-accepted; satī-Satī.





The prajāpati Aṅgirā had two wives, named Svadhā and Satī. The wife named Svadhā accepted all the Pitās as her sons, and Satī accepted the Atharvāṅgirasa Veda as her son.





TEXT 20



kṛśāśvo 'rciṣi bhāryāyāṁ

dhūmaketum ajījanat

dhiṣaṇāyāṁ vedaśiro

devalaṁ vayunaṁ manum

SYNONYMS



kṛśāśvaḥ-Kṛśāśva; arciṣi-Arcis; bhāryāyām-in his wife; dhūmaketum-to Dhūmaketu; ajījanat-gave birth; dhiṣaṇāyām-in the wife known as Dhiṣaṇā; vedaśiraḥ-Vedaśirā; devalam-Devala; vayunam-Vayuna; manum-Manu.





Kṛśāśva had two wives, named Arcis and Dhiṣaṇā. In the wife named Arcis he begot Dhūmaketu and in Dhiṣaṇā he begot four sons, named Vedaśirā, Devala, Vayuna and Manu.





TEXTS 21–22



tārkṣyasya vinatā kadrūḥ

pataṅgī yāminīti ca

pataṅgy asūta patagān

yāminī śalabhān atha

suparṇāsūta garuḍaṁ



sākṣād yajñeśa-vāhanam

sūrya-sūtam anūruṁ ca

kadrūr nāgān anekaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



tārkṣyasya-of Kaśyapa, whose other name is Tārkṣya; vinatā-Vinatā; kadrūḥ-Kadrū; pataṅgī-Pataṅgī; yāminī-Yāminī; iti-thus; ca-and; pataṅgī-Pataṅgī; asūta-gave birth; patagān-to birds of different varieties; yāminī-Yāminī; śalabhān-(gave birth to) locusts; atha-thereafter; suparṇā-the wife named Vinatā; asūta-gave birth; garuḍam-to the celebrated bird known as Garuḍa; sākṣāt-directly; yajñeśa-vāhanam-the carrier of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; sūrya-sūtam-the chariot driver of the sun-god; anūrum-Anūru; ca-and; kadrūḥ-Kadrū; nāgān-serpents; anekaśaḥ-in varieties.





Kaśyapa, who is also named Tārkṣya, had four wives-Vinatā [Suparṇā], Kadrū, Pataṅgī and Yāminī. Pataṅgī gave birth to many kinds of birds, and Yāminī gave birth to locusts. Vinatā [Suparṇā] gave birth to Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, and to Anūru, or Aruṇa, the chariot driver of the sun-god. Kadrū gave birth to different varieties of serpents.





TEXT 23



kṛttikādīni nakṣatrāṇ-

īndoḥ patnyas tu bhārata

dakṣa-śāpāt so 'napatyas

tāsu yakṣma-grahārditaḥ

SYNONYMS



kṛttikā-ādīni-headed by Kṛttikā; nakṣatrāṇi-the constellations; indoḥ-of the moon-god; patnyaḥ-the wives; tu-but; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of the dynasty of Bharata; dakṣa-śāpāt-because of being cursed by Dakṣa; saḥ-the moon-god; anapatyaḥ-without children; tāsu-in so many wives; yakṣma-graha-arditaḥ-being oppressed by a disease that brings about gradual destruction.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Bhāratas, the constellations named Kṛttikā were all wives of the moon-god. However, because Prajāpati Dakṣa had cursed him to suffer from a disease causing gradual destruction, the moon-god could not beget children in any of his wives.





TEXTS 24–26



punaḥ prasādya taṁ somaḥ

kalā lebhe kṣaye ditāḥ

śṛṇu nāmāni lokānāṁ

mātṝṇāṁ śaṅkarāṇi ca

atha kaśyapa-patnīnāṁ



yat-prasūtam idaṁ jagat

aditir ditir danuḥ kāṣṭhā

ariṣṭā surasā ilā

muniḥ krodhavaśā tāmrā



surabhiḥ saramā timiḥ

timer yādo-gaṇā āsan

śvāpadāḥ saramā-sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



punaḥ-again; prasādya-pacifying; tam-him (Prajāpati Dakṣa); somaḥ-the moon-god; kalāḥ-portions of light; lebhe-achieved; kṣaye-in gradual destruction (the dark fortnight); ditāḥ-removed; śṛṇu-please hear; nāmāni-all the names; lokānām-of the planets; mātṝṇām-of the mothers; śaṅkarāṇi-pleasing; ca-also; atha-now; kaśyapa-patnīnām-of the wives of Kaśyapa; yat-prasūtam-from whom was born; idam-this; jagat-whole universe; aditiḥ-Aditi; ditiḥ-Diti; danuḥ-Danu; kāṣṭhā-Kāṣṭhā; ariṣṭā-Ariṣṭā; surasā-Surasā; ilā-Ilā; muniḥ-Muni; krodhavaśā-Krodhavaśā; tāmrā-Tāmrā; surabhiḥ-Surabhi; saramā-Saramā; timiḥ-Timi; timeḥ-from Timi; yādaḥ-gaṇāḥ-the aquatics; āsan-appeared; śvāpadāḥ-the ferocious animals like the lions and tigers; saramā-sutāḥ-the children of Saramā.





Thereafter the King of the moon pacified Prajāpati Dakṣa with courteous words and thus regained the portions of light he had lost during his disease. Nevertheless he could not beget children. The moon loses his shining power during the dark fortnight, and in the bright fortnight it is manifest again. O King Parīkṣit, now please hear from me the names of Kaśyapa's wives, from whose wombs the population of the entire universe has come. They are the mothers of almost all the population of the entire universe, and their names are very auspicious to hear. They are Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kāṣṭhā, Ariṣṭā, Surasā, Ilā, Muni, Krodhavaśā, Tāmrā, Surabhi, Saramā and Timi. From the womb of Timi all the aquatics took birth, and from the womb of Saramā the ferocious animals like the tigers and lions took birth.





TEXT 27



surabher mahiṣā gāvo

ye cānye dviśaphā nṛpa

tāmrāyāḥ śyena-gṛdhrādyā

muner apsarasāṁ gaṇāḥ

SYNONYMS



surabheḥ-from the womb of Surabhi; mahiṣāḥ-buffalo; gāvaḥ-cows; ye-who; ca-also; anye-others; dvi-śaphāḥ-having cloven hooves; nṛpa-O King; tāmrāyāḥ-from Tāmrā; śyena-eagles; gṛdhra-ādyāḥ-vultures and so on; muneḥ-from Muni; apsarasām-of angels; gaṇāḥ-the groups.





My dear King Parīkṣit, from the womb of Surabhi the buffalo, cow and other animals with cloven hooves took birth, from the womb of Tāmrā the eagles, vultures and other large birds of prey took birth, and from the womb of Muni the angels took birth.





TEXT 28



dandaśūkādayaḥ sarpā

rājan krodhavaśātmajāḥ

ilāyā bhūruhāḥ sarve

yātudhānāś ca saurasāḥ

SYNONYMS



dandaśūka-ādayaḥ-headed by the dandaśūka snakes; sarpāḥ-reptiles; rājan-O King; krodhavaśā-ātma-jāḥ-born from Krodhavaśā; ilāyāḥ-from the womb of Ilā; bhūruhāḥ-the creepers and trees; sarve-all; yātudhānāḥ-the cannibals (Rākṣasas); ca-also; saurasāḥ-from the womb of Surasā.





The sons born of Krodhavaśā were the serpents known as dandaśūka, as well as other serpents and the mosquitoes. All the various creepers and trees were born from the womb of Ilā. The Rākṣasas, bad spirits, were born from the womb of Surasā.





TEXTS 29–31



ariṣṭāyās tu gandharvāḥ

kāṣṭhāyā dviśaphetarāḥ

sutā danor eka-ṣaṣṭis

teṣāṁ prādhānikāñ śṛṇu

dvimūrdhā śambaro 'riṣṭo



hayagrīvo vibhāvasuḥ

ayomukhaḥ śaṅkuśirāḥ

svarbhānuḥ kapilo 'ruṇaḥ

pulomā vṛṣaparvā ca



ekacakro 'nutāpanaḥ

dhūmrakeśo virūpākṣo

vipracittiś ca durjayaḥ

SYNONYMS



ariṣṭāyāḥ-from the womb of Ariṣṭā; tu-but; gandharvāḥ-the Gandharvas; kāṣṭhāyāḥ-from the womb of Kāṣṭhā; dvi-śapha-itarāḥ-animals such as horses, which do not have cloven hooves; sutāḥ-sons; danoḥ-from the womb of Danu; eka-ṣaṣṭiḥ-sixty-one; teṣām-of them; prādhānikān-the important ones; śṛṇu-hear; dvimūrdhā-Dvimūrdhā; śambaraḥ-Śambara; ariṣṭaḥ-Ariṣṭa; hayagrīvaḥ-Hayagrīva; vibhāvasuḥ-Vibhāvasu; ayomukhaḥ-Ayomukha; śaṅkuśirāḥ-Śaṅkuśirā; svarbhānuḥ-Svarbhānu; kapilaḥ-Kapila; aruṇaḥ-Aruṇa; pulomā-Pulomā; vṛṣaparvā-Vṛṣaparvā; ca-also; ekacakraḥ-Ekacakra; anutāpanaḥ-Anutāpana; dhūmrakeśaḥ-Dhūmrakeśa; virūpākṣaḥ-Virūpākṣa; vipracittiḥ-Vipracitti; ca-and; durjayaḥ-Durjaya.





The Gandharvas were born from the womb of Ariṣṭā, and animals whose hooves are not split, such as the horse, were born from the womb of Kāṣṭhā. O King, from the womb of Danu came sixty-one sons, of whom these eighteen were very important: Dvimūrdhā, Śambara, Ariṣṭa, Hayagrīva, Vibhāvasu, Ayomukha, Śaṅkuśirā, Svarbhānu, Kapila, Aruṇa, Pulomā, Vṛṣaparvā, Ekacakra, Anutāpana, Dhūmrakeśa, Virūpākṣa, Vipracitti and Durjaya.





TEXT 32



svarbhānoḥ suprabhāṁ kanyām

uvāha namuciḥ kila

vṛṣaparvaṇas tu śarmiṣṭhāṁ

yayātir nāhuṣo balī

SYNONYMS



svarbhānoḥ-of Svarbhānu; suprabhām-Suprabhā; kanyām-the daughter; uvāha-married; namuciḥ-Namuci; kila-indeed; vṛṣaparvaṇaḥ-of Vṛṣaparvā; tu-but; śarmiṣṭhām-Śarmiṣṭhā; yayātiḥ-King Yayāti; nāhuṣaḥ-the son of Nahuṣa; balī-very powerful.





The daughter of Svarbhānu named Suprabhā was married by Namuci. The daughter of Vṛṣaparvā named Śarmiṣṭhā was given to the powerful King Yayāti, the son of Nahuṣa.





TEXTS 33–36



vaiśvānara-sutā yāś ca

catasraś cāru-darśanāḥ

upadānavī hayaśirā

pulomā kālakā tathā

upadānavīṁ hiraṇyākṣaḥ



kratur hayaśirāṁ nṛpa

pulomāṁ kālakāṁ ca dve

vaiśvānara-sute tu kaḥ

upayeme 'tha bhagavān



kaśyapo brahma-coditaḥ

paulomāḥ kālakeyāś ca

dānavā yuddha-śālinaḥ

tayoḥ ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi



yajña-ghnāṁs te pituḥ pitā

jaghāna svar-gato rājann

eka indra-priyaṅkaraḥ

SYNONYMS



vaiśvānara-sutāḥ-the daughters of Vaiśvānara; yāḥ-who; ca-and; catasraḥ-four; cāru-darśanāḥ-very, very beautiful; upadānavī-Upadānavī; hayaśirā-Hayaśirā; pulomā-Pulomā; kālakā-Kālakā; tathā-as well; upadānavīm-Upadānavī; hiraṇyākṣaḥ-the demon Hiraṇyākṣa; kratuḥ-Kratu; hayaśirām-Hayaśirā; nṛpa-O King; pulomām kālakām ca-Pulomā and Kālakā; dve-the two; vaiśvānara-sute-daughters of Vaiśvānara; tu-but; kaḥ-the prajāpati; upayeme-married; atha-then; bhagavān-the most powerful; kaśyapaḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; brahma-coditaḥ-requested by Lord Brahmā; paulomāḥ kālakeyāḥ ca-the Paulomas and Kālakeyas; dānavāḥ-demons; yuddha-śālinaḥ-very fond of fighting; tayoḥ-of them; ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi-sixty thousand; yajña-ghnān-who were disturbing sacrifices; te-your; pituḥ-of the father; pitā-the father; jaghāna-killed; svaḥ-gataḥ-in the heavenly planets; rājan-O King; ekaḥ-alone; indra-priyam-karaḥ-to please King Indra.





Vaiśvānara, the son of Danu, had four beautiful daughters, named Upadānavī, Hayaśirā, Pulomā and Kālakā. Hiraṇyākṣa married Upadānavī, and Kratu married Hayaśirā. Thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmā, Prajāpati Kaśyapa married Pulomā and Kālakā, the other two daughters of Vaiśvānara. From the wombs of these two wives of Kaśyapa came sixty thousand sons, headed by Nivātakavaca, who are known as the Paulomas and the Kālakeyas. They were physically very strong and expert in fighting, and their aim was to disturb the sacrifices performed by the great sages. My dear King, when your grandfather Arjuna went to the heavenly planets, he alone killed all these demons, and thus King Indra became extremely affectionate toward him.





TEXT 37



vipracittiḥ siṁhikāyāṁ

śataṁ caikam ajījanat

rāhu-jyeṣṭhaṁ ketu-śataṁ

grahatvaṁ ya upāgatāḥ

SYNONYMS



vipracittiḥ-Vipracitti; siṁhikāyām-in the womb of his wife Siṁhikā; śatam-to one hundred; ca-and; ekam-one; ajījanat-gave birth; rāhu-jyeṣṭham-among whom Rāhu is the oldest; ketu-śatam-one hundred Ketus; grahatvam-planethood; ye-all of whom; upāgatāḥ-obtained.





In his wife Siṁhikā, Vipracitti begot one hundred and one sons, of whom the eldest is Rāhu and the others are the one hundred Ketus. All of them attained positions in the influential planets.





TEXTS 38–39



athātaḥ śrūyatāṁ vaṁśo

yo 'diter anupūrvaśaḥ

yatra nārāyaṇo devaḥ

svāṁśenāvātarad vibhuḥ

vivasvān aryamā pūṣā



tvaṣṭātha savitā bhagaḥ

dhātā vidhātā varuṇo

mitraḥ śatru urukramaḥ

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; ataḥ-now; śrūyatām-let it be heard; vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty; yaḥ-which; aditeḥ-from Aditi; anupūrvaśaḥ-in chronological order; yatra-wherein; nārāyaṇaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devaḥ-the Lord; sva-aṁśena-by His own plenary expansion; avātarat-descended; vibhuḥ-the Supreme; vivasvān-Vivasvān; aryamā-Aryamā; pūṣā-Pūṣā; tvaṣṭā-Tvaṣṭā; atha-thereafter; savitā-Savitā; bhagaḥ-Bhaga; dhātā-Dhātā; vidhātā-Vidhātā; varuṇaḥ-Varuṇa; mitraḥ-Mitra; śatruḥ-Śatru; urukramaḥ-Urukrama.





Now please hear me as I describe the descendants of Aditi in chronological order. In this dynasty the Supreme Personality of Godhead Nārāyaṇa descended by His plenary expansion. The names of the sons of Aditi are as follows: Vivasvān, Aryamā, Pūṣā, Tvaṣṭā, Savitā, Bhaga, Dhātā, Vidhātā, Varuṇa, Mitra, Śatru and Urukrama.





TEXT 40



vivasvataḥ śrāddhadevaṁ

saṁjñāsūyata vai manum

mithunaṁ ca mahā-bhāgā

yamaṁ devaṁ yamīṁ tathā

saiva bhūtvātha vaḍavā

nāsatyau suṣuve bhuvi

SYNONYMS



vivasvataḥ-of the sun-god; śrāddhadevam-named Śrāddhadeva; saṁjñā-Saṁjñā; asūyata-gave birth; vai-indeed; manum-to Manu; mithunam-twins; ca-and; mahā-bhāgā-the fortunate Saṁjñā; yamam-to Yamarāja; devam-the demigod; yamīm-to his sister named Yamī; tathā-as well as; sā-she; eva-also; bhūtvā-becoming; atha-then; vaḍavā-a mare; nāsatyau-to the Aśvinī-kumāras; suṣuve-gave birth; bhuvi-on this earth.





Saṁjñā, the wife of Vivasvān, the sun-god, gave birth to the Manu named Śrāddhadeva, and the same fortunate wife also gave birth to the twins Yamarāja and the River Yamunā. Then Yamī, while wandering on the earth in the form of a mare, gave birth to the Aśvinī-kumāras.





TEXT 41



chāyā śanaiścaraṁ lebhe

sāvarṇiṁ ca manuṁ tataḥ

kanyāṁ ca tapatīṁ yā vai

vavre saṁvaraṇaṁ patim

SYNONYMS



chāyā-Chāyā, another wife of the sun-god; śanaiścaram-Saturn; lebhe-begot; sāvarṇim-Sāvarṇi; ca-and; manum-the Manu; tataḥ-from him (Vivasvān); kanyām-one daughter; ca-as well as; tapatīm-named Tapatī; yā-who; vai-indeed; vavre-married; saṁvaraṇam-Saṁvaraṇa; patim-husband.





Chāyā, another wife of the sun-god, begot two sons named Śanaiścara and Sāvarṇi Manu, and one daughter, Tapatī, who married Saṁvaraṇa.





TEXT 42



aryamṇo mātṛkā patnī

tayoś carṣaṇayaḥ sutāḥ

yatra vai mānuṣī jātir

brahmaṇā copakalpitā

SYNONYMS



aryamṇaḥ-of Aryamā; mātṛkā-Mātṛkā; patnī-the wife; tayoḥ-by their union; carṣaṇayaḥ sutāḥ-many sons who were learned scholars; yatra-wherein; vai-indeed; mānuṣī-human; jātiḥ-species; brahmaṇā-by Lord Brahmā; ca-and; upakalpitā-was created.





From the womb of Mātṛkā, the wife of Aryamā, were born many learned scholars. Among them Lord Brahmā created the human species, which are endowed with an aptitude for self-examination.





TEXT 43



pūṣānapatyaḥ piṣṭādo

bhagna-danto 'bhavat purā

yo 'sau dakṣāya kupitaṁ

jahāsa vivṛta-dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



pūṣā-Pūṣā; anapatyaḥ-without children; piṣṭa-adaḥ-who lives by eating flour; bhagna-dantaḥ-with broken teeth; abhavat-became; purā-formerly; yaḥ-who; asau-that; dakṣāya-at Dakṣa; kupitam-very angry; jahāsa-laughed; vivṛta-dvijaḥ-uncovering his teeth.





Pūṣā had no sons. When Lord Śiva was angry at Dakṣa, Pūṣā had laughed at Lord Śiva and shown his teeth. Therefore he lost his teeth and had to live by eating only ground flour.





TEXT 44



tvaṣṭur daityātmajā bhāryā

racanā nāma kanyakā

sanniveśas tayor jajñe

viśvarūpaś ca vīryavān

SYNONYMS



tvaṣṭuḥ-of Tvaṣṭā; daitya-ātma-jā-the daughter of a demon; bhāryā-wife; racanā-Racanā; nāma-named; kanyakā-a maiden; sanniveśaḥ-Sanniveśa; tayoḥ-of those two; jajñe-was born; viśvarūpaḥ-Viśvarūpa; ca-and; vīryavān-very powerful in bodily strength.





Racanā, the daughter of the Daityas, became the wife of Prajāpati Tvaṣṭā. By his semina he begot in her womb two very powerful sons named Sanniveśa and Viśvarūpa.





TEXT 45



taṁ vavrire sura-gaṇā

svasrīyaṁ dviṣatām api

vimatena parityaktā

guruṇāṅgirasena yat

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Viśvarūpa); vavrire-accepted as a priest; sura-gaṇāḥ-the demigods; svasrīyam-the son of a daughter; dviṣatām-of the inimical demons; api-although; vimatena-being disrespected; parityaktāḥ-who were given up; guruṇā-by their spiritual master; āṅgirasena-Bṛhaspati; yat-since.





Although Viśvarūpa was the son of the daughter of their eternal enemies the demons, the demigods accepted him as their priest in accordance with the order of Brahmā when they were abandoned by their spiritual master, Bṛhaspati, whom they had disrespected.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Progeny of the Daughters of Dakṣa."



Chapter Seven



Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, Bṛhaspati.





As related in this chapter, Indra, the King of heaven, committed an offense at the feet of his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati. Bṛhaspati therefore left the demigods, who then had no priest. However, at the request of the demigods, Viśvarūpa, the son of the brāhmaṇa Tvaṣṭā, became their priest.





Once upon a time, Indra, the King of the demigods, was sitting with his wife Śacīdevī and being praised by various demigods like the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas when Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, entered the assembly. Indra, being too absorbed in material opulence, forgot himself and did not respect Bṛhaspati, who thus became aware of Indra's pride in his material opulence and immediately disappeared from the assembly to teach him a lesson. Indra became most repentant, understanding that because of his opulence he had forgotten to respect his spiritual master. He left the palace to beg pardon from his spiritual master, but could not find Bṛhaspati anywhere.





Because of his disrespectful behavior toward his spiritual master. Indra lost all his opulence and was conquered by the demons, who defeated the demigods in a great fight and occupied Indra's throne. King Indra, along with the other demigods, later took shelter of Lord Brahmā. Understanding the situation, Lord Brahmā chastised the demigods for their offense to their spiritual master. Following Lord Brahmā's orders, the demigods accepted Viśvarūpa, who was a brāhmaṇa and the son of Tvaṣṭā, as their priest. Then they performed yajñas under the priesthood of Viśvarūpa and were able to conquer the demons.





TEXT 1



śrī-rājovāca

kasya hetoḥ parityaktā

ācāryeṇātmanaḥ surāḥ

etad ācakṣva bhagavañ

chiṣyāṇām akramaṁ gurau

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-the King inquired; kasya hetoḥ-for what reason; parityaktāḥ-rejected; ācāryeṇa-by the spiritual master, Bṛhaspati; ātmanaḥ-of himself; surāḥ-all the demigods; etat-this; ācakṣva-kindly describe; bhagavan-O great sage (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); śiṣyāṇām-of the disciples; akramam-the offense; gurau-unto the spiritual master.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O great sage, why did the spiritual master of the demigods, Bṛhaspati, reject the demigods, who were his own disciples? What offense did the demigods commit against their spiritual master? Please describe to me this incident.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments:



saptame guruṇā tyaktair

devair daitya-parājitaiḥ

viśvarūpo gurutvena

vṛto brahmopadeśataḥ





"This Seventh Chapter describes how Bṛhaspati was offended by the demigods, how he left them and the demigods were defeated, and how the demigods, following the instructions of Lord Brahmā, accepted Viśvarūpa as the priest to perform their sacrifice."





TEXTS 2–8



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

indras tribhuvanaiśvarya-

madollaṅghita-satpathaḥ

marudbhir vasubhī rudrair

ādityair ṛbhubhir nṛpa

viśvedevaiś ca sādhyaiś ca



nāsatyābhyāṁ pariśritaḥ

siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvair

munibhir brahmavādibhiḥ

vidyādharāpsarobhiś ca



kinnaraiḥ patagoragaiḥ

niṣevyamāṇo maghavān

stūyamānaś ca bhārata

upagīyamāno lalitam



āsthānādhyāsanāśritaḥ

pāṇḍureṇātapatreṇa

candra-maṇḍala-cāruṇā

yuktaś cānyaiḥ pārameṣṭhyaiś



cāmara-vyajanādibhiḥ

virājamānaḥ paulamyā

sahārdhāsanayā bhṛśam

sa yadā paramācāryaṁ



devānām ātmanaś ca ha

nābhyanandata samprāptaṁ

pratyutthānāsanādibhiḥ

vācaspatiṁ muni-varaṁ



surāsura-namaskṛtam

noccacālāsanād indraḥ

paśyann api sabhāgatam

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied; indraḥ-King Indra; tri-bhuvana-aiśvarya-because of possessing all the material opulences of the three worlds; mada-due to pride; ullaṅghita-who has transgressed; sat-pathaḥ-the path of Vedic civilization; marudbhiḥ-by the wind demigods, known as the Maruts; vasubhiḥ-by the eight Vasus; rudraiḥ-by the eleven Rudras; ādityaiḥ-by the Ādityas; ṛbhubhiḥ-by the Ṛbhus; nṛpa-O King; viśvedevaiḥ ca-and by the Viśvadevas; sādhyaiḥ-by the Sādhyas; ca-also; nāsatyābhyām-by the two Aśvinī-kumāras; pariśritaḥ-surrounded; siddha-by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cāraṇa-the Cāraṇas; gandharvaiḥ-and the Gandharvas; munibhiḥ-by the great sages; brahmavādibhiḥ-by greatly learned impersonalist scholars; vidyādhara-apsarobhiḥ ca-and by the Vidyādharas and Apsarās; kinnaraiḥ-by the Kinnaras; pataga-uragaiḥ-by the Patagas (birds) and Uragas (snakes); niṣevyamāṇaḥ-being served; maghavān-King Indra; stūyamānaḥ ca-and being offered prayers; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; upagīyamānaḥ-being sung before; lalitam-very sweetly; āsthāna-in his assembly; adhyāsana-āśritaḥ-situated on the throne; pāṇḍureṇa-white; ātapatreṇa-with an umbrella over the head; candra-maṇḍala-cāruṇā-as beautiful as the circle of the moon; yuktaḥ-endowed; ca anyaiḥ-and by other; pārameṣṭhyaiḥ-symptoms of an exalted king; cāmara-by yak-tail; vyajana-ādibhiḥ-fans and other paraphernalia; virājamānaḥ-shining; paulamyā-his wife, Śacī; saha-with; ardha-āsanayā-who occupied half the throne; bhṛśam-greatly; saḥ-he (Indra); yadā-when; parama-ācāryam-the most exalted ācārya, spiritual master; devānām-of all the demigods; ātmanaḥ-of himself; ca-and; ha-indeed; na-not; abhyanandata-welcomed; samprāptam-having appeared in the assembly; pratyutthāna-by getting up from the throne; āsana-ādibhiḥ-and by a seat and other greetings; vācaspatim-the priest of the demigods, Bṛhaspati; muni-varam-the best of all the sages; sura-asura-namaskṛtam-who is respected by both the demigods and the asuras; na-not; uccacāla-did get up; āsanāt-from the throne; indraḥ-Indra; paśyan api-although seeing; sabhā-āgatam-entering the assembly.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, once upon a time, the King of heaven, Indra, being extremely proud because of his great opulence of the three worlds, transgressed the law of Vedic etiquette. Seated on his throne, he was surrounded by the Maruts, Vasus, Rudras, Ādityas, Ṛbhus, Viśvadevas, Sādhyas, Aśvinī-kumāras, Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas and by great saintly persons. Also surrounding him were the Vidyādharas, Apsarās, Kinnaras, Patagas [birds] and Uragas [snakes]. All of them were offering Indra their respects and services, and the Apsarās and Gandharvas were dancing and singing with very sweet musical instruments. Over Indra's head was a white umbrella as effulgent as the full moon. Fanned by yak-tail whisks and served with all the paraphernalia of a great king, Indra was sitting with his wife, Śacīdevī, who occupied half the throne, when the great sage Bṛhaspati appeared in that assembly. Bṛhaspati, the best of the sages, was the spiritual master of Indra and the demigods and was respected by the demigods and demons alike. Nevertheless, although Indra saw his spiritual master before him, he did not rise from his own seat or offer a seat to his spiritual master, nor did Indra offer him a respectful welcome. Indra did nothing to show him respect.





TEXT 9



tato nirgatya sahasā

kavir āṅgirasaḥ prabhuḥ

āyayau sva-gṛhaṁ tūṣṇīṁ

vidvān śrī-mada-vikriyām

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; nirgatya-going out; sahasā-suddenly; kaviḥ-the great learned sage; āṅgirasaḥ-Bṛhaspati; prabhuḥ-the master of the demigods; āyayau-returned; sva-gṛham-to his home; tūṣṇīm-being silent; vidvān-having known; śrī-mada-vikriyām-deterioration because of madness due to opulence.





Bṛhaspati knew everything that would happen in the future. Seeing Indra's transgression of etiquette, he completely understood that Indra was puffed up by his material opulence. Although able to curse Indra, he did not do so. Instead, he left the assembly and in silence returned to his home.





TEXT 10



tarhy eva pratibudhyendro

guru-helanam ātmanaḥ

garhayām āsa sadasi

svayam ātmānam ātmanā

SYNONYMS



tarhi-then, immediately; eva-indeed; pratibudhya-realizing; indraḥ-King Indra; guru-helanam-disrespect to the spiritual master; ātmanaḥ-his own; garhayām āsa-reproached; sadasi-in that assembly; svayam-personally; ātmānam-himself; ātmanā-by himself.





Indra, the King of heaven, could immediately understand his mistake. Realizing he had disrespected his spiritual master, he condemned himself in the presence of all the members of the assembly.





TEXT 11



aho bata mayāsādhu

kṛtaṁ vai dabhra-buddhinā

yan mayaiśvarya-mattena

guruḥ sadasi kātkṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; bata-indeed; mayā-by me; asādhu-disrespectful; kṛtam-the action done; vai-certainly; dabhra-buddhinā-being of less intelligence; yat-because; mayā-by me; aiśvarya-mattena-being very proud of material opulence; guruḥ-the spiritual master; sadasi-in this assembly; kāt-kṛtaḥ-mistreated.





Alas, what a regrettable deed I have committed because of my lack of intelligence and my pride in my material opulences. I failed to show respect to my spiritual master when he entered this assembly, and thus I have insulted him.





TEXT 12



ko gṛdhyet paṇḍito lakṣmīṁ

tripiṣṭapa-pater api

yayāham āsuraṁ bhāvaṁ

nīto 'dya vibudheśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-who; gṛdhyet-would accept; paṇḍitaḥ-a learned man; lakṣmīm-opulences; tri-piṣṭa-pa-pateḥ api-although I am the King of the demigods; yayā-by which; aham-I; āsuram-demoniac; bhāvam-mentality; nītaḥ-carried to; adya-now; vibudha-of the demigods, who are in the mode of goodness; īśvaraḥ-the King.





Although I am King of the demigods, who are situated in the mode of goodness, I was proud of a little opulence and polluted by false ego. Under the circumstances, who in this world would accept such riches at the risk of falling down ? Alas! I condemn my wealth and opulence.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye: "O my Lord, I do not aspire for material opulence or wealth, nor do I want a great number of followers to accept me as their leader, nor do I want a very beautiful wife to please me." Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi: "I do not even want liberation. All I want, life after life, is to be a faithful servant of Your Lordship." According to the laws of nature, when one is extremely opulent one becomes degraded, and this is true both individually and collectively. The demigods are situated in the mode of goodness, but sometimes even one who is situated in such an exalted position as King Indra, the king of all the demigods, falls down because of material opulence. We are now actually seeing this in America. The entire American nation has tried to advance in material opulence without striving to produce ideal human beings. The result is that Americans are now regretting the wholesale criminality of American society and are wondering how America has become so lawless and unmanageable. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.31), na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum: persons who are unenlightened do not know the aim of life, which is to return home, back to Godhead. Therefore, both individually and collectively, they try to enjoy so-called material comforts, and they become addicted to wine and women. The men produced in such a society are less than fourth class. They are the unwanted population known as varṇa-saṅkara, and as stated in Bhagavad-gītā, an increase of varṇa-saṅkara population creates a hellish society. This is the society in which Americans now find themselves.



Fortunately, however, the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement has come to America, and many fortunate young men are giving serious attention to this movement, which is creating ideal men of first-class character, men who completely refrain from meat-eating, illicit sex, intoxication and gambling. If the American people are serious about curbing the degraded criminal life of their nation, they must take to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and try to create the kind of human society advised in Bhagavad-gītā (cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]). They must divide their society into first-class men, second-class men, third-class men and fourth-class men. Since they are now creating only men who are less than fourth class, how can they avoid the dangers of a criminal society? Long, long ago, Lord Indra regretted his disrespect to his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati. Similarly, it is advised that the American people regret their mistaken advancement in civilization. They should take advice from the spiritual master, the representative of Kṛṣṇa. If they do so, they will be happy, and theirs will be an ideal nation to lead the entire world.





TEXT 13



yaḥ pārameṣṭhyaṁ dhiṣaṇam

adhitiṣṭhan na kañcana

pratyuttiṣṭhed iti brūyur

dharmaṁ te na paraṁ viduḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; pārameṣṭhyam-royal; dhiṣaṇam-throne; adhitiṣṭhan-sitting on; na-not; kañcana-anyone; pratyuttiṣṭhet-should rise before; iti-thus; brūyuḥ-those who say; dharmam-the codes of religion; te-they; na-not; param-higher; viduḥ-know.





If a person says, "One who is situated on the exalted throne of a king should not stand up to show respect to another king or a brāhmaṇa," it is to be understood that he does not know the superior religious principles.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says in this regard that when a president or king is sitting on his throne, he does not need to show respect to everyone who comes within his assembly, but he must show respect to superiors like his spiritual master, brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas. There are many examples of how he should act. When Lord Kṛṣṇa was sitting on His throne and Nārada fortunately entered His assembly, even Lord Kṛṣṇa immediately stood up with His officers and ministers to offer respectful obeisances to Nārada. Nārada knew that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Kṛṣṇa knew that Nārada was His devotee, but although Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord and Nārada is the Lord's devotee, the Lord observed the religious etiquette. Since Nārada was a brahmacārī, a brāhmaṇa and an exalted devotee, even Kṛṣṇa, while acting as a king, offered His respectful obeisances unto Nārada. Such is the conduct visible in the Vedic civilization. A civilization in which the people do not know how the representative of Nārada and Kṛṣṇa should be respected, how society should be formed and how one should advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness-a society concerned only with manufacturing new cars and new skyscrapers every year and then breaking them to pieces and making new ones-may be technologically advanced, but it is not a human civilization. A human civilization is advanced when its people follow the cātur-varṇya system, the system of four orders of life. There must be ideal, first-class men to act as advisors, second-class men to act as administrators, third-class men to produce food and protect cows, and fourth-class men who obey the three higher classes of society. One who does not follow the standard system of society should be considered a fifth-class man. A society without Vedic laws and regulations will not be very helpful to humanity. As stated in this verse, dharmaṁ te na paraṁ viduḥ: such a society does not know the aim of life and the highest principle of religion.





TEXT 14



teṣāṁ kupatha-deṣṭṝṇāṁ

patatāṁ tamasi hy adhaḥ

ye śraddadhyur vacas te vai

majjanty aśma-plavā iva

SYNONYMS



teṣām-of them (the misleaders); ku-patha-deṣṭṝṇām-who show the path of danger; patatām-themselves falling; tamasi-in darkness; hi-indeed; adhaḥ-down; ye-anyone who; śraddadhyuḥ-place faith in; vacaḥ-the words; te-they; vai-indeed; majjanti-sink; aśma-plavāḥ-boats made of stone; iva-like.





Leaders who have fallen into ignorance and who mislead people by directing them to the path of destruction [as described in the previous verse] are, in effect, boarding a stone boat, and so too are those who blindly follow them. A stone boat would be unable to float and would sink in the water with its passengers. Similarly, those who mislead people go to hell, and their followers go with them.





As stated in the Vedic literature (Bhāg. 11.20.17):



nṛ-deham ādyaṁ sulabhaṁ sudurlabhaṁ

plavaṁ sukalpaṁ guru-karṇa-dhāram





We, the conditioned souls, have fallen in the ocean of nescience, but the human body fortunately provides us a good opportunity to cross the ocean because the human body is like a very good boat. When directed by a spiritual master acting as the captain, the boat can very easily cross the ocean. Furthermore, the boat is helped across by favorable winds, which are the instructions of Vedic knowledge. If one does not take advantage of all these facilities to cross the ocean of nescience, he is certainly committing suicide.



One who boards a boat made of stone is doomed. To be elevated to the stage of perfection, humanity must first give up false leaders who present boats of stone. All of human society is in such a dangerous position that to be rescued it must abide by the standard instructions of the Vedas. The cream of these instructions appears in the form of Bhagavad-gītā. One should not take shelter of any other instructions, for Bhagavad-gītā gives direct instructions on how to fulfill the aim of human life. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Give up all other processes of religion and simply surrender to Me." Even if one does not accept Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His instructions are so exalted and beneficial for humanity that if one follows His instructions one will be saved. Otherwise one will be cheated by unauthorized meditation and gymnastic methods of yoga. Thus one will board a boat of stone. which will sink and drown all its passengers. Unfortunately. although the American people are extremely eager to get out of materialistic chaos, they are sometimes found to patronize the makers of stone boats. That will not help them. They must take the proper boat offered by Kṛṣṇa in the form of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Then they will be easily saved. In this regard Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments: aśmamayaḥ plavo yeṣāṁ te yathā majjantaṁ plavam anumajjanti tatheti rāja-nīty-upadeṣṭṛṣu sva-sabhyeṣu kopo vyañjitaḥ. If society is guided by political diplomacy, with one nation maneuvering against another, it will certainly sink like a stone boat. political maneuvering and diplomacy will not save human society. People must take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness to understand the aim of life, to understand God. and to fulfill the human mission.





TEXT 15



athāham amarācāryam

agādha-dhiṣaṇaṁ dvijam

prasādayiṣye niśaṭhaḥ

śīrṣṇā tac-caraṇaṁ spṛśan

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; aham-I; amara-ācāryam-the spiritual master of the demigods; agādha-dhiṣaṇam-whose spiritual knowledge is deep; dvijam-the perfect brāhmaṇa; prasādayiṣye-I shall please; niśaṭhaḥ-without duplicity; śīrṣṇā-with my head; tat-caraṇam-his lotus feet; spṛśan-touching.





King Indra said: Therefore with great frankness and without duplicity I shall now bow my head at the lotus feet of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods. Because he is in the mode of goodness, he is fully aware of all knowledge and is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Now I shall touch his lotus feet and offer my obeisances unto him to try to satisfy him.





Coming to his senses, King Indra realized that he was not a very sincere disciple of his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati. Therefore he decided that henceforward he would be niśaṭha, nonduplicitous. Niśaṭhaḥ śīrṣṇa-tac-caraṇaṁ spṛśan: he decided to touch his head to the feet of his spiritual master. From this example, we should learn this principle enunciated by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi



"By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement." A disciple should never be a hypocrite or be unfaithful to his spiritual master. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.27), the spiritual master is also called ācārya. Ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān: the Supreme Personality of Godhead says that one should respect the spiritual master, accepting him as the Lord Himself. Nāvamanyeta karhicit: one should not disrespect the ācārya at any time. Na martya-buddhyāsūyeta: one should never think the ācārya an ordinary person. Familiarity sometimes breeds contempt, but one should be very careful in one's dealings with the ācārya. Agādha-dhiṣaṇaṁ dvijam: the ācārya is a perfect brāhmaṇa and has unlimited intelligence in guiding the activities of his disciple. Therefore Kṛṣṇa advises in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34):



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ





"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." One should fully surrender unto the spiritual master. and with service (sevayā) one should approach him for further spiritual enlightenment.





TEXT 16



evaṁ cintayatas tasya

maghono bhagavān gṛhāt

bṛhaspatir gato 'dṛṣṭāṁ

gatim adhyātma-māyayā

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; cintayataḥ-while thinking very seriously; tasya-he; maghonaḥ-Indra; bhagavān-the most powerful; gṛhāt-from his home; bṛhaspatiḥ-Bṛhaspati; gataḥ-went; adṛṣṭām-invisible; gatim-to a state; adhyātma-due to being highly elevated in spiritual consciousness; māyayā-by his potency.





While Indra, the King of the demigods, thought in this way and repented in his own assembly, Bṛhaspati, the most powerful spiritual master, understood his mind. Thus he became invisible to Indra and left home, for Bṛhaspati was spiritually more powerful than King Indra.





TEXT 17



guror nādhigataḥ saṁjñāṁ

parīkṣan bhagavān svarāṭ

dhyāyan dhiyā surair yuktaḥ

śarma nālabhatātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



guroḥ-of his spiritual master; na-not; adhigataḥ-finding; saṁjñām-trace; parīkṣan-searching vigorously all around; bhagavān-the most powerful Indra; svarāṭ-independent; dhyāyan-meditating; dhiyā-by wisdom; suraiḥ-by the demigods; yuktaḥ-surrounded; śarma-peace; na-not; alabhata-obtained; ātmanaḥ-of the mind.





Although Indra searched vigorously with the assistance of the other demigods, he could not find Bṛhaspati. Then Indra thought, "Alas, my spiritual master has become dissatisfied with me, and now I have no means of achieving good fortune." Although Indra was surrounded by demigods, he could not find peace of mind.





TEXT 18



tac chrutvaivāsurāḥ sarva

āśrityauśanasaṁ matam

devān pratyudyamaṁ cakrur

durmadā ātatāyinaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat śrutvā-hearing that news; eva-indeed; asurāḥ-the demons; sarve-all; āśritya-taking shelter of; auśanasam-of Śukrācārya; matam-the instruction; devān-the demigods; pratyudyamam-action against; cakruḥ-performed; durmadāḥ-not very intelligent; ātatāyinaḥ-equipped with arms for fighting.





Hearing of the pitiable condition of King Indra, the demons, following the instructions of their guru, Śukrācārya, equipped themselves with weapons and declared war against the demigods.





TEXT 19



tair visṛṣṭeṣubhis tīkṣṇair

nirbhinnāṅgoru-bāhavaḥ

brahmāṇaṁ śaraṇaṁ jagmuḥ

sahendrā nata-kandharāḥ

SYNONYMS



taiḥ-by them (the demons); visṛṣṭa-thrown; iṣubhiḥ-by the arrows; tīkṣṇaiḥ-very sharp; nirbhinna-pierced all over; aṅga-bodies; uru-thighs; bāhavaḥ-and arms; brahmāṇam-of Lord Brahmā; śaraṇam-the shelter; jagmuḥ-approached; saha-indrāḥ-with King Indra; nata-kandharāḥ-their heads bent downward.





The demigods' heads, thighs and arms and the other parts of their bodies were injured by the sharp arrows of the demons. The demigods, headed by Indra, saw no other course than to immediately approach Lord Brahmā with bowed heads for shelter and proper instruction.





TEXT 20



tāṁs tathābhyarditān vīkṣya

bhagavān ātmabhūr ajaḥ

kṛpayā parayā deva

uvāca parisāntvayan

SYNONYMS



tān-them (the demigods); tathā-in that way; abhyarditān-afflicted by the weapons of the demons; vīkṣya-seeing; bhagavān-the most powerful; ātma-bhūḥ-Lord Brahmā; ajaḥ-who was not born like an ordinary human being; kṛpayā-out of causeless mercy; parayā-great; devaḥ-Lord Brahmā; uvāca-said; parisāntvayan-pacifying them.





When the most powerful Lord Brahmā saw the demigods coming toward him, their bodies gravely injured by the arrows of the demons, he pacified them by his great causeless mercy and spoke as follows.





TEXT 21



śrī-brahmovāca

aho bata sura-śreṣṭhā

hy abhadraṁ vaḥ kṛtaṁ mahat

brahmiṣṭhaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ dāntam

aiśvaryān nābhyanandata

SYNONYMS



śrī-brahmā uvāca-Lord Brahmā said; aho-alas; bata-it is very astonishing; sura-śreṣṭhāḥ-O best of the demigods; hi-indeed; abhadram-injustice; vaḥ-by you; kṛtam-done; mahat-great; brahmiṣṭham-a person fully obedient to the Supreme Brahman; brāhmaṇam-a brāhmaṇa; dāntam-who has fully controlled the mind and senses; aiśvaryāt-because of your material opulence; na-not; abhyanandata-welcomed properly.





Lord Brahmā said: O best of the demigods, unfortunately, because of madness resulting from your material opulence, you failed to receive Bṛhaspati properly when he came to your assembly. Because he is aware of the Supreme Brahman and fully in control of his senses, he is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Therefore it is very astonishing that you have acted impudently toward him.





Lord Brahmā recognized the brahminical qualifications of Bṛhaspati, who was the spiritual master of the demigods because of his awareness of the Supreme Brahman. Bṛhaspati was very much in control of his senses and mind, and therefore he was a most qualified brāhmaṇa. Lord Brahmā chastised the demigods for not properly respecting this brāhmaṇa, who was their guru. Lord Brahmā wanted to impress upon the demigods that one's guru should not be disrespected under any circumstances. When Bṛhaspati entered the assembly of the demigods, they and their king, Indra, took him for granted. Since he came every day, they thought, they did not need to show him special respect. As it is said, familiarity breeds contempt. Being very much displeased, Bṛhaspati immediately left Indra's palace. Thus all the demigods, headed by Indra, became offenders at the lotus feet of Bṛhaspati, and Lord Brahmā, being aware of this, condemned their neglect. In a song we sing every day, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, cakṣu-dāna dila yei, janme janme prabhu sei: the guru gives spiritual insight to the disciple, and therefore the guru should be considered his master, life after life. Under no circumstances should the guru be disrespected, but the demigods, being puffed up by their material possessions, were disrespectful to their guru. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.27) advises, ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān nāvamanyeta karhicit/ na martya-buddhyāsūyeta: the ācārya should always be offered respectful obeisances; one should never envy the ācārya, considering him an ordinary human being.





TEXT 22



tasyāyam anayasyāsīt

parebhyo vaḥ parābhavaḥ

prakṣīṇebhyaḥ sva-vairibhyaḥ

samṛddhānāṁ ca yat surāḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-that; ayam-this; anayasya-of your ungrateful activity; āsīt-was; parebhyaḥ-by others; vaḥ-of all of you; parābhavaḥ-the defeat; prakṣīṇebhyaḥ-although they were weak; sva-vairibhyaḥ-by your own enemies, who were previously defeated by you; samṛddhānām-being yourselves very opulent; ca-and; yat-which; surāḥ-O demigods.





Because of your misbehavior toward Bṛhaspati, you have been defeated by the demons. My dear demigods, since the demons were weak, having been defeated by you several times, how else could you, who were so advanced in opulence, be defeated by them?





The devas are celebrated for fighting with the asuras perpetually. In such fights the asuras were always defeated, but this time the demigods were defeated. Why? The reason, as stated here, was that they had offended their spiritual master. Their impudent disrespect of their spiritual master was the cause of their defeat by the demons. As stated in the śāstras, when one disrespects a respectable superior, one loses his longevity and the results of his pious activities, and in this way one is degraded.





TEXT 23



maghavan dviṣataḥ paśya

prakṣīṇān gurv-atikramāt

sampraty upacitān bhūyaḥ

kāvyam ārādhya bhaktitaḥ

ādadīran nilayanaṁ

mamāpi bhṛgu-devatāḥ

SYNONYMS



maghavan-O Indra; dviṣataḥ-your enemies; paśya-just see; prakṣīṇān-being very weak (formerly); guru-atikramāt-because of disrespecting their guru, Śukrācārya; samprati-at the present moment; upacitān-powerful; bhūyaḥ-again; kāvyam-their spiritual master, Śukrācārya; ārādhya-worshiping; bhaktitaḥ-with great devotion; ādadīran-may take away; nilayanam-the abode, Satyaloka; mama-my; api-even; bhṛgu-devatāḥ-who are now strong devotees of Śukrācārya, the disciple of Bhṛgu.





O Indra, your enemies, the demons, were extremely weak because of their disrespect toward Śukrācārya, but since they have now worshiped Śukrācārya with great devotion, they have again become powerful. By their devotion to Śukrācārya, they have increased their strength so much that now they are even able to easily seize my abode from me.





Lord Brahmā wanted to point out to the demigods that by the strength of the guru one can become most powerful within this world, and by the displeasure of the guru one can lose everything. This is confirmed by the song of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi



"By the mercy of the spiritual master one is benedicted by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make any advancement." Although the demons are insignificant in comparison to Lord Brahmā, because of the strength of their guru they were so powerful that they could even seize Brahmaloka from Lord Brahmā. We therefore pray to the spiritual master:



mūkaṁ karoti vācālaṁ

paṅguṁ laṅghayate girim

yat-kṛpā tam ahaṁ vande

śrī-guruṁ dīna-tāraṇam





By the mercy of the guru, even a dumb man can become the greatest orator, and even a lame man can cross mountains. As advised by Lord Brahmā, one should remember this śāstric injunction if one desires success in his life.





TEXT 24



tripiṣṭapaṁ kiṁ gaṇayanty abhedya-

mantrā bhṛgūṇām anuśikṣitārthāḥ

na vipra-govinda-gav-īśvarāṇāṁ

bhavanty abhadrāṇi nareśvarāṇām

SYNONYMS



tri-piṣṭa-pam-all the demigods, including Lord Brahmā; kim-what; gaṇayanti-they care for; abhedya-mantrāḥ-whose determination to carry out the orders of the spiritual master is unbreakable; bhṛgūṇām-of the disciples of Bhṛgu Muni like Śukrācārya; anuśikṣita-arthāḥ-deciding to follow the instructions; na-not; vipra-the brāhmaṇas; govinda-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; go-the cows; īśvarāṇām-of persons favoring or considering worshipable; bhavanti-are; abhadrāṇi-any misfortunes; nara-īśvarāṇām-or of kings who follow this principle.





Because of their firm determination to follow the instructions of Śukrācārya, his disciples, the demons, are now unconcerned about the demigods. In fact, kings or others who have determined faith in the mercy of brāhmaṇas, cows and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and who always worship these three are always strong in their position.





From the instructions of Lord Brahmā it is understood that everyone should very faithfully worship the brāhmaṇas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cows. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca: He is always very kind to cows and brāhmaṇas. Therefore one who worships Govinda must satisfy Him by worshiping the brāhmaṇas and cows. If a government worships the brāhmaṇas, the cows and Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, it is never defeated anywhere; otherwise it must always be defeated and condemned everywhere. At the present moment, all over the world, governments have no respect for brāhmaṇas, cows and Govinda, and consequently there are chaotic conditions all over the world. In summary, although the demigods were very powerful in material opulence, the demons defeated them in battle because the demigods had behaved disrespectfully toward a brāhmaṇa, Bṛhaspati, who was their spiritual master.





TEXT 25



tad viśvarūpaṁ bhajatāśu vipraṁ

tapasvinaṁ tvāṣṭram athātmavantam

sabhājito 'rthān sa vidhāsyate vo

yadi kṣamiṣyadhvam utāsya karma

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; viśvarūpam-Viśvarūpa; bhajata-just worship as guru; āśu-immediately; vipram-who is a perfect brāhmaṇa; tapasvinam-undergoing great austerities and penances; tvāṣṭram-the son of Tvaṣṭā; atha-as well as; ātma-vantam-very independent; sabhājitaḥ-being worshiped; arthān-the interests; saḥ-he; vidhāsyate-will execute; vaḥ-of all of you; yadi-if; kṣamiṣyadhvam-you tolerate; uta-indeed; asya-his; karma-activities (to support the Daityas).





O demigods, I instruct you to approach Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā, and accept him as your guru. He is a pure and very powerful brāhmaṇa undergoing austerity and penances. Pleased by your worship, he will fulfill your desires, provided that you tolerate his being inclined to side with the demons.





Lord Brahmā advised the demigods to accept the son of Tvaṣṭā as their spiritual master although he was always inclined toward the benefit of the asuras.





TEXT 26



śrī-śuka uvāca

ta evam uditā rājan

brahmaṇā vigata-jvarāḥ

ṛṣiṁ tvāṣṭram upavrajya

pariṣvajyedam abruvan

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; te-all the demigods; evam-thus; uditāḥ-being advised; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; brahmaṇā-by Lord Brahmā; vigata-jvarāḥ-being relieved from the aggrievement caused by the demons; ṛṣim-the great sage; tvāṣṭram-to the son of Tvaṣṭā; upavrajya-going; pariṣvajya-embracing; idam-this; abruvan-spoke.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus advised by Lord Brahmā and relieved of their anxiety, all the demigods went to the sage Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā. My dear King, they embraced him and spoke as follows.





TEXT 27



śrī-devā ūcuḥ

vayaṁ te 'tithayaḥ prāptā

āśramaṁ bhadram astu te

kāmaḥ sampādyatāṁ tāta

pitṝṇāṁ samayocitaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ-the demigods said; vayam-we; te-your; atithayaḥ-guests; prāptāḥ-arrived at; āśramam-your abode; bhadram-good fortune; astu-let there be; te-unto you; kāmaḥ-the desire; sampādyatām-let it be executed; tāta-O darling; pitṝṇām-of us, who are just like your fathers; samayocitaḥ-suitable to the present time.





The demigods said: Beloved Viśvarūpa, may there be all good fortune for you. We, the demigods, have come to your āśrama as your guests. Please try to fulfill our desires according to the time, since we are on the level of your parents.





TEXT 28



putrāṇāṁ hi paro dharmaḥ

pitṛ-śuśrūṣaṇaṁ satām

api putravatāṁ brahman

kim uta brahmacāriṇām

SYNONYMS



putrāṇām-of sons; hi-indeed; paraḥ-superior; dharmaḥ-religious principle; pitṛ-śuśrūṣaṇam-the service of the parents; satām-good; api-even; putra-vatām-of those who have sons; brahman-O dear brāhmaṇa; kim uta-what to speak; brahmacāriṇām-of brahmacārīs.





O brāhmaṇa, the highest duty of a son, even though he has sons of his own, is to serve his parents, and what to speak of a son who is a brahmacārī?





TEXTS 29–30



ācāryo brahmaṇo mūrtiḥ

pitā mūrtiḥ prajāpateḥ

bhrātā marutpater mūrtir

mātā sākṣāt kṣites tanuḥ

dayāyā bhaginī mūrtir



dharmasyātmātithiḥ svayam

agner abhyāgato mūrtiḥ

sarva-bhūtāni cātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



ācāryaḥ-the teacher or spiritual master who instructs Vedic knowledge by his personal behavior; brahmaṇaḥ-of all the Vedas; mūrtiḥ-the personification; pitā-the father; mūrtiḥ-the personification; prajāpateḥ-of Lord Brahmā; bhrātā-the brother; marut-pateḥ mūrtiḥ-the personification of Indra; mātā-the mother; sākṣāt-directly; kṣiteḥ-of the earth; tanuḥ-the body; dayāyāḥ-of mercy; bhaginī-the sister; mūrtiḥ-the personification; dharmasya-of religious principles; ātma-the self; atithiḥ-the guest; svayam-personally; agneḥ-of the fire-god; abhyāgataḥ-the invited guest; mūrtiḥ-the personification; sarva-bhūtāni-all living entities; ca-and; ātmanaḥ-of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu.





The ācārya, the spiritual master who teaches all the Vedic knowledge and gives initiation by offering the sacred thread, is the personification of all the Vedas. Similarly, a father personifies Lord Brahmā; a brother, King Indra; a mother, the planet earth; and a sister, mercy. A guest personifies religious principles, an invited guest personifies the demigod Agni, and all living entities personify Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





According to the moral instructions of Cāṇakya Paṇḍita, ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu: one should observe all living entities to be on the same level as oneself. This means that no one should be neglected as inferior; because Paramātmā is seated in everyone's body, everyone should be respected as a temple of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This verse describes the different ways in which one should respect a guru, a father, a brother, a sister, a guest and so on.





TEXT 31



tasmāt pitṝṇām ārtānām

ārtiṁ para-parābhavam

tapasāpanayaṁs tāta

sandeśaṁ kartum arhasi

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; pitṝṇām-of the parents; ārtānām-who are in distress; ārtim-the grief; para-parābhavam-being defeated by the enemies; tapasā-by the strength of your austerities; apanayan-taking away; tāta-O dear son; sandeśam-our desire; kartum arhasi-you deserve to execute.





Dear son, we have been defeated by our enemies, and therefore we are very much aggrieved. Please mercifully fulfill our desires by relieving our distress through the strength of your austerities. Please fulfill our prayers.





TEXT 32



vṛṇīmahe tvopādhyāyaṁ

brahmiṣṭhaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ gurum

yathāñjasā vijeṣyāmaḥ

sapatnāṁs tava tejasā

SYNONYMS



vṛṇīmahe-we choose; tvā-you; upādhyāyam-as teacher and spiritual master; brahmiṣṭham-being perfectly aware of the Supreme Brahman; brāhmaṇam-a qualified brāhmaṇa; gurum-the perfect spiritual master; yathā-so that; añjasā-very easily; vijeṣyāmaḥ-we shall defeat; sapatnān-our rivals; tava-your; tejasā-by the power of austerity.





Since you are completely aware of the Supreme Brahman, you are a perfect brāhmaṇa, and therefore you are the spiritual master of all orders of life. We accept you as our spiritual master and director so that by the power of your austerity we may easily defeat the enemies who have conquered us.





One must approach a particular type of guru to execute a particular type of duty. Therefore although Viśvarūpa was inferior to the demigods, the demigods accepted him as their guru to conquer the demons.





TEXT 33



na garhayanti hy artheṣu

yaviṣṭhāṅghry-abhivādanam

chandobhyo 'nyatra na brahman

vayo jyaiṣṭhyasya kāraṇam

SYNONYMS



na-not; garhayanti-forbid; hi-indeed; artheṣu-in acquiring interests; yaviṣṭha-aṅghri-at the lotus feet of a junior; abhivādanam-offering obeisances; chandobhyaḥ-the Vedic mantras; anyatra-apart from; na-not; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; vayaḥ-age; jyaiṣṭhyasya-of seniority; kāraṇam-the cause.





The demigods continued: Do not fear criticism for being younger than us. Such etiquette does not apply in regard to Vedic mantras. Except in relationship to Vedic mantras, seniority is determined by age, but one may offer respectful obeisances even to a younger person who is advanced in chanting Vedic mantras. Therefore although you are junior in relationship to us, you may become our priest without hesitation.





It is said, vṛddhatvaṁ vayasā vinā: one may be senior without being advanced in age. Even if one is not old, one gains seniority if he is senior in knowledge. Viśvarūpa was junior in relationship to the demigods because he was their nephew, but the demigods wanted to accept him as their priest, and therefore he would have to accept obeisances from them. The demigods explained that this should not be a cause for hesitation; he could become their priest because he was advanced in Vedic knowledge. Similarly. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita advises, nīcād apy uttamaṁ jñānam: one may accept education from a member of a lower social order. The brāhmaṇas, the members of the most elevated varṇa, are teachers, but a person in a lower family, such as a family of kṣatriyas, vaiśyas or even śūdras, may be accepted as a teacher if he has knowledge. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu approved of this when He expressed this opinion before Rāmānanda Rāya (Cc. Madhya 8.128):



kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei 'guru' haya





It does not matter whether one is a brāhmaṇa, śūdra, gṛhastha or sannyāsī. These are all material designations. A spiritually advanced person has nothing to do with such designations. Therefore, if one is advanced in the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, regardless of his position in human society, he may become a spiritual master.





TEXT 34



śrī-ṛṣir uvāca

abhyarthitaḥ sura-gaṇaiḥ

paurahitye mahā-tapāḥ

sa viśvarūpas tān āha

prasannaḥ ślakṣṇayā girā

SYNONYMS



śrī-ṛṣiḥ uvāca-Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; abhyarthitaḥ-being requested; sura-gaṇaiḥ-by the demigods; paurahitye-in accepting the priesthood; mahā-tapāḥ-highly advanced in austerity and penances; saḥ-he; viśvarūpaḥ-Viśvarūpa; tān-to the demigods; āha-spoke; prasannaḥ-being satisfied; ślakṣṇayā-sweet; girā-with words.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When all the demigods requested the great Viśvarūpa to be their priest, Viśvarūpa, who was advanced in austerities, was very pleased. He replied to them as follows.





TEXT 35



śrī-viśvarūpa uvāca

vigarhitaṁ dharma-śīlair

brahmavarca-upavyayam

kathaṁ nu mad-vidho nāthā

lokeśair abhiyācitam

pratyākhyāsyati tac-chiṣyaḥ

sa eva svārtha ucyate

SYNONYMS



śrī-viśvarūpaḥ uvāca-Śrī Viśvarūpa said; vigarhitam-condemned; dharma-śīlaiḥ-by persons respectful to the religious principles; brahma-varcaḥ-of brahminical strength or power; upavyayam-causes loss; katham-how; nu-indeed; mat-vidhaḥ-a person like me; nāthāḥ-O lords; loka-īśaiḥ-by the ruling powers of different planets; abhiyācitam-request; pratyākhyāsyati-will refuse; tat-śiṣyaḥ-who is on the level of their disciple; saḥ-that; eva-indeed; sva-arthaḥ-real interest; ucyate-is described as.





Śrī Viśvarūpa said: O demigods, although the acceptance of priesthood is decried as causing the loss of previously acquired brahminical power, how can someone like me refuse to accept your personal request? You are all exalted commanders of the entire universe. I am your disciple and must take many lessons from you. Therefore I cannot refuse you. I must agree for my own benefit.





The professions of a qualified brāhmaṇa are paṭhana, pāṭhana, yajana, yājana, dāna and pratigraha. The words yajana and yājana mean that a brāhmaṇa becomes the priest of the populace for the sake of their elevation. One who accepts the post of spiritual master neutralizes the sinful reactions of the yajamāna, the one on whose behalf he performs yajña. Thus the results of the pious acts previously performed by the priest or spiritual master are diminished. Therefore priesthood is not accepted by learned brāhmaṇas. Nevertheless, the greatly learned brāhmaṇa Viśvarūpa became the priest of the demigods because of his profound respect for them.





TEXT 36



akiñcanānāṁ hi dhanaṁ śiloñchanaṁ

teneha nirvartita-sādhu-satkriyaḥ

kathaṁ vigarhyaṁ nu karomy adhīśvarāḥ

paurodhasaṁ hṛṣyati yena durmatiḥ

SYNONYMS



akiñcanānām-of persons who have taken to austerities and penances to become detached from worldly possessions; hi-certainly; dhanam-the wealth; śila-the collecting of grains left in the field; uñchanam-and the collecting of grains left in the wholesale marketplace; tena-by that means; iha-here; nirvartita-accomplishing; sādhu-of the exalted devotees; sat-kriyaḥ-all the pious activities; katham-how; vigarhyam-reproachable; nu-indeed; karomi-I shall execute; adhīśvarāḥ-O great governors of the planetary systems; paurodhasam-the duty of priesthood; hṛṣyati-is pleased; yena-by which; durmatiḥ-one who is less intelligent.





O exalted governors of various planets, the true brāhmaṇa, who has no material possessions, maintains himself by the profession of accepting śiloñchana. In other words, he picks up grains left in the field and on the ground in the wholesale marketplace. By this means, householder brāhmaṇas who actually abide by the principles of austerity and penance maintain themselves and their families and perform all necessary pious activities. A brāhmaṇa who desires to achieve happiness by gaining wealth through professional priesthood must certainly have a very low mind. How shall I accept such priesthood?





A first-class brāhmaṇa does not accept any rewards from his disciples or yajamānas. Practicing austerities and penances, he instead goes to the agricultural field and collects food grains left by the agriculturalists to be collected by brāhmaṇas. Similarly, such brāhmaṇas go to marketplaces where grains are purchased and sold wholesale, and there they collect grains left by the merchants. In this way, such exalted brāhmaṇas maintain their bodies and families. Such priests never demand anything from their disciples to live in opulence, imitating kṣatriyas or vaiśyas. In other words, a pure brāhmaṇa voluntarily accepts a life of poverty and lives in complete dependence on the mercy of the Lord. Not very many years ago, a brāhmaṇa in Kṛṣṇanagara, near Navadvīpa, was offered some help from the local Zamindar, Vraja Kṛṣṇacandra. The brāhmaṇa refused to accept the help. He said that since he was very happy in his householder life, taking rice given by his disciples and cooking vegetables of tamarind leaves, there was no question of taking help from the Zamindar. The conclusion is that although a brāhmaṇa may receive much opulence from his disciples, he should not utilize the rewards of his priesthood for his personal benefit; he must use them for the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 37



tathāpi na pratibrūyāṁ

gurubhiḥ prārthitaṁ kiyat

bhavatāṁ prārthitaṁ sarvaṁ

prāṇair arthaiś ca sādhaye

SYNONYMS



tathā api-still; na-not; pratibrūyām-I may refuse; gurubhiḥ-by persons on the level of my spiritual master; prārthitam-request; kiyat-of small value; bhavatām-of all of you; prārthitam-the desire; sarvam-whole; prāṇaiḥ-by my life; arthaiḥ-by my possessions; ca-also; sādhaye-I shall execute.





All of you are my superiors. Therefore although accepting priesthood is sometimes reproachable, I cannot refuse even a small request from you. I agree to be your priest. I shall fulfill your request by dedicating my life and possessions.





TEXT 38



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

tebhya evaṁ pratiśrutya

viśvarūpo mahā-tapāḥ

paurahityaṁ vṛtaś cakre

parameṇa samādhinā

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tebhyaḥ-unto them (the demigods); evam-thus; pratiśrutya-promising; viśvarūpaḥ-Viśvarūpa; mahā-tapāḥ-the most exalted personality; paurahityam-the priesthood; vṛtaḥ-surrounded by them; cakre-executed; parameṇa-supreme; samādhinā-with attention.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, after making this promise to the demigods, the exalted Viśvarūpa, surrounded by the demigods, performed the necessary priestly activities with great enthusiasm and attention.





The word samādhinā is very important. Samādhi means complete absorption with an undiverted mind. Viśvarūpa, who was a most learned brāhmaṇa, not only accepted the request of the demigods, but took their request seriously and performed the activities of priesthood with an undiverted mind. In other words, he accepted the priesthood not for material gain, but to profit the demigods. Such is the duty of a priest. The word puraḥ means "family," and hita means "benefit." Thus the word purohita indicates that the priest is the well-wisher of the family. Another meaning of the word puraḥ is "first." A priest's first duty is to see that his disciples benefit spiritually and materially by all means. Then he is satisfied. A priest should never be interested in performing Vedic rituals for his personal benefit.





TEXT 39



sura-dviṣāṁ śriyaṁ guptām

auśanasyāpi vidyayā

ācchidyādān mahendrāya

vaiṣṇavyā vidyayā vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



sura-dviṣām-of the enemies of the demigods; śriyam-the opulence; guptām-protected; auśanasya-of Śukrācārya; api-although; vidyayā-by the talents; ācchidya-collecting; adāt-delivered; mahā-indrāya-unto King Indra; vaiṣṇavyā-of Lord Viṣṇu; vidyayā-by a prayer; vibhuḥ-the most powerful Viśvarūpa.





The opulence of the demons, who are generally known as the enemies of the demigods, was protected by the talents and tactics of Śukrācārya, but Viśvarūpa, who was most powerful, composed a protective prayer known as the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca. By this intelligent mantra, he took away the opulence of the demons and gave it to Mahendra, the King of heaven.





The distinction between the demigods (devas) and demons (asuras) is that the demigods are all devotees of Lord Viṣṇu whereas the demons are devotees of demigods like Lord Śiva, Goddess Kālī and Goddess Durgā. Sometimes the demons are also devotees of Lord Brahmā. For example, Hiraṇyakaśipu was a devotee of Lord Brahmā, Rāvaṇa was a devotee of Lord Śiva, and Mahiṣāsura was a devotee of Goddess Durgā. The demigods are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu (viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva), whereas the demons (āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ) are always against the viṣṇu-bhaktas, or Vaiṣṇavas. To oppose the Vaiṣṇavas, the demons become devotees of Lord Śiva, Lord Brahmā, Kālī, Durgā, and so on. In the days of yore, many long years ago, there was animosity between the devas and the asuras, and the same spirit still continues, for the devotees of Lord Śiva and Goddess Durgā are always envious of Vaiṣṇavas, who are devotees of Lord Viṣṇu. This strain between the devotees of Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu has always existed. In the higher planetary systems, fights between the demons and the demigods continue for a long, long time.



Herein we see that Viśvarūpa made for the demigods a protective covering, saturated with a Viṣṇu mantra. Sometimes the Viṣṇu mantra is called Viṣṇu-jvara, and the Śiva mantra is called Śiva-jvara. We find in the śāstras that sometimes the Śiva-jvara and Viṣṇu-jvara are employed in the fights between the demons and the demigods.



The word sura-dviṣām, which in this verse means "of the enemies of the demigods," also refers to the atheists. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam elsewhere says that Lord Buddha appeared for the purpose of bewildering the demons or atheists. The Supreme Personality of Godhead always awards His benediction to devotees. The Lord Himself confirms this in Bhagavad-gītā (9.31):



kaunteya pratijānīhi

na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati





"O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes."





TEXT 40



yayā guptaḥ sahasrākṣo

jigye 'sura-camūr vibhuḥ

tāṁ prāha sa mahendrāya

viśvarūpa udāra-dhīḥ

SYNONYMS



yayā-by which; guptaḥ-protected; sahasra-akṣaḥ-the thousand-eyed demigod, Indra; jigye-conquered; asura-of the demons; camūḥ-military power; vibhuḥ-becoming very powerful; tām-that; prāha-spoke; saḥ-he; mahendrāya-unto the King of heaven, Mahendra; viśvarūpaḥ-Viśvarūpa; udāra-dhīḥ-very broad-minded.





Viśvarūpa, who was most liberal, spoke to King Indra [Sahasrākṣa] the secret hymn that protected Indra and conquered the military power of the demons.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, Bṛhaspati."



Chapter Eight



The Nārāyaṇa-kavaca Shield





This chapter describes how Indra, the King of heaven, was victorious over the soldiers of the demons, and it also describes the shield of the Viṣṇu mantra.





To take protection from this shield, one must first touch kuśa grass and wash one's mouth with ācamana-mantras. One should observe silence and then place the eight-syllable Viṣṇu mantra on the parts of his body and place the twelve-syllable mantra on his hands. The eight-syllable mantra is oṁ namo nārāyaṇāya. This mantra should be distributed all over the front and back of the body. The twelve-syllable mantra, which begins with the praṇava, oṁkāra, is oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. One syllable should be placed on each of the fingers and should be preceded by the praṇava, oṁkāra. Thereafter, one must chant oṁ viṣṇave namaḥ, which is a six-syllable mantra. One must progressively place the syllables of the mantra on the heart, the head, between the two eyebrows, on the śikhā and between the eyes, and then one should chant maḥ astrāya phaṭ and with this mantra protect himself from all directions. Nādevo devam arcayet: one who has not risen to the level of a deva cannot chant this mantra. According to this direction of the śāstra, one must think himself qualitatively nondifferent from the Supreme.





After finishing this dedication, one must offer a prayer to the eight-armed Lord Viṣṇu, who sits on the shoulders of Garuḍadeva. One also has to think of the fish incarnation, Vāmana, Kūrma, Nṛsiṁha, Varāha. Paraśurāma, Rāmacandra (the elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa). Nara-Nārāyaṇa, Dattātreya (an empowered incarnation), Kapila, Sanat-kumāra, Hayagrīva, Nāradadeva (the incarnation of a devotee). Dhanvantari, Ṛṣabhadeva, Yajña, Balarāma, Vyāsadeva, Buddhadeva and Keśava. One should also think of Govinda, the master of Vṛndāvana. and one should think of Nārāyaṇa, the master of the spiritual sky. One should think of Madhusūdana, Tridhāmā, Mādhava, Hṛṣīkeśa, Padmanābha, Janārdana, Dāmodara and Viśveśvara, as well as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa Himself. After offering prayers to the Lord's personal expansions known as the svāṁśa and śaktyāveśa-avatāras, one should pray to the weapons of Lord Nārāyaṇa, such as the Sudarśana, gadā, śaṅkha, khaḍga and bow.





After explaining this process, Śukadeva Gosvāmī told Mahārāja Parīkṣit how Viśvarūpa, the brother of Vṛtrāsura, described the glories of the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca to Indra.





TEXTS 1–2



śrī-rājovāca

yayā guptaḥ sahasrākṣaḥ

savāhān ripu-sainikān

krīḍann iva vinirjitya

tri-lokyā bubhuje śriyam

bhagavaṁs tan mamākhyāhi



varma nārāyaṇātmakam

yathātatāyinaḥ śatrūn

yena gupto 'jayan mṛdhe

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; yayā-by which (the spiritual armor); guptaḥ-protected; sahasra-akṣaḥ-the thousand-eyed King Indra; sa-vāhān-with their carriers; ripu-sainikān-the soldiers and commanders of the enemies; krīḍan iva-just like playing; vinirjitya-conquering; tri-lokyāḥ-of the three worlds (the higher, middle and lower planetary systems); bubhuje-enjoyed; śriyam-the opulence; bhagavan-O great sage; tat-that; mama-unto me; ākhyāhi-please explain; varma-defensive armor made of a mantra; nārāyaṇa-ātmakam-consisting of the mercy of Nārāyaṇa; yathā-in which way; ātatāyinaḥ-who were endeavoring to kill him; śatrūn-enemies; yena-by which; guptaḥ-being protected; ajayat-conquered; mṛdhe-in the fight.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: My lord, kindly explain the Viṣṇu mantra armor that protected King Indra and enabled him to conquer his enemies, along with their carriers, and enjoy the opulence of the three worlds. Please explain to me that Nārāyaṇa armor, by which King Indra achieved success in battle, conquering the enemies who were endeavoring to kill him.





TEXT 3



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

vṛtaḥ purohitas tvāṣṭro

mahendrāyānupṛcchate

nārāyaṇākhyaṁ varmāha

tad ihaika-manāḥ śṛṇu

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vṛtaḥ-the chosen; purohitaḥ-priest; tvāṣṭraḥ-the son of Tvaṣṭā; mahendrāya-unto King Indra; anupṛcchate-after he (Indra) inquired; nārāyaṇa-ākhyam-named Nārāyaṇa-kavaca; varma-defensive armor made of a mantra; āha-he said; tat-that; iha-this; eka-manāḥ-with great attention; śṛṇu-hear from me.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: King Indra, the leader of the demigods, inquired about the armor known as Nārāyaṇa-kavaca from Viśvarūpa, who was engaged by the demigods as their priest. Please hear Viśvarūpa's reply with great attention.





TEXTS 4–6



śrī-viśvarūpa uvāca

dhautāṅghri-pāṇir ācamya

sapavitra udaṅ-mukhaḥ

kṛta-svāṅga-kara-nyāso

mantrābhyāṁ vāg-yataḥ śuciḥ

nārāyaṇa-paraṁ varma



sannahyed bhaya āgate

pādayor jānunor ūrvor

udare hṛdy athorasi

mukhe śirasy ānupūrvyād



oṁkārādīni vinyaset

oṁ namo nārāyaṇāyeti

viparyayam athāpi vā

SYNONYMS



śrī-viśvarūpaḥ uvāca-Śrī Viśvarūpa said; dhauta-having completely washed; aṅghri-feet; pāṇiḥ-hands; ācamya-performing ācamana (sipping a little water three times after chanting the prescribed mantra); sa-pavitraḥ-wearing rings made of kuśa grass (on the ring finger of each hand); udak-mukhaḥ-sitting facing the north; kṛta-making; sva-aṅga-kara-nyāsaḥ-mental assignment of the eight parts of the body and twelve parts of the hands; mantrābhyām-with the two mantras (oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya and oṁ namo nārāyaṇāya); vāk-yataḥ-keeping oneself silent; śuciḥ-being purified; nārāyaṇa-param-fully intent on Lord Nārāyaṇa; varma-armor; sannahyet- put on oneself; bhaye-when fear; āgate-has come; pādayoḥ-on the two legs; jānunoḥ-on the two knees; ūrvoḥ-on the two thighs; udare-on the abdomen; hṛdi-on the heart; atha-thus; urasi-on the chest; mukhe-on the mouth; śirasi-on the head; ānupūrvyāt-one after another; oṁkāra-ādīni-beginning with oṁkāra; vinyaset-one should place; oṁ-the praṇava; namaḥ-obeisances; nārāyaṇāya- unto Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iti-thus; viparyayam-the reverse; atha api-moreover; vā-or.





Viśvarūpa said: If some form of fear arrives, one should first wash his hands and legs clean and then perform ācamana by chanting this mantra: oṁ apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā/ yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ sa bahyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ/ śrī-viṣṇu śrī-viṣṇu śrī-viṣṇu. Then one should touch kuśa grass and sit gravely and silently, facing north. When completely purified, one should touch the mantra composed of eight syllables to the eight parts of his body and touch the mantra composed of twelve syllables to his hands. Thus, in the following manner, he should bind himself with the Nārāyaṇa coat of armor. First, while chanting the mantra composed of eight syllables [oṁ namo nārāyaṇāya], beginning with the praṇava, the syllable oṁ, one should touch his hands to eight parts of his body, starting with the two feet and progressing systematically to the knees, thighs, abdomen, heart, chest, mouth and head. Then one should chant the mantra in reverse, beginning from the last syllable [ya], while touching the parts of his body in the reverse order. These two processes are known as utpatti-nyāsa and saṁhāra-nyāsa respectively.





TEXT 7



kara-nyāsaṁ tataḥ kuryād

dvādaśākṣara-vidyayā

praṇavādi-ya-kārāntam

aṅguly-aṅguṣṭha-parvasu

SYNONYMS



kara-nyāsam-the ritual known as kara-nyāsa, which assigns the syllables of the mantra to the fingers; tataḥ-thereafter; kuryāt-should execute; dvādaśa-akṣara-composed of twelve syllables; vidyayā-with the mantra; praṇava-ādi-beginning with the oṁkāra; ya-kāra-antam-ending with the syllable ya; aṅguli-on the fingers, beginning with the index finger; aṅguṣṭha-parvasu-to the joints of the thumbs.





Then one should chant the mantra composed of twelve syllables [oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya]. Preceding each syllable by the oṁkāra, one should place the syllables of the mantra on the tips of his fingers, beginning with the index finger of the right hand and concluding with the index finger of the left. The four remaining syllables should be placed on the joints of the thumbs.





TEXTS 8–10



nyased dhṛdaya oṁkāraṁ

vi-kāram anu mūrdhani

ṣa-kāraṁ tu bhruvor madhye

ṇa-kāraṁ śikhayā nyaset

ve-kāraṁ netrayor yuñjyān



na-kāraṁ sarva-sandhiṣu

ma-kāram astram uddiśya

mantra-mūrtir bhaved budhaḥ

savisargaṁ phaḍ-antaṁ tat



sarva-dikṣu vinirdiśet

oṁ viṣṇave nama iti

SYNONYMS



nyaset-should place; hṛdaye-on the heart; oṁkāram-the praṇava, oṁkāra; vi-kāram-the syllable vi of viṣṇave; anu-thereafter; mūrdhani-on the top of the head; ṣa-kāram-the syllable sa; tu-and; bhruvoḥ madhye-between the two eyebrows; ṇa-kāram-the syllable ṇa; śikhayā-on the śikhā on the head; nyaset-should place; vekāram-the syllable ve; netrayoḥ-between the two eyes; yuñjyāt-should be placed; na-kāram-the syllable na of the word namaḥ; sarva-sandhiṣu-on all the joints; ma-kāram-the syllable ma of the word namaḥ; astram-a weapon; uddiśya-thinking; mantra-mūrtiḥ-the form of the mantra; bhavet-should become; budhaḥ-an intelligent person; sa-visargam-with the visarga (ḥ); phaṭ-antam-ending with the sound phaṭ; tat-that; sarva-dikṣu-in all directions; vinirdiśet-should fix; oṁ-praṇava; viṣṇave-unto Lord Viṣṇu; namaḥ-obeisances; iti-thus.





One must then chant the mantra of six syllables [oṁ viṣṇave namaḥ]. One should place the syllable "oṁ" on his heart, the syllable "vi" on the top of his head, the syllable "ṣa" between his eyebrows, the syllable "ṇa" on his tuft of hair [śikhā], and the syllable "ve" between his eyes. The chanter of the mantra should then place the syllable "na" on all the joints of his body and meditate on the syllable "ma" as being a weapon. He should thus become the perfect personification of the mantra. Thereafter, adding visarga to the final syllable "ma," he should chant the mantra "maḥ astrāya phaṭ" in all directions, beginning from the east. In this way, all directions will be bound by the protective armor of the mantra.





TEXT 11



ātmānaṁ paramaṁ dhyāyed

dhyeyaṁ ṣaṭ-śaktibhir yutam

vidyā-tejas-tapo-mūrtim

imaṁ mantram udāharet

SYNONYMS



ātmānam-the self; paramam-the supreme; dhyāyet-one should meditate on; dhyeyam-worthy to be meditated on; ṣaṭ-śaktibhiḥ-the six opulences; yutam-possessed of; vidyā-learning; tejaḥ-influence; tapaḥ-austerity; mūrtim-personified; imam-this; mantram-mantra; udāharet-should chant.





After finishing this chanting, one should think himself qualitatively one with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is full in six opulences and is worthy to be meditated upon. Then one should chant the following protective prayer to Lord Nārāyaṇa, the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca.





TEXT 12



oṁ harir vidadhyān mama sarva-rakṣāṁ

nyastāṅghri-padmaḥ patagendra-pṛṣṭhe

darāri-carmāsi-gadeṣu-cāpa-

pāśān dadhāno 'ṣṭa-guṇo 'ṣṭa-bāhuḥ

SYNONYMS



oṁ-O Lord; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vidadhyāt-may He bestow; mama-my; sarva-rakṣām-protection from all sides; nyasta-placed; aṅghri-padmaḥ-whose lotus feet; patagendra-pṛṣṭhe-on the back of Garuḍa, the king of all birds; dara-conchshell; ari-disc; carma-shield; asi-sword; gadā-club; iṣu-arrows; cāpa-bow; pāśān-ropes; dadhānaḥ-holding; aṣṭa-possessing eight; guṇaḥ-perfections; aṣṭa-eight; bāhuḥ-arms.





The Supreme Lord, who sits on the back of the bird Garuḍa, touching him with His lotus feet, holds eight weapons-the conchshell, disc, shield, sword, club, arrows, bow and ropes. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead protect me at all times with His eight arms. He is all-powerful because He fully possesses the eight mystic powers [aṇimā, laghimā, etc.].





Thinking oneself one with the Supreme is called ahaṅgrahopāsanā. Through ahaṅgrahopāsanā one does not become God, but he thinks of himself as qualitatively one with the Supreme. Understanding that as a spirit soul he is equal in quality to the supreme soul the way the water of a river is of the same nature as the water of the sea, one should meditate upon the Supreme Lord, as described in this verse, and seek His protection. The living entities are always subordinate to the Supreme. Consequently their duty is to always seek the mercy of the Lord in order to be protected by Him in all circumstances.





TEXT 13



jaleṣu māṁ rakṣatu matsya-mūrtir

yādo-gaṇebhyo varuṇasya pāśāt

sthaleṣu māyāvaṭu-vāmano 'vyāt

trivikramaḥ khe 'vatu viśvarūpaḥ

SYNONYMS



jaleṣu-in the water; mām-me; rakṣatu-protect; matsya-mūrtiḥ-the Supreme Lord in the form of a great fish; yādaḥ-gaṇebhyaḥ-from fierce aquatic animals; varuṇasya-of the demigod known as Varuṇa; pāśāt-from the arresting rope; sthaleṣu-on the land; māyā-vaṭu-the merciful form of the Lord as a dwarf; vāmanaḥ-named Vāmanadeva; avyāt-may He protect; trivikramaḥ-Trivikrama, whose three gigantic steps took the three worlds from Bali; khe-in the sky; avatu-may the Lord protect; viśvarūpaḥ-the gigantic universal form.





May the Lord, who assumes the body of a great fish, protect me in the water from the fierce animals that are associates of the demigod Varuṇa. By expanding His illusory energy, the Lord assumed the form of the dwarf Vāmana. May Vāmana protect me on the land. Since the gigantic form of the Lord, Viśvarūpa, conquers the three worlds, may He protect me in the sky.





This mantra seeks the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the water, land and sky in His incarnations as the fish, Vāmanadeva and the Viśvarūpa.





TEXT 14



durgeṣv aṭavy-āji-mukhādiṣu prabhuḥ

pāyān nṛsiṁho 'sura-yūthapāriḥ

vimuñcato yasya mahāṭṭa-hāsaṁ

diśo vinedur nyapataṁś ca garbhāḥ

SYNONYMS



durgeṣu-in places where travel is very difficult; aṭavi-in the dense forest; āji-mukha-ādiṣu-on the war front and so on; prabhuḥ-the Supreme Lord; pāyāt-may He protect; nṛsiṁhaḥ-Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva; asura-yūthapa-of Hiraṇyakaśipu, the leader of the demons; ariḥ-the enemy; vimuñcataḥ-releasing; yasya-of whom; mahā-aṭṭa-hāsam-great and fearful laughing; diśaḥ-all the directions; vineduḥ-resounded through; nyapatan-fell down; ca-and; garbhāḥ-the embryos of the wives of the demons.





May Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who appeared as the enemy of Hiraṇyakaśipu, protect me in all directions. His loud laughing vibrated in all directions and caused the pregnant wives of the asuras to have miscarriages. May that Lord be kind enough to protect me in difficult places like the forest and battlefront.





TEXT 15



rakṣatv asau mādhvani yajña-kalpaḥ

sva-daṁṣṭrayonnīta-dharo varāhaḥ

rāmo 'dri-kūṭeṣv atha vipravāse

salakṣmaṇo 'vyād bharatāgrajo 'smān

SYNONYMS



rakṣatu-may the Lord protect; asau-that; mā-me; adhvani-on the street; yajña-kalpaḥ-who is ascertained by performance of ritualistic ceremonies; sva-daṁṣṭrayā-by His own tusk; unnīta-raising; dharaḥ-the planet earth; varāhaḥ-Lord Boar; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāma; adri-kūṭeṣu-on the summits of the mountains; atha-then; vipravāse-in foreign countries; sa-lakṣmaṇaḥ-with His brother Lakṣmaṇa; avyāt-may He protect; bharata-agrajaḥ-the elder brother of Mahārāja Bharata; asmān-us.





The Supreme indestructible Lord is ascertained through the performance of ritualistic sacrifices and is therefore known as Yajñeśvara. In His incarnation as Lord Boar, He raised the planet earth from the water at the bottom of the universe and kept it on His pointed tusks. May that Lord protect me from rogues on the street. May Paraśurāma protect me on the tops of mountains, and may the elder brother of Bharata, Lord Rāmacandra, along with His brother Lakṣmaṇa, protect me in foreign countries.





There are three Rāmas. One Rāma is Paraśurāma (Jāmadāgnya). another Rāma is Lord Rāmacandra, and a third Rāma is Lord Balarāma. In this verse the words rāmo'dri-kūṭeṣv atha indicate Lord Paraśurāma. The brother of Bharata Mahārāja and Lakṣmaṇa is Lord Rāmacandra.





TEXT 16



mām ugra-dharmād akhilāt pramādān

nārāyaṇaḥ pātu naraś ca hāsāt

dattas tv ayogād atha yoga-nāthaḥ

pāyād guṇeśaḥ kapilaḥ karma-bandhāt

SYNONYMS



mām-me; ugra-dharmāt-from unnecessary religious principles; akhilāt-from all kinds of activities; pramādāt-which are enacted in madness; nārāyaṇaḥ-Lord Nārāyaṇa; pātu-may He protect; naraḥ ca-and Nara; hāsāt-from unnecessary pride; dattaḥ-Dattātreya; tu-of course; ayogāt-from the path of false yoga; atha-indeed; yoga-nāthaḥ-the master of all mystic powers; pāyāt-may He protect; guṇa-īśaḥ-the master of all spiritual qualities; kapilaḥ-Lord Kapila; karma-bandhāt-from the bondage of fruitive activities.





May Lord Nārāyaṇa protect me from unnecessarily following false religious systems and falling from my duties due to madness. May the Lord in His appearance as Nara protect me from unnecessary pride. May Lord Dattātreya, the master of all mystic power, protect me from falling while performing bhakti-yoga, and may Lord Kapila, the master of all good qualities, protect me from the material bondage of fruitive activities.





TEXT 17



sanat-kumāro 'vatu kāmadevād

dhayaśīrṣā māṁ pathi deva-helanāt

devarṣi-varyaḥ puruṣārcanāntarāt

kūrmo harir māṁ nirayād aśeṣāt

SYNONYMS



sanat-kumāraḥ-the great brahmacārī named Sanat-kumāra; avatu-may he protect; kāma-devāt-from the hands of Cupid or lusty desire; haya-śīrṣā-Lord Hayagrīva, the incarnation of the Lord whose head is like that of a horse; mām-me; pathi-on the path; deva-helanāt-from neglecting to offer respectful obeisances to brāhmaṇas, Vaiṣṇavas and the Supreme Lord; devarṣi-varyaḥ-the best of the saintly sages, Nārada; puruṣa-arcana-antarāt-from the offenses in worshiping the Deity; kūrmaḥ-Lord Kūrma, the tortoise; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mām-me; nirayāt-from hell; aśeṣāt-unlimited.





May Sanat-kumāra protect me from lusty desires. As I begin some auspicious activity, may Lord Hayagrīva protect me from being an offender by neglecting to offer respectful obeisances to the Supreme Lord. May Devarṣi Nārada protect me from committing offenses in worshiping the Deity, and may Lord Kūrma, the tortoise, protect me from falling to the unlimited hellish planets.





Lusty desires are very strong in everyone, and they are the greatest impediment to the discharge of devotional service. Therefore those who are very much influenced by lusty desires are advised to take shelter of Sanat-kumāra, the great brahmacārī devotee. Nārada Muni, who is the guide for arcana, is the author of the Nārada-pañcarātra, which prescribes the regulative principles for worshiping the Deity. Everyone engaged in Deity worship, whether at home or in the temple, should always seek the mercy of Devarṣi Nārada in order to avoid the thirty-two offenses while worshiping the Deity. These offenses in Deity worship are mentioned in The Nectar of Devotion.





TEXT 18



dhanvantarir bhagavān pātv apathyād

dvandvād bhayād ṛṣabho nirjitātmā

yajñaś ca lokād avatāj janāntād

balo gaṇāt krodha-vaśād ahīndraḥ

SYNONYMS



dhanvantariḥ-the incarnation Dhanvantari, the physician; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pātu-may He protect me; apathyāt-from things injurious to the health, such as meat and intoxicants; dvandvāt-from duality; bhayāt-from fear; ṛṣabhaḥ-Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; nirjita-ātmā-who fully controlled his mind and self; yajñaḥ-Yajña; ca-and; lokāt-from the defamation of the populace; avatāt-may He protect; jana-antāt-from dangerous positions created by other people; balaḥ-Lord Balarāma; gaṇāt-from the hordes of; krodha-vaśāt-the angry serpents; ahīndraḥ-Lord Balarāma in the form of the serpent Śeṣa Nāga.





May the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His incarnation as Dhanvantari relieve me from undesirable eatables and protect me from physical illness. May Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, who conquered His inner and outer senses, protect me from fear produced by the duality of heat and cold. May Yajña protect me from defamation and harm from the populace, and may Lord Balarāma as Śeṣa protect me from envious serpents.





To live within this material world, one must face many dangers, as described herein. For example, undesirable food poses a danger to health, and therefore one must give up such food. The Dhanvantari incarnation can protect us in this regard. Since Lord Viṣṇu is the Supersoul of all living entities, if He likes He can save us from adhibhautika disturbances, disturbances from other living entities. Lord Balarāma is the Śeṣa incarnation, and therefore He can save us from angry serpents or envious persons, who are always ready to attack.





TEXT 19



dvaipāyano bhagavān aprabodhād

buddhas tu pāṣaṇḍa-gaṇa-pramādāt

kalkiḥ kaleḥ kāla-malāt prapātu

dharmāvanāyoru-kṛtāvatāraḥ

SYNONYMS



dvaipāyanaḥ-Śrīla Vyāsadeva, the giver of all Vedic knowledge; bhagavān-the most powerful incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aprabodhāt-from ignorance of the śāstra; buddhaḥ tu-also Lord Buddha; pāṣaṇḍa-gaṇa-of atheists creating disillusionment for innocent persons; pramādāt-from the madness; kalkiḥ-Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Keśava; kaleḥ-of this Kali-yuga; kāla-malāt-from the darkness of the age; prapātu-may He protect; dharma-avanāya-for the protection of religious principles; uru-very great; kṛta-avatāraḥ-who took an incarnation.





May the Personality of Godhead in His incarnation as Vyāsadeva protect me from all kinds of ignorance resulting from the absence of Vedic knowledge. May Lord Buddhadeva protect me from activities opposed to Vedic principles and from laziness that causes one to madly forget the Vedic principles of knowledge and ritualistic action. May Kalkideva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appeared as an incarnation to protect religious principles, protect me from the dirt of the age of Kali.





This verse mentions various incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who appear for various purposes. Śrīla Vyāsadeva, Mahāmuni, compiled the Vedic literature for the benefit of all human society. If one wants to be protected from the reactions of ignorance even in this age of Kali, one may consult the books left by Śrīla Vyāsadeva, Upaniṣads, Vedānta-sūtra (Brahma-sūtra), Mahābhārata, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Mahā-Purāṇa (Vyāsadeva's commentary on the Brahma-sūtra) and the other seventeen Purāṇas. Only by the mercy of Śrīla Vyāsadeva do we have so many volumes of transcendental knowledge to save us from the clutches of ignorance.



As described by Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī in his Daśāvatāra-stotra, Lord Buddha apparently decried the Vedic knowledge:



nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātaṁ

sadaya-hṛdaya-darśita-paśu-ghātam

keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagad-īśa hare





The mission of Lord Buddha was to save people from the abominable activity of animal killing and to save the poor animals from being unnecessarily killed. When pāṣaṇḍīs were cheating by killing animals on the plea of sacrificing them in Vedic yajñas, the Lord said, "If the Vedic injunctions allow animal killing, I do not accept the Vedic principles." Thus he actually saved people who acted according to Vedic principles. One should therefore surrender to Lord Buddha so that he can help one avoid misusing the injunctions of the Vedas.



The Kalki avatāra is the fierce incarnation who vanquishes the class of the atheists born in this age of Kali. Now, in the beginning of Kali-yuga, many irreligious principles are in effect, and as Kali-yuga advances, many pseudo religious principles will certainly be introduced, and people will forget the real religious principles enunciated by Lord Kṛṣṇa before the beginning of Kali-yuga, namely principles of surrender unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Unfortunately, because of Kali-yuga, foolish people do not surrender to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Even most people who claim to belong to the Vedic system of religion are actually opposed to the Vedic principles. Every day they manufacture a new type of dharma on the plea that whatever one manufactures is also a path of liberation. Atheistic men generally say, yata mata tata patha. According to this view, there are hundreds and thousands of different opinions in human society, and each opinion is a valid religious principle. This philosophy of rascals has killed the religious principles mentioned in the Vedas, and such philosophies will become increasingly influential as Kali-yuga progresses. In the last stage of Kali-yuga, Kalkideva, the fierce incarnation of Keśava, will descend to kill all the atheists and will save only the devotees of the Lord.





TEXT 20



māṁ keśavo gadayā prātar avyād

govinda āsaṅgavam ātta-veṇuḥ

nārāyaṇaḥ prāhṇa udātta-śaktir

madhyan-dine viṣṇur arīndra-pāṇiḥ

SYNONYMS



mām-me; keśavaḥ-Lord Keśava; gadayā-by His club; prātaḥ-in the morning hours; avyāt-may He protect; govindaḥ-Lord Govinda; āsaṅgavam-during the second part of the day; ātta-veṇuḥ-holding His flute; nārāyaṇaḥ-Lord Nārāyaṇa with four hands; prāhṇaḥ-during the third part of the day; udātta-śaktiḥ-controlling different types of potencies; madhyam-dine-during the fourth part of the day; viṣṇuḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; arīndra-pāṇiḥ-bearing the disc in His hand to kill the enemies.





May Lord Keśava protect me with His club in the first portion of the day, and may Govinda, who is always engaged in playing His flute, protect me in the second portion of the day. May Lord Nārāyaṇa, who is equipped with all potencies, protect me in the third part of the day, and may Lord Viṣṇu, who carries a disc to kill His enemies, protect me in the fourth part of the day.





According to Vedic astronomical calculations, day and night are each divided into thirty ghaṭikās (twenty-four minutes), instead of twelve hours. Generally, each day and each night is divided into six parts consisting of five ghaṭikās. In each of these six portions of the day and night, the Lord may be addressed for protection according to different names. Lord Keśava, the proprietor of the holy place of Mathurā, is the Lord of the first portion of the day, and Govinda, the Lord of Vṛndāvana. is the master of the second portion.





TEXT 21



devo 'parāhṇe madhu-hogradhanvā

sāyaṁ tri-dhāmāvatu mādhavo mām

doṣe hṛṣīkeśa utārdha-rātre

niśītha eko 'vatu padmanābhaḥ

SYNONYMS



devaḥ-the Lord; aparāhṇe-in the fifth part of the day; madhu-hā-named Madhusūdana; ugra-dhanvā-bearing the very fearful bow known as Śārṅga; sāyam-the sixth part of the day; tri-dhāmā-manifesting as the three deities Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara; avatu-may He protect; mādhavaḥ-named Mādhava; mām-me; doṣe-during the first portion of the night; hṛṣīkeśaḥ-Lord Hṛṣīkeśa; uta-also; ardha-rātre-during the second part of the night; niśīthe-during the third part of the night; ekaḥ-alone; avatu-may He protect; padmanābhaḥ-Lord Padmanābha.





May Lord Madhusūdana, who carries a bow very fearful for the demons, protect me during the fifth part of the day. In the evening, may Lord Mādhava, appearing as Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara, protect me, and in the beginning of night may Lord Hṛṣīkeśa protect me. At the dead of night [in the second and third parts of night] may Lord Padmanābha alone protect me.





TEXT 22



śrīvatsa-dhāmāpara-rātra īśaḥ

pratyūṣa īśo 'si-dharo janārdanaḥ

dāmodaro 'vyād anusandhyaṁ prabhāte

viśveśvaro bhagavān kāla-mūrtiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrīvatsa-dhāmā-the Lord, on whose chest the mark of Śrīvatsa is resting; apara-rātre-in the fourth part of the night; īśaḥ-the Supreme Lord; pratyūṣe-in the end of the night; īśaḥ-the Supreme Lord; asi-dharaḥ-carrying a sword in the hand; janārdanaḥ-Lord Janārdana; dāmodaraḥ-Lord Dāmodara; avyāt-may He protect; anusandhyam-during each junction or twilight; prabhāte-in the early morning (the sixth part of the night); viśva-īśvaraḥ-the Lord of the whole universe; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kāla-mūrtiḥ-the personification of time.





May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who bears the Śrīvatsa on His chest, protect me after midnight until the sky becomes pinkish. May Lord Janārdana, who carries a sword in His hand, protect me at the end of night [during the last four ghaṭikās of night]. May Lord Dāmodara protect me in the early morning, and may Lord Viśveśvara protect me during the junctions of day and night.





TEXT 23



cakraṁ yugāntānala-tigma-nemi

bhramat samantād bhagavat-prayuktam

dandagdhi dandagdhy ari-sainyam āśu

kakṣaṁ yathā vāta-sakho hutāśaḥ

SYNONYMS



cakram-the disc of the Lord; yuga-anta-at the end of the millennium; anala-like the fire of devastation; tigma-nemi-with a sharp rim; bhramat-wandering; samantāt-on all sides; bhagavat-prayuktam-being engaged by the Lord; dandagdhi dandagdhi-please burn completely, please burn completely; ari-sainyam-the army of our enemies; āśu-immediately; kakṣam-dry grass; yathā-like; vāta-sakhaḥ-the friend of the wind; hutāśaḥ-blazing fire.





Set into motion by the Supreme Personality of Godhead and wandering in all the four directions, the disc of the Supreme Lord has sharp edges as destructive as the fire of devastation at the end of the millennium. As a blazing fire burns dry grass to ashes with the assistance of the breeze, may that Sudarśana cakra burn our enemies to ashes.





TEXT 24



gade 'śani-sparśana-visphuliṅge

niṣpiṇḍhi niṣpiṇḍhy ajita-priyāsi

kuṣmāṇḍa-vaināyaka-yakṣa-rakṣo-

bhūta-grahāṁś cūrṇaya cūrṇayārīn

SYNONYMS



gade-O club in the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aśani-like thunderbolts; sparśana-whose touch; visphuliṅge-giving off sparks of fire; niṣpiṇḍhi niṣpiṇḍhi-pound to pieces, pound to pieces; ajita-priyā-very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; asi-you are; kuṣmāṇḍa-imps named Kuṣmāṇḍas; vaināyaka-ghosts named Vaināyakas; yakṣa-ghosts named Yakṣas; rakṣaḥ-ghosts named Rākṣasas; bhūta-ghosts named Bhūtas; grahān-and evil demons named Grahas; cūrṇaya-pulverize; cūrṇaya-pulverize; arīn-my enemies.





O club in the hand of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you produce sparks of fire as powerful as thunderbolts, and you are extremely dear to the Lord. I am also His servant. Therefore kindly help me pound to pieces the evil living beings known as Kuṣmāṇḍas, Vaināyakas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Bhūtas and Grahas. Please pulverize them.





TEXT 25



tvaṁ yātudhāna-pramatha-preta-mātṛ-

piśāca-vipragraha-ghora-dṛṣṭīn

darendra vidrāvaya kṛṣṇa-pūrito

bhīma-svano 'rer hṛdayāni kampayan

SYNONYMS



tvam-you; yātudhāna-Rākṣasas; pramatha-Pramathas; preta-Pretas; mātṛ-Mātās; piśāca-Piśācas; vipra-graha-brāhmaṇa ghosts; ghora-dṛṣṭīn-who have very fearful eyes; darendra-O Pāñcajanya, the conchshell in the hands of the Lord; vidrāvaya-drive away; kṛṣṇa-pūritaḥ-being filled with air from the mouth of Kṛṣṇa; bhīma-svanaḥ-sounding extremely fearful; areḥ-of the enemy; hṛdayāni-the cores of the hearts; kampayan-causing to tremble.





O best of conchshells, O Pāñcajanya in the hands of the Lord, you are always filled with the breath of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore you create a fearful sound vibration that causes trembling in the hearts of enemies like the Rākṣasas, pramatha ghosts, Pretas, Mātās, Piśācas and brāhmaṇa ghosts with fearful eyes.





TEXT 26



tvaṁ tigma-dhārāsi-varāri-sainyam

īśa-prayukto mama chindhi chindhi

cakṣūṁṣi carmañ chata-candra chādaya

dviṣām aghonāṁ hara pāpa-cakṣuṣām

SYNONYMS



tvam-you; tigma-dhāra-asi-vara-O best of swords possessing very sharp blades; ari-sainyam-the soldiers of the enemy; īśa-prayuktaḥ-being engaged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mama-my; chindhi chindhi-chop to pieces, chop to pieces; cakṣūṁṣi-the eyes; carman-O shield; śata-candra-possessing brilliant circles like a hundred moons; chādaya-please cover; dviṣām-of those who are envious of me; aghonām-who are completely sinful; hara-please take away; pāpa-cakṣuṣām-of those whose eyes are very sinful.





O king of sharp-edged swords, you are engaged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Please cut the soldiers of my enemies to pieces. Please cut them to pieces! O shield marked with a hundred brilliant moonlike circles, please cover the eyes of the sinful enemies. Pluck out their sinful eyes.





TEXTS 27–28



yan no bhayaṁ grahebhyo 'bhūt

ketubhyo nṛbhya eva ca

sarīsṛpebhyo daṁṣṭribhyo

bhūtebhyo 'ṁhobhya eva ca

sarvāṇy etāni bhagavan-



nāma-rūpānukīrtanāt

prayāntu saṅkṣayaṁ sadyo

ye naḥ śreyaḥ-pratīpakāḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-which; naḥ-our; bhayam-fear; grahebhyaḥ-from the Graha demons; abhūt-was; ketubhyaḥ-from meteors, or falling stars; nṛbhyaḥ-from envious human beings; eva ca-also; sarīsṛpebhyaḥ-from snakes or scorpions; daṁṣṭribhyaḥ-from animals with fierce teeth like tigers, wolves and boars; bhūtebhyaḥ-from ghosts or the material elements (earth, water, fire, etc.); aṁhobhyaḥ-from sinful activities; eva ca-as well as; sarvāṇi etāni-all these; bhagavat-nāma-rūpa-anukīrtanāt-by glorifying the transcendental form, name, attributes and paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prayāntu-let them go; saṅkṣayam-to complete destruction; sadyaḥ-immediately; ye-which; naḥ-our; śreyaḥ-pratīpakāḥ-hindrances to well-being.





May the glorification of the transcendental name, form, qualities and paraphernalia of the Supreme Personality of Godhead protect us from the influence of bad planets, meteors, envious human beings, serpents, scorpions, and animals like tigers and wolves. May it protect us from ghosts and the material elements like earth, water, fire and air, and may it also protect us from lightning and our past sins. We are always afraid of these hindrances to our auspicious life. Therefore, may they all be completely destroyed by the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.





TEXT 29



garuḍo bhagavān stotra-

stobhaś chandomayaḥ prabhuḥ

rakṣatv aśeṣa-kṛcchrebhyo

viṣvaksenaḥ sva-nāmabhiḥ

SYNONYMS



garuḍaḥ-His Holiness Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu; bhagavān-as powerful as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; stotra-stobhaḥ-who is glorified by selected verses and songs; chandaḥ-mayaḥ-the personified Vedas; prabhuḥ-the lord; rakṣatu-may He protect; aśeṣa-kṛcchrebhyaḥ-from unlimited miseries; viṣvaksenaḥ-Lord Viṣvaksena; sva-nāmabhiḥ-by His holy names.





Lord Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, is the most worshipable lord, for he is as powerful as the Supreme Lord Himself. He is the personified Vedas and is worshiped by selected verses. May he protect us from all dangerous conditions, and may Lord Viṣvaksena, the Personality of Godhead, also protect us from all dangers by His holy names.





TEXT 30



sarvāpadbhyo harer nāma-

rūpa-yānāyudhāni naḥ

buddhīndriya-manaḥ-prāṇān

pāntu pārṣada-bhūṣaṇāḥ

SYNONYMS



sarva-āpadbhyaḥ-from all kinds of danger; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nāma-the holy name; rūpa-the transcendental form; yāna-the carriers; āyudhāni-and all the weapons; naḥ-our; buddhi-intelligence; indriya-senses; manaḥ-mind; prāṇān-life air; pāntu-may they protect and maintain; pārṣada-bhūṣaṇāḥ-the decorations who are personal associates.





May the Supreme Personality of Godhead's holy names, His transcendental forms, His carriers and all the weapons decorating Him as personal associates protect our intelligence, senses, mind and life air from all dangers.





There are various associates of the transcendental Personality of Godhead, and His weapons and carrier are among them. In the spiritual world, nothing is material. The sword, bow, club, disc and everything decorating the personal body of the Lord are spiritual living force. Therefore the Lord is called advaya jñāna, indicating that there is no difference between Him and His names, forms, qualities, weapons and so on. Anything pertaining to Him is in the same category of spiritual existence. They are all engaged in the service of the Lord in varieties of spiritual forms.





TEXT 31



yathā hi bhagavān eva

vastutaḥ sad asac ca yat

satyenānena naḥ sarve

yāntu nāśam upadravāḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; hi-indeed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva-undoubtedly; vastutaḥ-at the ultimate issue; sat-manifested; asat-unmanifested; ca-and; yat-whatever; satyena-by the truth; anena-this; naḥ-our; sarve-all; yāntu-let them go; nāśam-to annihilation; upadravāḥ-disturbances.





The subtle and gross cosmic manifestation is material, but nevertheless it is nondifferent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He is ultimately the cause of all causes. Cause and effect are factually one because the cause is present in the effect. Therefore the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, can destroy all our dangers by any of His potent parts.





TEXTS 32–33



yathaikātmyānubhāvānāṁ

vikalpa-rahitaḥ svayam

bhūṣaṇāyudha-liṅgākhyā

dhatte śaktīḥ sva-māyayā

tenaiva satya-mānena



sarva-jño bhagavān hariḥ

pātu sarvaiḥ svarūpair naḥ

sadā sarvatra sarva-gaḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; aikātmya-in terms of oneness manifested in varieties; anubhāvānām-of those thinking; vikalpa-rahitaḥ-the absence of difference; svayam-Himself; bhūṣaṇa-decorations; āyudha-weapons; liṅga-ākhyāḥ-characteristics and different names; dhatte-possesses; śaktīḥ-potencies like wealth, influence, power, knowledge, beauty and renunciation; sva-māyayā-by expanding His spiritual energy; tena eva-by that; satya-mānena-true understanding; sarva-jñaḥ-omniscient; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ-who can take away all the illusion of the living entities; pātu-may He protect; sarvaiḥ-with all; sva-rūpaiḥ-His forms; naḥ-us; sadā-always; sarvatra-everywhere; sarva-gaḥ-who is all-pervasive.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entities, the material energy, the spiritual energy and the entire creation are all individual substances. In the ultimate analysis, however, together they constitute the supreme one, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge see unity in diversity. For such advanced persons, the Lord's bodily decorations, His name, His fame, His attributes and forms and the weapons in His hand are manifestations of the strength of His potency. According to their elevated spiritual understanding, the omniscient Lord, who manifests various forms, is present everywhere. May He always protect us everywhere from all calamities.





A person highly elevated in spiritual knowledge knows that nothing exists but the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.4) where Lord Kṛṣṇa says, mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam, indicating that everything we see is an expansion of His energy. This is confirmed in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.22.52):



ekadeśa-sthitasyāgner

jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis

tathedam akhilaṁ jagat





As a fire, although existing in one place, can expand its light and heat everywhere, so the omnipotent Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although situated in His spiritual abode, expands Himself everywhere, in both the material and spiritual worlds, by His various energies. Since both cause and effect are the Supreme Lord, there is no difference between cause and effect. Consequently the ornaments and weapons of the Lord, being expansions of His spiritual energy, are not different from Him. There is no difference between the Lord and His variously presented energies. This is also confirmed in the Padma Purāṇa:



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ





The holy name of the Lord is fully identical with the Lord, not partially. The word pūrṇa means "complete." The Lord is omnipotent and omniscient, and similarly, His name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and everything pertaining to Him are complete, pure, eternal and free from material contamination. The prayer to the ornaments and carriers of the Lord is not false, for they are as good as the Lord. Since the Lord is all-pervasive, He exists in everything, and everything exists in Him. Therefore even worship of the Lord's weapons or ornaments has the same potency as worship of the Lord. Māyāvādīs refuse to accept the form of the Lord, or they say that the form of the Lord is māyā, or false, but one should note very carefully that this is not acceptable. Although the Lord's original form and His impersonal expansion are one, the Lord maintains His form, qualities and abode eternally. Therefore this prayer says, pātu sarvaiḥ svarūpair naḥ sadā sarvatra sama-gaḥ: "May the Lord, who is all-pervasive in His various forms, protect us everywhere." The Lord is always present everywhere by His name, form, qualities, attributes and paraphernalia, and they all have equal power to protect the devotees. Śrīla Madhvācārya explains this as follows:



eka eva paro viṣṇur

bhūṣāheti dhvajeṣv ajaḥ

tat-tac-chakti-pradatvena

svayam eva vyavasthitaḥ

satyenānena māṁ devaḥ

pātu sarveśvaro hariḥ





TEXT 34



vidikṣu dikṣūrdhvam adhaḥ samantād

antar bahir bhagavān nārasiṁhaḥ

prahāpayaḹ loka-bhayaṁ svanena

sva-tejasā grasta-samasta-tejāḥ

SYNONYMS



vidikṣu-in all corners; dikṣu-in all directions (east, west, north and south); ūrdhvam-above; adhaḥ-below; samantāt-on all sides; antaḥ-internally; bahiḥ-externally; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nārasiṁhaḥ-in the form of Nṛsiṁhadeva (half-lion and half-man); prahāpayan-completely destroying; loka-bhayam-fear created by animals, poison, weapons, water, air, fire and so on; svanena-by His roar or the vibration of His name by His devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja; sva-tejasā-by His personal effulgence; grasta-covered; samasta-all other; tejāḥ-influences.





Prahlāda Mahārāja loudly chanted the holy name of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. May Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, roaring for His devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja, protect us from all fear of dangers created by stalwart leaders in all directions through poison, weapons, water, fire, air and so on. May the Lord cover their influence by His own transcendental influence. May Nṛsiṁhadeva protect us in all directions and in all corners, above, below, within and without.





TEXT 35



maghavann idam ākhyātaṁ

varma nārāyaṇātmakam

vijeṣyase 'ñjasā yena

daṁśito 'sura-yūthapān

SYNONYMS



maghavan-O King Indra; idam-this; ākhyātam-described; varma-mystic armor; nārāyaṇa-ātmakam-related to Nārāyaṇa; vijeṣyase-you will conquer; añjasā-very easily; yena-by which; daṁśitaḥ-being protected; asura-yūthapān-the chief leaders of the demons.





Viśvarūpa continued: O Indra, this mystic armor related to Lord Nārāyaṇa has been described by me to you. By putting on this protective covering, you will certainly be able to conquer the leaders of the demons.





TEXT 36



etad dhārayamāṇas tu

yaṁ yaṁ paśyati cakṣuṣā

padā vā saṁspṛśet sadyaḥ

sādhvasāt sa vimucyate

SYNONYMS



etat-this; dhārayamāṇaḥ-a person employing; tu-but; yam yam-whomever; paśyati-he sees; cakṣuṣā-by his eyes; padā-by his feet; vā-or; saṁspṛśet-may touch; sadyaḥ-immediately; sādhvasāt-from all fear; saḥ-he; vimucyate-is freed.





If one employs this armor, whomever he sees with his eyes or touches with his feet is immediately freed from all the above-mentioned dangers.





TEXT 37



na kutaścid bhayaṁ tasya

vidyāṁ dhārayato bhavet

rāja-dasyu-grahādibhyo

vyādhy-ādibhyaś ca karhicit

SYNONYMS



na-not; kutaścit-from anywhere; bhayam-fear; tasya-of him; vidyām-this mystical prayer; dhārayataḥ-employing; bhavet-may appear; rāja-from the government; dasyu-from rogues and thieves; graha-ādibhyaḥ-from demons and so on; vyādhi-ādibhyaḥ-from diseases and so on; ca-also; karhicit-at any time.





This prayer, Nārāyaṇa-kavaca, constitutes subtle knowledge transcendentally connected with Nārāyaṇa. One who employs this prayer is never disturbed or put in danger by the government, by plunderers, by evil demons or by any type of disease.





TEXT 38



imāṁ vidyāṁ purā kaścit

kauśiko dhārayan dvijaḥ

yoga-dhāraṇayā svāṅgaṁ

jahau sa maru-dhanvani

SYNONYMS



imām-this; vidyām-prayer; purā-formerly; kaścit-someone; kauśikaḥ-Kauśika; dhārayan-using; dvijaḥ-a brāhmaṇa; yoga-dhāraṇayā-by mystic power; sva-aṅgam-his own body; jahau-gave up; saḥ-he; maru-dhanvani-in the desert.





O King of heaven, a brāhmaṇa named Kauśika formerly used this armor when he purposely gave up his body in the desert by mystic power.





TEXT 39



tasyopari vimānena

gandharva-patir ekadā

yayau citrarathaḥ strībhir

vṛto yatra dvija-kṣayaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-his dead body; upari-above; vimānena-by airplane; gandharva-patiḥ-the King of Gandharvaloka, Citraratha; ekadā-once upon a time; yayau-went; citrarathaḥ-Citraratha; strībhiḥ-by many beautiful women; vṛtaḥ-surrounded; yatra-where; dvija-kṣayaḥ-the brāhmaṇa Kauśika had died.





Surrounded by many beautiful women, Citraratha, the King of Gandharvaloka, was once passing in his airplane over the brāhmaṇa's body at the spot where the brāhmaṇa had died.





TEXT 40



gaganān nyapatat sadyaḥ

savimāno hy avāk-śirāḥ

sa vālikhilya-vacanād

asthīny ādāya vismitaḥ

prāsya prācī-sarasvatyāṁ

snātvā dhāma svam anvagāt

SYNONYMS



gaganāt-from the sky; nyapatat-fell; sadyaḥ-suddenly; sa-vimānaḥ-with his airplane; hi-certainly; avāk-śirāḥ-with his head downward; saḥ-he; vālikhilya-of the great sages named the Vālikhilyas; vacanāt-by the instructions; asthīni-all the bones; ādāya-taking; vismitaḥ-struck with wonder; prāsya-throwing; prācī-sarasvatyām-in the River Sarasvatī, which flows to the east; snātvā-bathing in that river; dhāma-to the abode; svam-his own; anvagāt-returned.





Suddenly Citraratha was forced to fall from the sky headfirst with his airplane. Struck with wonder, he was ordered by the great sages named the Vālikhilyas to throw the brāhmaṇa's bones in the nearby River Sarasvatī. He had to do this and bathe in the river before returning to his own abode.





TEXT 41



śrī-śuka uvāca

ya idaṁ śṛṇuyāt kāle

yo dhārayati cādṛtaḥ

taṁ namasyanti bhūtāni

mucyate sarvato bhayāt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yaḥ-anyone who; idam-this; śṛṇuyāt-may hear; kāle-at a time of fear; yaḥ-anyone who; dhārayati-employs this prayer; ca-also; ādṛtaḥ-with faith and adoration; tam-unto him; namasyanti-offer respectful obeisances; bhūtāni-all living beings; mucyate-is released; sarvataḥ-from all; bhayāt-fearful conditions.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear Mahārāja Parīkṣit, one who employs this armor or hears about it with faith and veneration when afraid because of any conditions in the material world is immediately freed from all dangers and is worshiped by all living entities.





TEXT 42



etāṁ vidyām adhigato

viśvarūpāc chatakratuḥ

trailokya-lakṣmīṁ bubhuje

vinirjitya mṛdhe 'surān

SYNONYMS



etām-this; vidyām-prayer; adhigataḥ-received; viśvarūpāt-from the brāhmaṇa Viśvarūpa; śata-kratuḥ-Indra, the King of heaven; trailokya-lakṣmīm-all the opulence of the three worlds; bubhuje-enjoyed; vinirjitya-conquering; mṛdhe-in battle; asurān-all the demons.





King Indra, who performed one hundred sacrifices, received this prayer of protection from Viśvarūpa. After conquering the demons, he enjoyed all the opulences of the three worlds.





This mystical mantric armor given by Viśvarūpa to Indra, the King of heaven, acted powerfully, with the effect that Indra was able to conquer the asuras and enjoy the opulence of the three worlds without impediments. In this regard, Madhvācārya points out:



vidyāḥ karmāṇi ca sadā

guroḥ prāptāḥ phala-pradāḥ

anyathā naiva phaladāḥ

prasannoktāḥ phala-pradāḥ





One must receive all kinds of mantras from a bona fide spiritual master; otherwise the mantras will not be fruitful. This is also indicated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34):



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ





"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." All mantras should be received through the authorized guru, and the disciple must satisfy the guru in all respects, after surrendering at his lotus feet. In the Padma Purāṇa it is also said, sampradāya-vihīnā ye mantrās te niṣphalā matāḥ. There are four sampradāyas, or disciplic successions, namely the Brahma-sampradāya, the Rudra-sampradāya, the Śrī sampradāya and the Kumāra-sampradāya. If one wants to advance in spiritual power, one must receive his mantras from one of these bona fide sampradāyas; otherwise he will never successfully advance in spiritual life.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Nārāyaṇa-kavaca Shield."



Chapter Nine



Appearance of the Demon Vṛtrāsura





As described in this chapter, Indra, the King of heaven, killed Viśvarūpa, and therefore Viśvarūpa's father performed a yajña to kill Indra. When Vṛtrāsura appeared from that yajña, the demigods, in fear, sought shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and glorified Him.





Because of affection for the demons, Viśvarūpa secretly supplied them the remnants of yajña. When Indra learned about this, he beheaded Viśvarūpa, but he later regretted killing Viśvarūpa because Viśvarūpa was a brāhmaṇa. Although competent to neutralize the sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa, Indra did not do so. Instead he accepted the reactions. Later, he distributed these reactions among the land, water, trees and women in general. Since the land accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions, a portion of the land turned into desert. The trees were also given one fourth of the sinful reactions, and therefore they drip sap, which is prohibited for drinking. Because women accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions, they are untouchable during their menstrual period. Since water was also infested with sinful reactions, when bubbles appear in water it cannot be used for any purpose.





After Viśvarūpa was killed, his father, Tvaṣṭā, performed a sacrifice to kill King Indra. Unfortunately, if mantras are chanted irregularly, they yield an opposite result. This happened when Tvaṣṭā performed this yajña. While performing the sacrifice to kill Indra. Tvaṣṭā chanted a mantra to increase Indra's enemies, but because he chanted the mantra wrong, the sacrifice produced an asura named Vṛtrāsura, of whom Indra was the enemy. When Vṛtrāsura was generated from the sacrifice, his fierce features made the whole world afraid, and his personal effulgence diminished even the power of the demigods. Finding no other means of protection, the demigods began to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the enjoyer of all the results of sacrifice, who is supreme throughout the entire universe. The demigods all worshiped Him because ultimately no one but Him can protect a living entity from fear and danger. Seeking shelter of a demigod instead of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead is compared to trying to cross the ocean by grasping the tail of a dog. A dog can swim, but that does not mean that one can cross the ocean by grasping a dog's tail.





Being pleased with the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead advised them to approach Dadhīci to beg him for the bones of his own body. Dadhīci would comply with the request of the demigods, and with the help of his bones Vṛtrāsura could be killed.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tasyāsan viśvarūpasya

śirāṁsi trīṇi bhārata

soma-pīthaṁ surā-pītham

annādam iti śuśruma

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasya-of him; āsan-there were; viśvarūpasya-of Viśvarūpa, the priest of the demigods; śirāṁsi-heads; trīṇi-three; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; soma-pītham-used for drinking the beverage soma; surā-pītham-used for drinking wine; anna-adam-used for eating; iti-thus; śuśruma-I have heard by the paramparā system.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Viśvarūpa, who was engaged as the priest of the demigods, had three heads. He used one to drink the beverage soma-rasa, another to drink wine and the third to eat food. O King Parīkṣit, thus I have heard from authorities.





One cannot directly perceive the kingdom of heaven, its king and other inhabitants, or how they perform their various engagements, for no one can go to the heavenly planets. Although modern scientists have invented many powerful space vehicles, they cannot even go to the moon, not to speak of other planets. By direct experience one cannot learn anything beyond the range of human perception. One must hear from authorities. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī, a great personality, says, "What I am describing to you, O King, is what I have heard from authoritative sources." This is the Vedic system. The Vedic knowledge is called śruti because it must be received by being heard from authorities. It is beyond the realm of our false experimental knowledge.





TEXT 2



sa vai barhiṣi devebhyo

bhāgaṁ pratyakṣam uccakaiḥ

adadad yasya pitaro

devāḥ sapraśrayaṁ nṛpa

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Viśvarūpa); vai-indeed; barhiṣi-in the sacrificial fire; devebhyaḥ-unto the particular demigods; bhāgam-the proper share; pratyakṣam-visibly; uccakaiḥ-by loud chanting of the mantras; adadat-offered; yasya-of whom; pitaraḥ-the fathers; devāḥ-demigods; sa-praśrayam-very humbly in a gentle voice; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the demigods were related to Viśvarūpa from his father's side, and therefore he visibly offered clarified butter in the fire while chanting mantras such as indrāya idaṁ svāhā ["this is meant for King Indra"] and idam agnaye ["this is for the demigod of fire"]. He loudly chanted these mantras and offered each of the demigods his proper share.





TEXT 3



sa eva hi dadau bhāgaṁ

parokṣam asurān prati

yajamāno 'vahad bhāgaṁ

mātṛ-sneha-vaśānugaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Viśvarūpa); eva-indeed; hi-certainly; dadau-offered; bhāgam-share; parokṣam-without the knowledge of the demigods; asurān-the demons; prati-unto; yajamānaḥ-performing sacrifice; avahat-offered; bhāgam-share; mātṛ-sneha-by affection for his mother; vaśa-anugaḥ-being compelled.





Although offering clarified butter in the sacrificial fire in the name of the demigods, without the knowledge of the demigods he also offered oblations to the demons because they were his relatives through his mother.





Because of Viśvarūpa's affection for the families of both the demigods and the demons, he appeased the Supreme Lord on behalf of both dynasties. When he offered oblations in the fire on behalf of the asuras, he did so secretly. without the knowledge of the demigods.





TEXT 4



tad deva-helanaṁ tasya

dharmālīkaṁ sureśvaraḥ

ālakṣya tarasā bhītas

tac-chīrṣāṇy acchinad ruṣā

SYNONYMS



tat-that; deva-helanam-offense to the demigods; tasya-of him (Viśvarūpa); dharma-alīkam-cheating in religious principles (pretending to be the priest of the demigods, but secretly acting as the priest of the demons also); sura-īśvaraḥ-the king of the demigods; ālakṣya-observing; tarasā-quickly; bhītaḥ-being afraid (that the demons would gain strength by being blessed by Viśvarūpa); tat-his (Viśvarūpa's); śīrṣāṇi-heads; acchinat-cut off; ruṣā-with great anger.





Once upon a time, however, the King of heaven, Indra, understood that Viśvarūpa was secretly cheating the demigods by offering oblations on behalf of the demons. He became extremely afraid of being defeated by the demons, and in great anger at Viśvarūpa he cut Viśvarūpa's three heads from his shoulders.





TEXT 5



soma-pīthaṁ tu yat tasya

śira āsīt kapiñjalaḥ

kalaviṅkaḥ surā-pītham

annādaṁ yat sa tittiriḥ

SYNONYMS



soma-pītham-used for drinking soma-rasa; tu-however; yat-which; tasya-of him (Viśvarūpa); śiraḥ-the head; āsīt-became; kapiñjalaḥ-a francolin partridge; kalaviṅkaḥ-a sparrow; surā-pītham-meant for drinking wine; anna-adam-used for eating food; yat-which; saḥ-that; tittiriḥ-a common partridge.





Thereafter, the head meant for drinking soma-rasa was transformed into a kapiñjala [francolin partridge]. Similarly, the head meant for drinking wine was transformed into a kalaviṅka [sparrow], and the head meant for eating food became a tittiri [common partridge].





TEXT 6



brahma-hatyām añjalinā

jagrāha yad apīśvaraḥ

saṁvatsarānte tad aghaṁ

bhūtānāṁ sa viśuddhaye

bhūmy-ambu-druma-yoṣidbhyaś

caturdhā vyabhajad dhariḥ

SYNONYMS



brahma-hatyām-the sinful reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa; añjalinā-with folded hands; jagrāha-assumed the responsibility for; yat api-although; īśvaraḥ-very powerful; saṁvatsara-ante-after one year; tat agham-that sinful reaction; bhūtānām-of the material elements; saḥ-he; viśuddhaye-for purification; bhūmi-unto the earth; ambu-water; druma-trees; yoṣidbhyaḥ-and unto women; caturdhā-in four divisions; vyabhajat-divided; hariḥ-King Indra.





Although Indra was so powerful that he could neutralize the sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa, he repentantly accepted the burden of these reactions with folded hands. He suffered for one year, and then to purify himself he distributed the reactions for this sinful killing among the earth, water, trees and women.





TEXT 7



bhūmis turīyaṁ jagrāha

khāta-pūra-vareṇa vai

īriṇaṁ brahma-hatyāyā

rūpaṁ bhūmau pradṛśyate

SYNONYMS



bhūmiḥ-the earth; turīyam-one fourth; jagrāha-accepted; khāta-pūra-of the filling of holes; vareṇa-because of the benediction; vai-indeed; īriṇam-the deserts; brahma-hatyāyāḥ-of the reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa; rūpam-form; bhūmau-on the earth; pradṛśyate-is visible.





In return for King Indra's benediction that ditches in the earth would be filled automatically, the land accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa. Because of those sinful reactions, we find many deserts on the surface of the earth.





Because deserts are manifestations of the earth's diseased condition, no auspicious ritualistic ceremony can be performed in a desert. Persons destined to live in deserts are understood to be sharing the reactions for the sin of brahma-hatyā, the killing of a brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 8



turyaṁ cheda-viroheṇa

vareṇa jagṛhur drumāḥ

teṣāṁ niryāsa-rūpeṇa

brahma-hatyā pradṛśyate

SYNONYMS



turyam-one fourth; cheda-although being cut; viroheṇa-of growing again; vareṇa-because of the benediction; jagṛhuḥ-accepted; drumāḥ-the trees; teṣām-of them; niryāsa-rūpeṇa-by the liquid oozing from the trees; brahma-hatyā-the reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa; pradṛśyate-is visible.





In return for Indra's benediction that their branches and twigs would grow back when trimmed, the trees accepted one fourth of the reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa. These reactions are visible in the flowing of sap from trees. [Therefore one is forbidden to drink this sap.]





TEXT 9



śaśvat-kāma-vareṇāṁhas

turīyaṁ jagṛhuḥ striyaḥ

rajo-rūpeṇa tāsv aṁho

māsi māsi pradṛśyate

SYNONYMS



śaśvat-perpetual; kāma-of sexual desire; vareṇa-because of the benediction; aṁhaḥ-the sinful reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa; turīyam-one fourth; jagṛhuḥ-accepted; striyaḥ-women; rajaḥ-rūpeṇa-in the form of the menstrual period; tāsu-in them; aṁhaḥ-the sinful reaction; māsi māsi-every month; pradṛśyate-is visible.





In return for Lord Indra's benediction that they would be able to enjoy lusty desires continuously, even during pregnancy for as long as sex is not injurious to the embryo, women accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions. As a result of those reactions, women manifest the signs of menstruation every month.





Women as a class are very lusty, and apparently their continuous lusty desires are never satisfied. In return for Lord Indra's benediction that there would be no cessation to their lusty desires, women accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 10



dravya-bhūyo-vareṇāpas

turīyaṁ jagṛhur malam

tāsu budbuda-phenābhyāṁ

dṛṣṭaṁ tad dharati kṣipan

SYNONYMS



dravya-other things; bhūyaḥ-of increasing; vareṇa-by the benediction; āpaḥ-water; turīyam-one fourth; jagṛhuḥ-accepted; malam-the sinful reaction; tāsu-in the water; budbuda-phenābhyām-by bubbles and foam; dṛṣṭam-visible; tat-that; harati-one collects; kṣipan-throwing away.





And in return for King Indra's benediction that water would increase the volume of other substances with which it was mixed, water accepted one fourth of the sinful reactions. Therefore there are bubbles and foam in water. When one collects water, these should be avoided.





If water is mixed with milk, fruit juice or other similar substances, it increases their volume, and no one can understand which has increased. In return for this benediction, water accepted one fourth of Indra's sinful reactions. These sinful reactions are visible in foam and bubbles. Therefore one should avoid foam and bubbles while collecting drinking water.





TEXT 11



hata-putras tatas tvaṣṭā

juhāvendrāya śatrave

indra-śatro vivardhasva

mā ciraṁ jahi vidviṣam

SYNONYMS



hata-putraḥ-who lost his son; tataḥ-thereafter; tvaṣṭā-Tvaṣṭā; juhāva-performed a sacrifice; indrāya-of Indra; śatrave-for creating an enemy; indra-śatro-O enemy of Indra; vivardhasva-increase; mā-not; ciram-after a long time; jahi-kill; vidviṣam-your enemy.





After Viśvarūpa was killed, his father, Tvaṣṭā, performed ritualistic ceremonies to kill Indra. He offered oblations in the sacrificial fire, saying, "O enemy of Indra, flourish to kill your enemy without delay."





There was some defect in Tvaṣṭā's chanting of the mantra because he chanted it long instead of short, and therefore the meaning changed. Tvaṣṭā intended to chant the word indra-śatro, meaning, "O enemy of Indra." In this mantra, the word indra is in the possessive case (ṣaṣṭhī), and the word indra-śatro is called a tat-puruṣa compound (tatpuruṣa-samāsa). Unfortunately, instead of chanting the mantra short, Tvaṣṭā chanted it long, and its meaning changed from "the enemy of Indra" to "Indra, who is an enemy." Consequently instead of an enemy of Indra's, there emerged the body of Vṛtrāsura, of whom Indra was the enemy.





TEXT 12



athānvāhārya-pacanād

utthito ghora-darśanaḥ

kṛtānta iva lokānāṁ

yugānta-samaye yathā

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; anvāhārya-pacanāt-from the fire known as Anvāhārya; utthitaḥ-arisen; ghora-darśanaḥ-appearing very fearful; kṛtāntaḥ-personified annihilation; iva-like; lokānām-of all the planets; yuga-anta-of the end of the millennium; samaye-at the time; yathā-just as.





Thereafter, from the southern side of the sacrificial fire known as Anvāhārya came a fearful personality who looked like the destroyer of the entire creation at the end of the millennium.





TEXTS 13–17



viṣvag vivardhamānaṁ tam

iṣu-mātraṁ dine dine

dagdha-śaila-pratīkāśaṁ

sandhyābhrānīka-varcasam

tapta-tāmra-śikhā-śmaśruṁ



madhyāhnārkogra-locanam

dedīpyamāne tri-śikhe



śūla āropya rodasī

nṛtyantam unnadantaṁ ca

cālayantaṁ padā mahīm

darī-gambhīra-vaktreṇa



pibatā ca nabhastalam

lihatā jihvayarkṣāṇi

grasatā bhuvana-trayam

mahatā raudra-daṁṣṭreṇa



jṛmbhamāṇaṁ muhur muhuḥ

vitrastā dudruvur lokā

vīkṣya sarve diśo daśa

SYNONYMS



viṣvak-all around; vivardhamānam-increasing; tam-him; iṣu-mātram-an arrow's flight; dine dine-day after day; dagdha-burnt; śaila-mountain; pratīkāśam-resembling; sandhyā-in the evening; abhra-anīka-like an array of clouds; varcasam-having an effulgence; tapta-melted; tāmra-like copper; śikhā-hair; śmaśrum-moustache and beard; madhyāhna-at midday; arka-like the sun; ugra-locanam-having powerful eyes; dedīpyamāne-blazing; tri-śikhe-three-pointed; śūle-on his spear; āropya-keeping; rodasī-heaven and earth; nṛtyantam-dancing; unnadantam-shouting loudly; ca-and; cālayantam-moving; padā-by his foot; mahīm-the earth; darī-gambhīra-as deep as a cave; vaktreṇa-by the mouth; pibatā-drinking; ca-also; nabhastalam-the sky; lihatā-licking up; jihvayā-by the tongue; ṛkṣāṇi-the stars; grasatā-swallowing; bhuvana-trayam-the three worlds; mahatā-very great; raudra-daṁṣṭreṇa-with fearful teeth; jṛmbhamāṇam-yawning; muhuḥ muhuḥ-again and again; vitrastāḥ-fearful; dudruvuḥ-ran; lokāḥ-people; vīkṣya-seeing; sarve-all; diśaḥ daśa-ten directions.





Like arrows released in the four directions, the demon's body grew, day after day. Tall and blackish, he appeared like a burnt hill and was as lustrous as a bright array of clouds in the evening. The hair on the demon's body and his beard and moustache were the color of melted copper, and his eyes were piercing like the midday sun. He appeared unconquerable, as if holding the three worlds on the points of his blazing trident. Dancing and shouting with a loud voice, he made the entire surface of the earth tremble as if from an earthquake. As he yawned again and again, he seemed to be trying to swallow the whole sky with his mouth, which was as deep as a cave. He seemed to be licking up all the stars in the sky with his tongue and eating the entire universe with his long, sharp teeth. Seeing this gigantic demon, everyone, in great fear, ran here and there in all directions.





TEXT 18



yenāvṛtā ime lokās

tapasā tvāṣṭra-mūrtinā

sa vai vṛtra iti proktaḥ

pāpaḥ parama-dāruṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



yena-by whom; āvṛtāḥ-covered; ime-all these; lokāḥ-planets; tapasā-by the austerity; tvāṣṭra-mūrtinā-in the form of the son of Tvaṣṭā; saḥ-he; vai-indeed; vṛtraḥ-Vṛtra; iti-thus; proktaḥ-called; pāpaḥ-personified sin; parama-dāruṇaḥ-very fearful.





That very fearful demon, who was actually the son of Tvaṣṭā, covered all the planetary systems by dint of austerity. Therefore he was named Vṛtra, or one who covers everything.





In the Vedas it is said, sa imāḹ lokān āvṛṇot tad vṛtrasya vṛtratvam: because the demon covered all the planetary systems, his name was Vṛtrāsura.





TEXT 19



taṁ nijaghnur abhidrutya

sagaṇā vibudharṣabhāḥ

svaiḥ svair divyāstra-śastraughaiḥ

so 'grasat tāni kṛtsnaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-him; nijaghnuḥ-struck; abhidrutya-running to; sa-gaṇāḥ-with soldiers; vibudha-ṛṣabhāḥ-all the great demigods; svaiḥ svaiḥ-with their own respective; divya-transcendental; astra-bows and arrows; śastra-oghaiḥ-different weapons; saḥ-he (Vṛtra); agrasat-swallowed; tāni-them (the weapons); kṛtsnaśaḥ-all together.





The demigods, headed by Indra, charged the demon with their soldiers, striking him with their own transcendental bows and arrows and other weapons but Vṛtrāsura swallowed all their weapons.





TEXT 20



tatas te vismitāḥ sarve

viṣaṇṇā grasta-tejasaḥ

pratyañcam ādi-puruṣam

upatasthuḥ samāhitāḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; te-they (the demigods); vismitāḥ-being struck with wonder; sarve-all; viṣaṇṇāḥ-being very morose; grasta-tejasaḥ-having lost all their personal strength; pratyañcam-to the Supersoul; ādi-puruṣam-the original person; upatasthuḥ-prayed; samāhitāḥ-all gathered together.





Struck with wonder and disappointment upon seeing the strength of the demon, the demigods lost their own strength. Therefore they all met together to try to please the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, by worshiping Him.





TEXT 21



śrī-devā ūcuḥ

vāyv-ambarāgny-ap-kṣitayas tri-lokā

brahmādayo ye vayam udvijantaḥ

harāma yasmai balim antako 'sau

bibheti yasmād araṇaṁ tato naḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ-the demigods said; vāyu-composed of air; ambara-sky; agni-fire; ap-water; kṣitayaḥ-and land; tri-lokāḥ-the three worlds; brahma-ādayaḥ-beginning from Lord Brahmā; ye-who; vayam-we; udvijantaḥ-being very much afraid; harāma-offer; yasmai-unto whom; balim-presentation; antakaḥ-the destroyer, death; asau-that; bibheti-fears; yasmāt-from whom; araṇam-shelter; tataḥ-therefore; naḥ-our.





The demigods said: The three worlds are created by the five elements-namely ether, air, fire, water and earth-which are controlled by various demigods, beginning from Lord Brahmā. Being very much afraid that the time factor will end our existence, we offer presentations unto time by performing our work as time dictates. The time factor himself, however, is afraid of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore let us now worship that Supreme Lord, who alone can give us full protection.





When one is afraid of being killed, one must take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is worshiped by all the demigods. beginning from Brahmā, although they are in charge of the various elements of this material world. The words bibheti yasmāt indicate that all the demons, regardless of how great and powerful, fear the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The demigods, being afraid of death, took shelter of the Lord and offered Him these prayers. Although the time factor is fearful to everyone, fear personified is afraid of the Supreme Lord, who is therefore known as abhaya, fearless. Taking shelter of the Supreme Lord brings actual fearlessness, and therefore the demigods decided to take shelter of the Lord.





TEXT 22



avismitaṁ taṁ paripūrṇa-kāmaṁ

svenaiva lābhena samaṁ praśāntam

vinopasarpaty aparaṁ hi bāliśaḥ

śva-lāṅgulenātititarti sindhum

SYNONYMS



avismitam-who is never struck with wonder; tam-Him; paripūrṇa-kāmam-who is fully satisfied; svena-by His own; eva-indeed; lābhena-achievements; samam-equipoised; praśāntam-very steady; vinā-without; upasarpati-approaches; aparam-another; hi-indeed; bāliśaḥ-a fool; śva-of a dog; lāṅgulena-by the tail; atititarti-wants to cross; sindhum-the sea.





Free from all material conceptions of existence and never wonder-struck by anything, the Lord is always jubilant and fully satisfied by His own spiritual perfection. He has no material designations, and therefore He is steady and unattached. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only shelter of everyone. Anyone desiring to be protected by others is certainly a great fool who desires to cross the sea by holding the tail of a dog.





A dog can swim in the water, but if a dog dives in the ocean and someone wants to cross the ocean by holding the dog's tail, he is certainly fool number one. A dog cannot cross the ocean, nor can a person cross the ocean by catching a dog's tail. Similarly, one who desires to cross the ocean of nescience should not seek the shelter of any demigod or anyone else but the fearless shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.58) therefore says:



samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ

mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo-murāreḥ

bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ

padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām





The Lord's lotus feet are an indestructible boat, and if one takes shelter of that boat he can easily cross the ocean of nescience. Consequently there are no dangers for a devotee although he lives within this material world, which is full of dangers at every step. One should seek the shelter of the all-powerful instead of trying to be protected by one's own concocted ideas.





TEXT 23



yasyoru-śṛṅge jagatīṁ sva-nāvaṁ

manur yathābadhya tatāra durgam

sa eva nas tvāṣṭra-bhayād durantāt

trātāśritān vāricaro 'pi nūnam

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; uru-very strong and high; śṛṅge-on the born; jagatīm-in the form of the world; sva-nāvam-his own boat; manuḥ-Manu, King Satyavrata; yathā-just as; ābadhya-binding; tatāra-crossed; durgam-the very difficult to cross (inundation); saḥ-He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva-certainly; naḥ-us; tvāṣṭra-bhayāt-from fear of the son of Tvaṣṭā; durantāt-endless; trātā-deliverer; āśritān-dependents (like us); vāri-caraḥ api-although taking the form of a fish; nūnam-indeed.





The Manu named King Satyavrata formerly saved himself by tying the small boat of the entire world to the horn of the Matsya avatāra, the fish incarnation. By the grace of the Matsya avatāra, Manu saved himself from the great danger of the flood. May that same fish incarnation save us from the great and fearful danger caused by the son of Tvaṣṭā.





TEXT 24



purā svayambhūr api saṁyamāmbhasy

udīrṇa-vātormi-ravaiḥ karāle

eko 'ravindāt patitas tatāra

tasmād bhayād yena sa no 'stu pāraḥ

SYNONYMS



purā-formerly (during the time of creation); svayambhūḥ-Lord Brahmā; api-also; saṁyama-ambhasi-in the water of inundation; udīrṇa-very high; vāta-of wind; ūrmi-and of waves; ravaiḥ-by the sounds; karāle-very fearful; ekaḥ-alone; aravindāt-from the lotus seat; patitaḥ-almost fallen; tatāra-escaped; tasmāt-from that; bhayāt-fearful situation; yena-by whom (the Lord); saḥ-He; naḥ-of us; astu-let there be; pāraḥ-deliverance.





In the beginning of creation, a tremendous wind caused fierce waves of inundating water. The great waves made such a horrible sound that Lord Brahmā almost fell from his seat on the lotus into the water of devastation, but he was saved with the help of the Lord. Thus we also expect the Lord to protect us from this dangerous condition.





TEXT 25



ya eka īśo nija-māyayā naḥ

sasarja yenānusṛjāma viśvam

vayaṁ na yasyāpi puraḥ samīhataḥ

paśyāma liṅgaṁ pṛthag īśa-māninaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-He who; ekaḥ-one; īśaḥ-controller; nija-māyayā-by His transcendental potency; naḥ-us; sasarja-created; yena-by whom (through whose mercy); anusṛjāma-we also create; viśvam-the universe; vayam-we; na-not; yasya-of whom; api-although; puraḥ-in front of us; samīhataḥ-of Him who is acting; paśyāma-see; liṅgam-the form; pṛthak-separate; īśa-as controllers; māninaḥ-thinking of ourselves.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who created us by His external potency and by whose mercy we expand the creation of the universe, is always situated before us as the Supersoul, but we cannot see His form. We are unable to see Him because all of us think that we are separate and independent gods.





Here is an explanation of why the conditioned soul cannot see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. Even though the Lord appears before us as Lord Kṛṣṇa or Lord Rāmacandra and lives in human society as a leader or king, the conditioned soul cannot understand Him. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam: [Bg. 9.11] rascals (mūḍhas) deride the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thinking Him an ordinary human being. However insignificant we are, we think that we are also God, that we can create a universe or that we can create another God. This is why we cannot see or understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard, Śrīla Madhvācārya says:



liṅgam eva paśyāmaḥ

kadācid abhimānas tu

devānām api sann iva

prāyaḥ kāleṣu nāsty eva

tāratamyena so 'pi tu





We are all conditioned to various degrees, but we think that we are God. This is why we cannot understand who God is or see Him face to face.





TEXTS 26–27



yo naḥ sapatnair bhṛśam ardyamānān

devarṣi-tiryaṅ-nṛṣu nitya eva

kṛtāvatāras tanubhiḥ sva-māyayā

kṛtvātmasāt pāti yuge yuge ca

tam eva devaṁ vayam ātma-daivataṁ



paraṁ pradhānaṁ puruṣaṁ viśvam anyam

vrajāma sarve śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

svānāṁ sa no dhāsyati śaṁ mahātmā

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-He who; naḥ-us; sapatnaiḥ-by our enemies, the demons; bhṛśam-almost always; ardyamānān-being persecuted; deva-among the demigods; ṛṣi-the saintly persons; tiryak-the animals; nṛṣu-and men; nityaḥ-always; eva-certainly; kṛta-avatāraḥ-appearing as an incarnation; tanubhiḥ-with different forms; sva-māyayā-by His internal potency; kṛtvā ātmasāt-considering very near and dear to Him; pāti-protects; yuge yuge-in every millennium; ca-and; tam-Him; eva-indeed; devam-the Supreme Lord; vayam-all of us; ātma-daivatam-the Lord of all living entities; param-transcendental; pradhānam-the original cause of the total material energy; puruṣam-the supreme enjoyer; viśvam-whose energy constitutes this universe; anyam-separately situated; vrajāma-we approach; sarve-all; śaraṇam-shelter; śaraṇyam-suitable as shelter; svānām-unto His own devotees; saḥ-He; naḥ-unto us; dhāsyati-shall give; śam-good fortune; mahātmā-the Supersoul.





By His inconceivable internal potency, the Supreme Personality of Godhead expands into various transcendental bodies as Vāmanadeva, the incarnation of strength among the demigods; Paraśurāma, the incarnation among saints; Nṛsiṁhadeva and Varāha, incarnations among animals; and Matsya and Kūrma, incarnations among aquatics. He accepts various transcendental bodies among all types of living entities, and among human beings He especially appears as Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma. By His causeless mercy, He protects the demigods, who are always harassed by the demons. He is the supreme worshipable Deity of all living entities. He is the supreme cause, represented as the male and female creative energies. Although different from this universe, He exists in His universal form [virāṭ-rūpa]. In our fearful condition, let us take shelter of Him, for we are sure that the Supreme Lord, the Supreme Soul, will give us His protection.





In this verse, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is ascertained to be the original cause of creation. Śrīdhara Svāmī, in his commentary Bhāvārtha-dīpikā, replies to the idea that prakṛti and puruṣa are the causes of the cosmic manifestation. As stated herein, paraṁ pradhānaṁ puruṣaṁ viśvam anyam: "He is the supreme cause, represented as the male and female creative energies. Although different from this universe, He exists in His universal form [virāṭ 'rūpa]." The word prakṛti, which is used to indicate the source of generation, refers to the material energy of the Supreme Lord, and the word puruṣa refers to the living entities, who are the superior energy of the Lord. Both the prakṛti and puruṣa ultimately enter the Supreme Lord, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām).



Although prakṛti and puruṣa superficially appear to be the causes of the material manifestation, both are emanations of different energies of the Supreme Lord. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the cause of prakṛti and puruṣa. He is the original cause (sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]). The Nāradīya Purāṇa says:



avikāro 'pi paramaḥ

prakṛtis tu vikāriṇī

anupraviśya govindaḥ

prakṛtiś cābhidhīyate





Both the prakṛti and puruṣa, which are inferior and superior energies, are emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As explained in Bhagavad-gītā (gām āviśya), the Lord enters the prakṛti, and then the prakṛti creates different manifestations. The prakṛti is not independent or beyond His energies. Vāsudeva, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the original cause of everything. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (10.8):



ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

iti matvā bhajante māṁ

budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ





"I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts." In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.33) the Lord also says, aham evāsam evāgre: "Only I existed before the creation." This is confirmed in the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa as follows:



smṛtir avyavadhānena

prakṛtitvam iti sthitiḥ

ubhayātmaka-sūtitvād

vāsudevaḥ paraḥ pumān

prakṛtiḥ puruṣaś ceti

śabdair eko 'bhidhīyate





To generate the universe, the Lord acts indirectly as the puruṣa and directly as the prakṛti. Because both energies emanate from Lord Vāsudeva, the all-pervasive Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is known as both prakṛti and puruṣa. Therefore Vāsudeva is the cause of everything (sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]).





TEXT 28



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti teṣāṁ mahārāja

surāṇām upatiṣṭhatām

pratīcyāṁ diśy abhūd āviḥ

śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; teṣām-of them; mahārāja-O King; surāṇām-of the demigods; upatiṣṭhatām-praying; pratīcyām-inside; diśi-in the direction; abhūt-became; āviḥ-visible; śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharaḥ-bearing the transcendental weapons: the conchshell, disc and club.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, when all the demigods offered Him their prayers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, carrying His weapons, the conchshell, disc and club, appeared first within their hearts and then before them.





TEXTS 29–30



ātma-tulyaiḥ ṣoḍaśabhir

vinā śrīvatsa-kaustubhau

paryupāsitam unnidra-

śarad-amburuhekṣaṇam

dṛṣṭvā tam avanau sarva



īkṣaṇāhlāda-viklavāḥ

daṇḍavat patitā rājañ

chanair utthāya tuṣṭuvuḥ

SYNONYMS



ātma-tulyaiḥ-almost equal to Himself; ṣoḍaśabhiḥ-by sixteen (servants); vinā-without; śrīvatsa-kaustubhau-the Śrīvatsa mark and Kaustubha jewel; paryupāsitam-being attended on all sides; unnidra-blooming; śarat-of the autumn; amburuha-like lotus flowers; īkṣaṇam-having eyes; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; tam-Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa); avanau-on the ground; sarve-all of them; īkṣaṇa-from directly seeing; āhlāda-with happiness; viklavāḥ-being overwhelmed; daṇḍa-vat-like a stick; patitāḥ-fell; rājan-O King; śanaiḥ-slowly; utthāya-standing up; tuṣṭuvuḥ-offered prayers.





Surrounding and serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, were sixteen personal attendants, decorated with ornaments and appearing exactly like Him but without the mark of Śrīvatsa and the Kaustubha jewel. O King, when all the demigods saw the Supreme Lord in that posture, smiling with eyes like the petals of lotuses grown in autumn, they were overwhelmed with happiness and immediately fell down like rods, offering daṇḍavats. Then they slowly rose and pleased the Lord by offering Him prayers.





In Vaikuṇṭhaloka the Supreme Personality of Godhead has four hands and decorations like the Śrīvatsa mark on His chest and the gem known as Kaustubha. These are special indications of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord's personal attendants and other devotees in Vaikuṇṭha have the same features, except for the Śrīvatsa mark and the Kaustubha gem.





TEXT 31



śrī-devā ūcuḥ

namas te yajña-vīryāya

vayase uta te namaḥ

namas te hy asta-cakrāya

namaḥ supuru-hūtaye

SYNONYMS



śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ-the demigods said; namaḥ-obeisances; te-unto You; yajña-vīryāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is able to give the results of sacrifice; vayase-who is the time factor, which ends the results of yajña; uta-although; te-unto You; namaḥ-obeisances; namaḥ-obeisances; te-unto You; hi-indeed; asta-cakrāya-who throws the disc; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; supuru-hūtaye-having varieties of transcendental names.





The demigods said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are competent to give the results of sacrifice, and You are also the time factor that destroys all such results in due course. You are the one who releases the cakra to kill the demons. O Lord, who possesses many varieties of names, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 32



yat te gatīnāṁ tisṛṇām

īśituḥ paramaṁ padam

nārvācīno visargasya

dhātar veditum arhati

SYNONYMS



yat-which; te-of You; gatīnām tisṛṇām-of the three destinations (the heavenly planets, the earthly planets and hell); īśituḥ-who are the controller; paramam padam-the supreme abode, Vaikuṇṭhaloka; na-not; arvācīnaḥ-a person appearing after; visargasya-the creation; dhātaḥ-O supreme controller; veditum-to understand; arhati-is able.





O supreme controller, You control the three destinations [promotion to the heavenly planets, birth as a human being, and condemnation in hell], yet Your supreme abode is Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma. Since we appeared after You created this cosmic manifestation, Your activities are impossible for us to understand. We therefore have nothing to offer You but our humble obeisances.





An inexperienced man generally does not know what to beg from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone is under the jurisdiction of the created material world, and no one knows what benediction to ask when praying to the Supreme Lord. People generally pray to be promoted to the heavenly planets because they have no information of Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Śrīla Madhvācārya quotes the following verse:



deva-lokāt pitṛ-lokāt

nirayāc cāpi yat param

tisṛbhyaḥ paramaṁ sthānaṁ

vaiṣṇavaṁ viduṣāṁ gatiḥ





There are different planetary systems, known as Devaloka (the planets of the demigods), Pitṛloka (the planet of the Pitās) and Niraya (the hellish planets). When one transcends these various planetary systems and enters Vaikuṇṭhaloka, he achieves the ultimate resort of the Vaiṣṇavas. Vaiṣṇavas have nothing to do with the other planetary systems.





TEXT 33



oṁ namas te 'stu bhagavan nārāyaṇa vāsudevādi-puruṣa mahā-puruṣa mahānubhāva parama-maṅgala parama-kalyāṇa parama-kāruṇika kevala jagad-ādhāra lokaika-nātha sarveśvara lakṣmī-nātha paramahaṁsa-parivrājakaiḥ parameṇātma-yoga-samādhinā paribhāvita-parisphuṭa-pāramahaṁsya-dharmeṇodghāṭita-tamaḥ-kapāṭa-dvāre citte 'pāvṛta ātma-loke svayam upalabdha-nija-sukhānubhavo bhavān.



SYNONYMS



oṁ-O Lord; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; te-unto You; astu-let there be; bhagavan-O Supreme Personality of Godhead; nārāyaṇa-the resort of all living entities, Nārāyaṇa; vāsudeva-Lord Vāsudeva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ādi-puruṣa-the original person; mahā-puruṣa-the most exalted personality; mahā-anubhāva-the supremely opulent; parama-maṅgala-the most auspicious; parama-kalyāṇa-the supreme benediction; parama-kāruṇika-the supremely merciful; kevala-changeless; jagat-ādhāra-the support of the cosmic manifestation; loka-eka-nātha-the only proprietor of all the planetary systems; sarva-īśvara-the supreme controller; lakṣmī-nātha-the husband of the goddess of fortune; paramahaṁsa-parivrājakaiḥ-by the topmost sannyāsīs wandering all over the world; parameṇa-by supreme; ātma-yoga-samādhinā-absorption in bhakti-yoga; paribhāvita-fully purified; parisphuṭa-and fully manifested; pāramahaṁsya-dharmeṇa-by executing the transcendental process of devotional service; udghāṭita-pushed open; tamaḥ-of illusory existence; kapāṭa-in which the door; dvāre-existing as the entrance; citte-in the mind; apāvṛte-without contamination; ātma-loke-in the spiritual world; svayam-personally; upalabdha-experiencing; nija-personal; sukha-anubhavaḥ-perception of happiness; bhavān-Your Lordship.





O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O Nārāyaṇa, O Vāsudeva, original person! O most exalted person, supreme experience, welfare personified! O supreme benediction, supremely merciful and changeless! O support of the cosmic manifestation, sole proprietor of all planetary systems, master of everything and husband of the goddess of fortune! Your Lordship is realized by the topmost sannyāsīs, who wander about the world to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness, fully absorbed in samādhi through bhakti-yoga. Because their minds are concentrated upon You, they can receive the conception of Your personality in their fully purified hearts. When the darkness in their hearts is completely eradicated and You are revealed to them, the transcendental bliss they enjoy is the transcendental form of Your Lordship. No one but such persons can realize You. Therefore we simply offer You our respectful obeisances.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead has numerous transcendental names pertaining to different grades of revelation to various grades of devotees and transcendentalists. When He is realized in His impersonal form He is called the Supreme Brahman, when realized as the Paramātmā He is called antaryāmī, and when He expands Himself in different forms for material creation He is called Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. When He is realized as Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha-the Caturvyūha, who are beyond the three forms of Viṣṇu-He is the Vaikuṇṭha Nārāyaṇa. Above realization of Nārāyaṇa is realization of Baladeva, and above that is realization of Kṛṣṇa. All these realizations are possible when one engages fully in devotional service. The covered core of one's heart is then completely open to receiving an understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various forms.





TEXT 34



duravabodha iva tavāyaṁ vihāra-yogo yad aśaraṇo 'śarīra idam anavekṣitāsmat-samavāya ātmanaivāvikriyamāṇena saguṇam aguṇaḥ sṛjasi pāsi harasi.



SYNONYMS



duravabodhaḥ-difficult to understand; iva-quite; tava-Your; ayam-this; vihāra-yogaḥ-engagement in the pastimes of material creation, maintenance and annihilation; yat-which; aśaraṇaḥ-not dependent on any other support; aśarīraḥ-without having a material body; idam-this; anavekṣita-without waiting for; asmat-of us; samavāyaḥ-the cooperation; ātmanā-by Your own self; eva-indeed; avikriyamāṇena-without being transformed; sa-guṇam-the material modes of nature; aguṇaḥ-although transcendental to such material qualities; sṛjasi-You create; pāsi-maintain; harasi-annihilate.





O Lord, You need no support, and although You have no material body, You do not need cooperation from us. Since You are the cause of the cosmic manifestation and You supply its material ingredients without being transformed, You create, maintain and annihilate this cosmic manifestation by Yourself. Nevertheless, although You appear engaged in material activity, You are transcendental to all material qualities. Consequently these transcendental activities of Yours are extremely difficult to understand.





The Brahma-saṁhitā (5.37) says, goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ: the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is always situated in Goloka Vṛndāvana. It is also said, vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya padam ekaṁ na gacchati: Kṛṣṇa never goes even a step from Vṛndāvana. Nevertheless, although Kṛṣṇa is situated in His own abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana, He is simultaneously all-pervading and is therefore present everywhere. This is very difficult for a conditioned soul to understand. but devotees can understand how Kṛṣṇa, without undergoing any changes, can simultaneously be in His abode and be all-pervasive. The demigods are understood to be various limbs of the Supreme Lord's body, although the Supreme Lord has no material body and does not need anyone's help. He is spread everywhere (mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ jagad avyakta-mūrtinā). Nevertheless, He is not present everywhere in His spiritual form. According to the Māyāvāda philosophy, the Supreme Truth, being all-pervasive, does not need a transcendental form. The Māyāvādīs suppose that since His form is distributed everywhere, He has no form. This is untrue. The Lord keeps His transcendental form, and at the same time He extends everywhere, in every nook and corner of the material creation.





TEXT 35



atha tatra bhavān kiṁ devadattavad iha guṇa-visarga-patitaḥ pāratantryeṇa sva-kṛta-kuśalākuśalaṁ phalam upādadāty āhosvid ātmārāma upaśama-śīlaḥ samañjasa-darśana udāsta iti ha vāva na vidāmaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; tatra-in that; bhavān-Your Lordship; kim-whether; deva-datta-vat-like an ordinary human being, forced by the fruits of his activities; iha-in this material world; guṇa-visarga-patitaḥ-fallen in a material body impelled by the modes of material nature; pāratantryeṇa-by dependence on the conditions of time, space, activity and nature; sva-kṛta-executed by oneself; kuśala-auspicious; akuśalam-inauspicious; phalam-results of action; upādadāti-accepts; āhosvit-or; ātmārāmaḥ-completely self-satisfied; upaśama-śīlaḥ-self-controlled in nature; samañjasa-darśanaḥ-not deprived of full spiritual potencies; udāste-remains neutral as the witness; iti-thus; ha vāva-certainly; na vidāmaḥ-we do not understand.





These are our inquiries. The ordinary conditioned soul is subject to the material laws, and he thus receives the fruits of his actions. Does Your Lordship, like an ordinary human being, exist within this material world in a body produced by the material modes? Do You enjoy or suffer the good or bad results of actions under the influence of time, past work and so forth? Or, on the contrary, are You present here only as a neutral witness who is self-sufficient, free from all material desires, and always full of spiritual potency? We certainly cannot understand Your actual position.





In Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa says that He descends to this material world for two purposes, namely paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]-to relieve the devotees and kill demons or nondevotees. These two kinds of action are the same for the Absolute Truth. When the Lord comes to punish the demons, He bestows His favor upon them, and similarly when He delivers His devotees and gives them relief, He also bestows His favor. Thus the Lord bestows His favor equally upon the conditioned souls. When a conditioned soul gives relief to others he acts piously, and when he gives trouble to others he acts impiously, but the Lord is neither pious nor impious; He is always full in His spiritual potency, by which He shows equal mercy to the punishable and the protectable. The Lord is apāpa-viddham; He is never contaminated by the reactions of so-called sinful activities. When Kṛṣṇa was present on this earth, He killed many inimical nondevotees, but they all received sārūpya; in other words, they returned to their original spiritual bodies. One who does not know the Lord's position says that God is unkind to him but merciful to others. Actually the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.29), samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ: "I am equal to everyone. No one is My enemy, and no one is My friend." But He also says, ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā mayi te teṣu cāpy aham: "If one becomes My devotee and fully surrenders unto Me, I give him special attention."





TEXT 36



na hi virodha ubhayaṁ bhagavaty aparimita-guṇa-gaṇa īśvare 'navagāhya-māhātmye 'rvācīna-vikalpa-vitarka-vicāra-pramāṇābhāsa-kutarka-śāstra-kalilāntaḥkaraṇāśraya-duravagraha-vādināṁ vivādānavasara uparata-samasta-māyāmaye kevala evātma-māyām antardhāya ko nv artho durghaṭa iva bhavati svarūpa-dvayābhāvāt.



SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-certainly; virodhaḥ-contradiction; ubhayam-both; bhagavati-in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aparimita-unlimited; guṇa-gaṇe-whose transcendental attributes; īśvare-in the supreme controller; anavagāhya-possessing; māhātmye-unfathomable ability and glories; arvācīna-recent; vikalpa-full of equivocal calculations; vitarka-opposing arguments; vicāra-judgments; pramāṇa-ābhāsa-imperfect evidence; kutarka-useless arguments; śāstra-by unauthorized scriptures; kalila-agitated; antaḥkaraṇa-minds; āśraya-whose shelter; duravagraha-with wicked obstinacies; vādinām-of theorists; vivāda-of the controversies; anavasare-not within the range; uparata-withdrawn; samasta-from whom all; māyā-maye-illusory energy; kevale-without a second; eva-indeed; ātma-māyām-the illusory energy, which can do and undo the inconceivable; antardhāya-placing between; kaḥ-what; nu-indeed; arthaḥ-meaning; durghaṭaḥ-impossible; iva-as it were; bhavati-is; sva-rūpa-natures; dvaya-of two; abhāvāt-due to the absence.





O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all contradictions can be reconciled in You. O Lord, since You are the Supreme Person, the reservoir of unlimited spiritual qualities, the supreme controller, Your unlimited glories are inconceivable to the conditioned souls. Many modern theologians argue about right and wrong without knowing what is actually right. Their arguments are always false and their judgments inconclusive because they have no authorized evidence with which to gain knowledge of You. Because their minds are agitated by scriptures containing false conclusions, they are unable to understand the truth concerning You. Furthermore, because of polluted eagerness to arrive at the right conclusion, their theories are incapable of revealing You, who are transcendental to their material conceptions. You are one without a second, and therefore in You contradictions like doing and not doing, happiness and distress, are not contradictory. Your potency is so great that it can do and undo anything as You like. With the help of that potency, what is impossible for You? Since there is no duality in Your constitutional position, You can do everything by the influence of Your energy.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being self-sufficient, is full of transcendental bliss (ātmārāma). He enjoys bliss in two ways-when He appears happy and when He appears distressed. Distinctions and contradictions are impossible in Him because only from Him have they emanated. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of all knowledge, all potency, all strength, opulence and influence. There is no limit to His powers. Since He is full in all transcendental attributes, nothing abominable from the material world can exist in Him. He is transcendental and spiritual, and therefore conceptions of material happiness and distress do not apply to Him.



We should not be astonished to find contradictions in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Actually there are no contradictions. That is the meaning of His being supreme. Because He is all-powerful, He is not subject to the conditioned soul's arguments regarding His existence or nonexistence. He is pleased to protect His devotees by killing their enemies. He enjoys both the killing and the protecting.



Such freedom from duality applies not only to the Lord but also to His devotees. In Vṛndāvana, the damsels of Vrajabhūmi enjoy transcendental bliss in the company of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and they feel the same transcendental bliss in separation when Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma leave Vṛndāvana for Mathurā. There is no question of material pains or pleasures for either the Supreme Personality of Godhead or His pure devotees, although they are sometimes superficially said to be distressed or happy. One who is ātmārāma is blissful in both ways.



Nondevotees cannot understand the contradictions present in the Supreme Lord or His devotees. Therefore in Bhagavad-gītā the Lord says, bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: [Bg. 18.55] the transcendental pastimes can be understood through devotional service; to nondevotees they are inconceivable. Acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet: the Supreme Lord and His form, name, pastimes and paraphernalia are inconceivable to nondevotees, and one should not try to understand such realities simply by logical arguments. They will not bring one to the right conclusion about the Absolute Truth.





TEXT 37



sama-viṣama-matīnāṁ matam anusarasi yathā rajju-khaṇḍaḥ sarpādi-dhiyām.



SYNONYMS



sama-equal or proper; viṣama-and unequal or mistaken; matīnām-of those having intelligence; matam-conclusion; anusarasi-You follow; yathā-just as; rajju-khaṇḍaḥ-a piece of rope; sarpa-ādi-a snake, etc.; dhiyām-of those who perceive.





A rope causes fear for a bewildered person who considers it a snake, but not for a person with proper intelligence who knows it to be only a rope. Similarly, You, as the Supersoul in everyone's heart, inspire fear or fearlessness according to one's intelligence, but in You there is no duality.





In Bhagavad-gītā (4.11) the Lord says, ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham: "As one surrenders unto Me, I reward him accordingly." The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the reservoir of everything, including all knowledge, all truth and all contradictions. The example cited herein is very appropriate. A rope is one truth, but some mistake it for a snake, whereas others know it to be a rope. Similarly, devotees who know the Supreme Personality of Godhead do not see contradictions in Him, but nondevotees regard Him as the snakelike source of all fear. For example, when Nṛsiṁhadeva appeared, Prahlāda Mahārāja saw the Lord as the supreme solace, whereas his father, a demon, saw Him as the ultimate death. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37), bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syāt: fear results from being absorbed in duality. When one is in knowledge of duality, one knows both fear and bliss. The same Supreme Lord is a source of bliss to devotees and fear to nondevotees who have a poor fund of knowledge. God is one, but people understand the Absolute Truth from different angles of vision. The unintelligent see contradictions in Him, but sober devotees find no contradictions.





TEXT 38



sa eva hi punaḥ sarva-vastuni vastu-svarūpaḥ sarveśvaraḥ sakala-jagat-kāraṇa-kāraṇa-bhūtaḥ sarva-pratyag-ātmatvāt sarva-guṇābhāsopalakṣita eka eva paryavaśeṣitaḥ.



SYNONYMS



saḥ-He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva-indeed; hi-certainly; punaḥ-again; sarva-vastuni-in everything, material and spiritual; vastu-svarūpaḥ-the substance; sarva-īśvaraḥ-the controller of everything; sakala-jagat-of the whole universe; kāraṇa-of the causes; kāraṇa-bhūtaḥ-existing as the cause; sarva-pratyak-ātmatvāt-because of being the Supersoul of every living being, or being present in everything, even the atom; sarva-guṇa-of all the effects of the material modes of nature (such as intelligence and the senses); ābhāsa-by the manifestations; upalakṣitaḥ-perceived; ekaḥ-alone; eva-indeed; paryavaśeṣitaḥ-left remaining.





With deliberation, one will see that the Supreme Soul, although manifested in different ways, is actually the basic principle of everything. The total material energy is the cause of the material manifestation, but the material energy is caused by Him. Therefore He is the cause of all causes, the manifester of intelligence and the senses. He is perceived as the Supersoul of everything. Without Him, everything would be dead. You, as that Supersoul, the supreme controller, are the only one remaining.





The words sarva-vastuni vastu-svarūpaḥ indicate that the Supreme Lord is the active principle of everything. As described in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.35):



eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who enters the existence of every universe and every atom by one of His plenary portions and thus manifests His infinite energy throughout the material creation." By His one plenary portion as Paramātmā, antaryāmī, the Lord is all-pervading throughout the unlimited universes. He is the pratyak, or antaryāmī, of all living entities. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (13.3), kṣetrajñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata: "O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all bodies." Because the Lord is the Supersoul, He is the active principle of every living entity and even the atom (aṇḍa-ntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham). He is the actual reality. According to various stages of intelligence, one realizes the presence of the Supreme in everything through the manifestations of His energy. The entire world is permeated by the three guṇas, and one can understand His presence according to one's modes of material nature.





TEXT 39



atha ha vāva tava mahimāmṛta-rasa-samudra-vipruṣā sakṛd avalīḍhayā sva-manasi niṣyandamānānavarata-sukhena vismārita-dṛṣṭa-śruta-viṣaya-sukha-leśābhāsāḥ parama-bhāgavatā ekāntino bhagavati sarva-bhūta-priya-suhṛdi sarvātmani nitarāṁ nirantaraṁ nirvṛta-manasaḥ katham u ha vā ete madhumathana punaḥ svārtha-kuśalā hy ātma-priya-suhṛdaḥ sādhavas tvac-caraṇāmbujānusevāṁ visṛjanti na yatra punar ayaṁ saṁsāra-paryāvartaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha ha-therefore; vāva-indeed; tava-Your; mahima-of glories; amṛta-of the nectar; rasa-of the mellow; samudra-of the ocean; vipruṣā-by a drop; sakṛt-only once; avalīḍhayā-tasted; sva-manasi-in his mind; niṣyandamāna-flowing; anavarata-continuously; sukhena-by the transcendental bliss; vismārita-forgotten; dṛṣṭa-from material sight; śruta-and sound; viṣaya-sukha-of the material happiness; leśa-ābhāsāḥ-the dim reflection of a tiny portion; parama-bhāgavatāḥ-great, exalted devotees; ekāntinaḥ-who have faith only in the Supreme Lord and nothing else; bhagavati-in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-bhūta-to all living entities; priya-who is dearmost; suhṛdi-the friend; sarva-ātmani-the Supersoul of all; nitarām-completely; nirantaram-continuously; nirvṛta-with happiness; manasaḥ-those whose minds; katham-how; u ha-then; vā-or; ete-these; madhu-mathana-O killer of the Madhu demon; punaḥ-again; sva-artha-kuśalāḥ-who are expert in the interest of life; hi-indeed; ātma-priya-suhṛdaḥ-who have accepted You as the Supersoul, dearmost lover and friend; sādhavaḥ-the devotees; tvat-caraṇa-ambuja-anusevām-service to the lotus feet of Your Lordship; visṛjanti-can give up; na-not; yatra-wherein; punaḥ-again; ayam-this; saṁsāra-paryāvartaḥ-repetition of birth and death within the material world.





Therefore, O killer of the Madhu demon, incessant transcendental bliss flows in the minds of those who have even once tasted but a drop of the nectar from the ocean of Your glories. Such exalted devotees forget the tiny reflection of so-called material happiness produced from the material senses of sight and sound. Free from all desires, such devotees are the real friends of all living entities. Offering their minds unto You and enjoying transcendental bliss, they are expert in achieving the real goal of life. O Lord, You are the soul and dear friend of such devotees, who never need return to this material world. How could they give up engagement in Your devotional service?





Although nondevotees, because of their meager knowledge and speculative habits, cannot understand the real nature of the Lord, a devotee who has once tasted the nectar from the Lord's lotus feet can realize what transcendental pleasure there is in the Lord's devotional service. A devotee knows that simply by rendering service to the Lord, he serves everyone. Therefore devotees are real friends to all living entities. Only a pure devotee can preach the glories of the Lord for the benefit of all conditioned souls.





TEXT 40



tri-bhuvanātma-bhavana trivikrama tri-nayana tri-loka-manoharānubhāva tavaiva vibhūtayo ditija-danujādayaś cāpi teṣām upakrama-samayo 'yam iti svātma-māyayā sura-nara-mṛga-miśrita-jalacarākṛtibhir yathāparādhaṁ daṇḍaṁ daṇḍa-dhara dadhartha evam enam api bhagavañ jahi tvāṣṭram uta yadi manyase.



SYNONYMS



tri-bhuvana-ātma-bhavana-O Lord, You are the shelter of the three worlds because You are the Supersoul of the three worlds; tri-vikrama-O Lord, who assumes the form of Vāmana, Your power and opulence are distributed throughout the three worlds; tri-nayana-O maintainer and seer of the three worlds; tri-loka-manohara-anubhāva-O You who are perceived as the most beautiful within the three worlds; tava-of You; eva-certainly; vibhūtayaḥ-the expansions of energy; diti-ja-danu-ja-ādayaḥ-the demoniac sons of Diti, and the Dānavas, another type of demon; ca-and; api-also (the human beings); teṣām-of all of them; upakrama-samayaḥ-the time of enterprise; ayam-this; iti-thus; sva-ātma-māyayā-by Your own energy; sura-nara-mṛga-miśrita-jalacara-ākṛtibhiḥ-with different forms like those of the demigods, human beings, animals, mixtures and aquatics (the incarnations Vāmana, Lord Rāmacandra, Kṛṣṇa, Varāha, Hayagrīva, Nṛsiṁha, Matsya and Kūrma); yathā-aparādham-according to their offenses; daṇḍam-punishment; daṇḍa-dhara-O supreme chastiser; dadhartha-You awarded; evam-thus; enam-this one (Vṛtrāsura); api-also; bhagavan-O Supreme Personality of Godhead; jahi-kill; tvāṣṭram-the son of Tvaṣṭā; uta-indeed; yadi manyase-if You think it proper.





O Lord, O personified three worlds, father of the three worlds! O strength of the three worlds, in the form of the Vāmana incarnation! O three-eyed form of Nṛsiṁhadeva! O most beautiful person within the three worlds! Everything and everyone, including human beings and even the Daitya demons and the Dānavas, is but an expansion of Your energy. O supremely powerful one, You have always appeared in Your forms as the various incarnations to punish the demons as soon as they become very powerful. You appear as Lord Vāmanadeva, Lord Rāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa. You appear sometimes as an animal like Lord Boar, sometimes a mixed incarnation like Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva and Lord Hayagrīva, and sometimes an aquatic like Lord Fish and Lord Tortoise. Assuming such various forms, You have always punished the demons and Dānavas. We therefore pray that Your Lordship appear today as another incarnation, if You so desire, to kill the great demon Vṛtrāsura.





There are two kinds of devotees, known as sakāma and akāma. Pure devotees are akāma, whereas devotees in the upper planetary systems, such as the demigods, are called sakāma because they still want to enjoy material opulence. Because of their pious activities, the sakāma devotees are promoted to the higher planetary systems, but at heart they still desire to lord it over the material resources. The sakāma devotees are sometimes disturbed by the demons and Rākṣasas, but the Lord is so kind that He always saves them by appearing as an incarnation. The Lord's incarnations are so powerful that Lord Vāmanadeva covered the entire universe with two steps and therefore had no place for His third step. The Lord is called Trivikrama because He showed His strength by delivering the entire universe with merely three steps.



The difference between sakāma and akāma devotees is that when sakāma devotees, like the demigods, fall into difficulty, they approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead for relief, whereas akāma devotees, even in the greatest danger, never disturb the Lord for material benefits. Even if an akāma devotee is suffering, he thinks this is due to his past impious activities and agrees to suffer the consequences. He never disturbs the Lord. Sakāma devotees immediately pray to the Lord as soon as they are in difficulty, but they are regarded as pious because they consider themselves fully dependent on the mercy of the Lord. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.8):



tat te 'nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk





Even while suffering in the midst of difficulties, devotees simply offer their prayers and service more enthusiastically. In this way they become firmly fixed in devotional service and eligible to return home, back to Godhead, without a doubt. Sakāma devotees, of course, achieve from the Lord the results they desire from their prayers, but they do not immediately become fit to return to Godhead. It is to be noted herein that Lord Viṣṇu, in His various incarnations, is always the protector of His devotees. Śrīla Madhvācārya says: vividhaṁ bhāva-pātratvāt sarve viṣṇor vibhūtayaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead (kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam). All the other incarnations proceed from Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 41



asmākaṁ tāvakānāṁ tatatata natānāṁ hare tava caraṇa-nalina-yugala-dhyānānubaddha-hṛdaya-nigaḍānāṁ sva-liṅga-vivaraṇenātmasāt-kṛtānām anukampānurañjita-viśada-rucira-śiśira-smitāvalokena vigalita-madhura-mukha-rasāmṛta-kalayā cāntas tāpam anaghārhasi śamayitum.



SYNONYMS



asmākam-of us; tāvakānām-who are wholly and solely dependent upon You; tata-tata-O grandfather, father of the father; natānām-who are fully surrendered unto You; hare-O Lord Hari; tava-Your; caraṇa-on the feet; nalina-yugala-like two blue lotus flowers; dhyāna-by meditation; anubaddha-bound; hṛdaya-in the heart; nigaḍānām-whose chains; sva-liṅga-vivaraṇena-by manifesting Your own form; ātmasāt-kṛtānām-of those You have accepted as Your own; anukampā-by compassion; anurañjita-being colored; viśada-bright; rucira-very pleasing; śiśira-cool; smita-with a smile; avalokena-by Your glance; vigalita-melted with compassion; madhura-mukha-rasa-of the very sweet words from Your mouth; amṛta-kalayā-by the drops of nectar; ca-and; antaḥ-within the cores of our hearts; tāpam-the great pain; anagha-O supreme pure; arhasi-You deserve; śamayitum-to curb.





O supreme protector, O grandfather, O supreme pure, O Lord! We are all surrendered souls at Your lotus feet. Indeed, our minds are bound to Your lotus feet in meditation by chains of love. Now please manifest Your incarnation. Accepting us as Your own eternal servants and devotees, be pleased with us and sympathetic toward us. By Your love-filled glance, with its cool and pleasing smile of sympathy, and by the sweet, nectarean words emanating from Your beautiful face, free us from the anxiety caused by this Vṛtrāsura, who always pains the cores of our hearts.





Lord Brahmā is considered the father of the demigods, but Kṛṣṇa, or Lord Viṣṇu, is the father of Brahmā because Brahmā took birth from the lotus flower growing from the Lord's abdomen.





TEXT 42



atha bhagavaṁs tavāsmābhir akhila-jagad-utpatti-sthiti-laya-nimittāyamāna-divya-māyā-vinodasya sakala-jīva-nikāyānām antar-hṛdayeṣu bahir api ca brahma-pratyag-ātma-svarūpeṇa pradhāna-rūpeṇa ca yathā-deśa-kāla-dehāvasthāna-viśeṣaṁ tad-upādānopalambhakatayānubhavataḥ sarva-pratyaya-sākṣiṇa ākāśa-śarīrasya sākṣāt para-brahmaṇaḥ paramātmanaḥ kiyān iha vārtha-viśeṣo vijñāpanīyaḥ syād visphuliṅgādibhir iva hiraṇya-retasaḥ.



SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; bhagavan-O Lord; tava-of You; asmābhiḥ-by us; akhila-all; jagat-of the material world; utpatti-of the creation; sthiti-maintenance; laya-and annihilation; nimittāyamāna-being the cause; divya-māyā-with the spiritual energy; vinodasya-of You, who amuse Yourself; sakala-all; jīva-nikāyānām-of the hordes of living entities; antaḥ-hṛdayeṣu-in the cores of the hearts; bahiḥ api-externally also; ca-and; brahma-of impersonal Brahman, or the Absolute Truth; pratyak-ātma-of the Supersoul; sva-rūpeṇa-by Your forms; pradhāna-rūpeṇa-by Your form as the external ingredients; ca-also; yathā-according to; deśa-kāla-deha-avasthāna-of country, time, body and position; viśeṣam-the particulars; tat-of them; upādāna-of the material causes; upalambhakatayā-by being the exhibitor; anubhavataḥ-witnessing; sarva-pratyaya-sākṣiṇaḥ-the witness of all different activities; ākāśa-śarīrasya-the Supersoul of the whole universe; sākṣāt-directly; para-brahmaṇaḥ-the Supreme Absolute Truth; paramātmanaḥ-the Supersoul; kiyān-of what extent; iha-herein; vā-or; artha-viśeṣaḥ-special necessity; vijñāpanīyaḥ-to be informed; syāt-may be; visphuliṅga-ādibhiḥ-by the sparks of the fire; iva-like; hiraṇya-retasaḥ-to the original fire.





O Lord, as the small sparks of a fire cannot possibly perform the actions of the whole fire, we sparks of Your Lordship cannot inform You of the necessities of our lives. You are the complete whole. Therefore, of what do we need to inform You? You know everything because You are the original cause of the cosmic manifestation, the maintainer and the annihilator of the entire universal creation. You always engage in Your pastimes with Your spiritual and material energies, for You are the controller of all these varied energies. You exist within all living entities, within the cosmic manifestation, and also beyond them. You exist internally as Parabrahman and externally as the ingredients of the material creation. Therefore, although manifested in various stages, at different times and places, and in various bodies, You, the Personality of Godhead, are the original cause of all causes. Indeed, You are the original element. You are the witness of all activities, but because You are as great as the sky, You are never touched by any of them. You are the witness of everything as Parabrahman and Paramātmā. O Supreme Personality of Godhead, nothing is unknown to You.





The Absolute Truth exists in three phases of spiritual understanding-Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān (brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate). Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of Brahman and Paramātmā. Brahman, the impersonal Absolute Truth, is all-pervading, and Paramātmā is locally situated in everyone's heart, but Bhagavān, who is worshipable by the devotees. is the original cause of all causes. A pure devotee is aware that since nothing is unknown to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He need not be informed of a devotee's conveniences and inconveniences. A pure devotee knows that there is no need to ask the Absolute Truth for any material necessities. Therefore, while informing the Supreme Lord about their distress in being attacked by Vṛtrāsura, the demigods apologized for offering prayers for their safety. A neophyte devotee, of course, approaches the Supreme Lord for relief from distress or poverty, or for speculative knowledge of the Lord. Bhagavad-gītā (7.16) mentions four kinds of pious men who begin devotional service to the Lord-one who is distressed (ārta), one in need of money (arthārthī), one who is inquisitive (jijñāsu) and one who is searching for the Absolute Truth (jñānī). A pure devotee, however, knows that since the Lord is omnipresent and omniscient, there is no need to offer prayers or worship Him for one's personal benefit. A pure devotee always engages in the service of the Lord without demanding anything. The Lord is present everywhere and knows the necessities of His devotees; consequently there is no need to disturb Him by asking Him for material benefits.





TEXT 43



ata eva svayaṁ tad upakalpayāsmākaṁ bhagavataḥ parama-guros tava caraṇa-śata-palāśac-chāyāṁ vividha-vṛjina-saṁsāra-pariśramopaśamanīm upasṛtānāṁ vayaṁ yat-kāmenopasāditāḥ.



SYNONYMS



ata eva-therefore; svayam-Yourself; tat-that; upakalpaya-please arrange; asmākam-of us; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parama-guroḥ-the supreme spiritual master; tava-of You; caraṇa-of the feet; śata-palāśat-like lotus flowers with hundreds of petals; chāyām-the shade; vividha-various; vṛjina-with dangerous positions; saṁsāra-of this conditioned life; pariśrama-the pain; upaśamanīm-relieving; upasṛtānām-the devotees who have taken shelter at Your lotus feet; vayam-we; yat-for which; kāmena-by the desires; upasāditāḥ-caused to come near (the shelter of Your lotus feet).





Dear Lord, You are omniscient, and therefore You know very well why we have taken shelter at Your lotus feet, which provide shade that gives relief from all material disturbances. Since You are the supreme spiritual master and You know everything, we have sought shelter of Your lotus feet for instruction. Please give us relief by counteracting our present distress. Your lotus feet are the only shelter for a fully surrendered devotee and are the only means for subduing all the tribulations of this material world.





One need only seek shelter of the shade of the Lord's lotus feet. Then all the material tribulations that disturb him will be subdued, just as when one comes under the shadow of a big tree, the disturbances caused by the heat of the scorching sun are immediately mitigated, without one's asking for relief. Therefore the whole concern of the conditioned soul should be the lotus feet of the Lord. The conditioned soul suffering from various tribulations because of existing in this material world can be relieved only when he seeks shelter at the Lord's lotus feet.





TEXT 44



atho īśa jahi tvāṣṭraṁ

grasantaṁ bhuvana-trayam

grastāni yena naḥ kṛṣṇa

tejāṁsy astrāyudhāni ca

SYNONYMS



atho-therefore; īśa-O supreme controller; jahi-kill; tvāṣṭram-the demon Vṛtrāsura, son of Tvaṣṭā; grasantam-who is devouring; bhuvana-trayam-the three worlds; grastāni-devoured; yena-by whom; naḥ-our; kṛṣṇa-O Lord Kṛṣṇa; tejāṁsi-all strength and prowess; astra-arrows; āyudhāni-and other weapons; ca-also.





Therefore, O Lord, O supreme controller, O Lord Kṛṣṇa, please annihilate this dangerous demon Vṛtrāsura, Tvaṣṭā's son, who has already swallowed all our weapons, our paraphernalia for fighting, and our strength and influence.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.15–16):



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ





catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha





"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me. O best among the Bhāratas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me-the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute."



The four classes of neophyte devotees who approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead to offer devotional service because of material motives are not pure devotees, but the advantage for such materialistic devotees is that they sometimes give up their material desires and become pure. When the demigods are utterly helpless, they approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead in grief and with tears in their eyes, praying to the Lord, and thus they become almost pure devotees, free from material desires. Admitting that they have forgotten pure devotional service because of extensive material opportunities, they fully surrender to the Lord, leaving to His consideration whether to maintain them or annihilate them. Such surrender is necessary. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings, mārabi rākhabi-yo icchā tohārā: "O Lord, I fully surrender unto Your lotus feet. Now, as You desire, You may protect me or annihilate me. You have the full right to do either."





TEXT 45



haṁsāya dahra-nilayāya nirīkṣakāya

kṛṣṇāya mṛṣṭa-yaśase nirupakramāya

sat-saṅgrahāya bhava-pāntha-nijāśramāptāv

ante parīṣṭa-gataye haraye namas te

SYNONYMS



haṁsāya-unto the most exalted and pure (pavitraṁ paramam, the supreme pure); dahra-in the core of the heart; nilayāya-whose abode; nirīkṣakāya-supervising the activities of the individual soul; kṛṣṇāya-unto the Supersoul, who is a partial manifestation of Kṛṣṇa; mṛṣṭa-yaśase-whose reputation is very bright; nirupakramāya-who has no beginning; sat-saṅgrahāya-understood only by pure devotees; bhava-pāntha-nija-āśrama-āptau-being obtainment of the shelter of Kṛṣṇa for persons within this material world; ante-at the ultimate end; parīṣṭa-gataye-unto Him who is the ultimate goal, the highest success of life; haraye-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; te-unto You.





O Lord, O supreme pure, You live within the core of everyone's heart and observe all the desires and activities of the conditioned souls. O Supreme Personality of Godhead known as Lord Kṛṣṇa, Your reputation is bright and illuminating. You have no beginning, for You are the beginning of everything. This is understood by pure devotees because You are easily accessible to the pure and truthful. When the conditioned souls are liberated and sheltered at Your lotus feet after roving throughout the material world for many millions of years, they attain the highest success of life. Therefore, O Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we offer our respectful obeisances at Your lotus feet.





The demigods certainly wanted Lord Viṣṇu to relieve their anxiety, but now they directly approach Lord Kṛṣṇa, for although there is no difference between Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa descends to this planet in His Vāsudeva feature for the purpose of paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]-protecting His devotees and annihilating the miscreants. Demons, or atheists, always disturb the demigods, or devotees, and therefore Kṛṣṇa descends to punish the atheists and demons and fulfill the desire of His devotees. Kṛṣṇa, being the original cause of everything, is the Supreme Person, above even Viṣṇu and Nārāyaṇa, although there is no difference between these different forms of the Lord. As explained in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.46):



dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya

dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharmā

yas tādṛg eva hi ca viṣṇutayā vibhāti

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





Kṛṣṇa expands Himself as Viṣṇu the way a bright candle kindles another. Although there is no difference between the power of one candle and another, Kṛṣṇa is compared to the original candle.



The word mṛṣṭa-yaśase is significant herein because Kṛṣṇa is always famous for relieving His devotee from danger. A devotee who has sacrificed everything for the service of Kṛṣṇa and whose only source of relief is the Lord is known as akiñcana.



As expressed in the prayers offered by Queen Kuntī, the Lord is akiñcana-vitta, the property of such a devotee. Those who are liberated from the bondage of conditioned life are elevated to the spiritual world, where they achieve five kinds of liberation-sāyujya, sālokya, sārūpya, sārṣṭi and sāmīpya. They personally associate with the Lord in five mellows-śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. These rasas are all emanations from Kṛṣṇa. As described by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the original mellow, ādi-rasa, is conjugal love. Kṛṣṇa is the origin of pure and spiritual conjugal love.





TEXT 46



śrī-śuka uvāca

athaivam īḍito rājan

sādaraṁ tri-daśair hariḥ

svam upasthānam ākarṇya

prāha tān abhinanditaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha-thereafter; evam-in this way; īḍitaḥ-being worshiped and offered obeisances; rājan-O King; sa-ādaram-with proper respect; tri-daśaiḥ-by all the demigods from the higher planetary systems; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; svam upasthānam-their prayer glorifying Him; ākarṇya-hearing; prāha-replied; tān-unto them (the demigods); abhinanditaḥ-being pleased.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, when the demigods offered the Lord their sincere prayers in this way, the Lord listened by His causeless mercy. Being pleased, He then replied to the demigods.





TEXT 47



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

prīto 'haṁ vaḥ sura-śreṣṭhā

mad-upasthāna-vidyayā

ātmaiśvarya-smṛtiḥ puṁsāṁ

bhaktiś caiva yayā mayi

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prītaḥ-pleased; aham-I; vaḥ-of you; sura-śreṣṭhāḥ-O best of the demigods; mat-upasthāna-vidyayā-by the highly advanced knowledge and prayers offered unto Me; ātma-aiśvarya-smṛtiḥ-remembrance of the exalted transcendental position of Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puṁsām-of men; bhaktiḥ-devotional service; ca-and; eva-certainly; yayā-by which; mayi-unto Me.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O beloved demigods, you have offered your prayers to Me with great knowledge, and I am certainly most pleased with you. A person is liberated by such knowledge, and thus he remembers My exalted position, which is above the conditions of material life. Such a devotee is fully purified by offering prayers in full knowledge. This is the source of devotional service to Me.





Another name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is Uttamaśloka, which means that He is offered prayers with selected verses. Bhakti means śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ [SB 7.5.23], chanting and hearing about Lord Viṣṇu. Impersonalists cannot be purified, for they do not offer personal prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even though they sometimes offer prayers, the prayers are not directed toward the Supreme Person. Impersonalists sometimes show their incomplete knowledge by addressing the Lord as being nameless. They always offer prayers indirectly, saying, "You are this, You are that," but they do not know to whom they are praying. A devotee, however, always offers personal prayers. A devotee says, govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **: "I offer my respectful obeisances unto Govinda, unto Kṛṣṇa." That is the way to offer prayers. If one continues to offer such personal prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is eligible to become a pure devotee and return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 48



kiṁ durāpaṁ mayi prīte

tathāpi vibudharṣabhāḥ

mayy ekānta-matir nānyan

matto vāñchati tattva-vit

SYNONYMS



kim-what; durāpam-difficult to obtain; mayi-when 1; prīte-satisfied; tathāpi-still; vibudha-ṛṣabhāḥ-O best of the intelligent demigods; mayi-in Me; ekānta-exclusively fixed; matiḥ-whose attention; na anyat-not anything other; mattaḥ-than Me; vāñchati-desires; tattva-vit-one who knows the truth.





O best of the intelligent demigods, although it is true that nothing is difficult for one to obtain when I am pleased with him, a pure devotee, whose mind is exclusively fixed upon Me, does not ask Me for anything but the opportunity to engage in devotional service.





When the demigods finished offering their prayers, they anxiously waited for their enemy Vṛtrāsura to be killed. This means that the demigods are not pure devotees. Although without difficulty one can get anything he desires if the Lord is pleased, the demigods aspire for material profit by pleasing the Lord. The Lord wanted the demigods to pray for unalloyed devotional service, but instead they prayed for an opportunity to kill their enemy. This is the difference between a pure devotee and a devotee on the material platform. Indirectly, the Lord regretted that the demigods did not ask for pure devotional service.





TEXT 49



na veda kṛpaṇaḥ śreya

ātmano guṇa-vastu-dṛk

tasya tān icchato yacched

yadi so 'pi tathā-vidhaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; veda-knows; kṛpaṇaḥ-a miserly living entity; śreyaḥ-the ultimate necessity; ātmanaḥ-of the soul; guṇa-vastu-dṛk-who is attracted by the creation of the modes of material nature; tasya-of him; tān-things created by the material energy; icchataḥ-desiring; yacchet-one bestows; yadi-if; saḥ api-he also; tathā-vidhaḥ-of the kind (a foolish kṛpaṇa who does not know his real self-interest).





Those who think material assets to be everything or to be the ultimate goal of life are called misers [kṛpaṇas]. They do not know the ultimate necessity of the soul. Moreover, if one awards that which is desired by such fools, he must also be considered foolish.





There are two classes of men-namely the kṛpaṇa and the brāhmaṇa. A brāhmaṇa is one who knows Brahman, the Absolute Truth, and who thus knows his real interest. A kṛpaṇa, however, is one who has a material, bodily concept of life. Not knowing how to utilize his human or demigod life, a kṛpaṇa is attracted by things created by the material modes of nature. The kṛpaṇas, who always desire material benefits, are foolish, whereas brāhmaṇas, who always desire spiritual benefits, are intelligent. If a kṛpaṇa, not knowing his self-interest, foolishly asks for something material, one who awards it to him is also foolish. Kṛṣṇa, however, is not a foolish person; He is supremely intelligent. If someone comes to Kṛṣṇa asking for material benefits, Kṛṣṇa does not award him the material things he desires. Instead, the Lord gives him intelligence so that he will forget his material desires and become attached to the Lord's lotus feet. In such cases, although the kṛpaṇa offers prayers to Lord Kṛṣṇa for material things, the Lord takes away whatever material possessions the kṛpaṇa has and gives him the sense to become a devotee. As stated by the Lord in the Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.39):



āmi-vijña, ei mūrkhe 'viṣaya' kene diba?

sva-caraṇāmṛta diyā 'viṣaya' bhulāiba





"Since I am very intelligent, why should I give this fool material prosperity? Instead I shall induce him to take the nectar of the shelter of My lotus feet and make him forget illusory material enjoyment." If one sincerely prays to God for material possessions in exchange for devotional service, the Lord, who is not foolish like such an unintelligent devotee, shows him special favor by taking away whatever material possessions he has and gradually giving him the intelligence to be satisfied only by rendering service to His lotus feet. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments in this regard that if a foolish child requests his mother to give him poison, the mother, being intelligent, will certainly not give him poison, even though he requests it. A materialist does not know that to accept material possessions means to accept poison, or the repetition of birth and death. An intelligent person, a brāhmaṇa, aspires for liberation from material bondage. That is the real self-interest of a human being.





TEXT 50



svayaṁ niḥśreyasaṁ vidvān

na vakty ajñāya karma hi

na rāti rogiṇo 'pathyaṁ

vāñchato 'pi bhiṣaktamaḥ

SYNONYMS



svayam-personally; niḥśreyasam-the supreme goal of life, namely the means of obtaining ecstatic love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vit-vān-one who is accomplished in devotional service; na-not; vakti-teaches; ajñāya-unto a foolish person not conversant with the ultimate goal of life; karma-fruitive activities; hi-indeed; na-not; rāti-administers; rogiṇaḥ-unto the patient; apathyam-something unconsumable; vāñchataḥ-desiring; api-although; bhiṣak-tamaḥ-an experienced physician.





A pure devotee who is fully accomplished in the science of devotional service will never instruct a foolish person to engage in fruitive activities for material enjoyment, not to speak of helping him in such activities. Such a devotee is like an experienced physician, who never encourages a patient to eat food injurious to his health, even if the patient desires it.





Here is the difference between the benedictions awarded by the demigods and those awarded by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. Devotees of the demigods ask for benedictions simply for sense gratification, and therefore they have been described in Bhagavad-gītā (7.20) as bereft of intelligence.



kāmais tais tair hṛta-jñānāḥ

prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ

taṁ taṁ niyamam āsthāya

prakṛtyā niyatāḥ svayā





"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to their own natures."



Conditioned souls are generally bereft of intelligence because of profound desires for sense gratification. They do not know what benedictions to ask. Therefore nondevotees are advised in the śāstras to worship various demigods to achieve material benefits. For example, if one wants a beautiful wife, he is advised to worship Umā, or goddess Durgā. If one wants to be cured of a disease, he is advised to worship the sun-god. All requests for benedictions from the demigods, however, are due to material lust. The benedictions will be finished at the end of the cosmic manifestation, along with those who bestow them. If one approaches Lord Viṣṇu for benedictions, the Lord will give him a benediction that will help him return home, back to Godhead. This is also confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (10.10):



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te





Lord Viṣṇu, or Lord Kṛṣṇa, instructs a devotee who constantly engages in His service how to approach Him at the end of his material body. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities, does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." This is the benediction of Lord Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa. After giving up his body, a devotee returns home, back to Godhead.



A devotee may foolishly ask for material benedictions, but Lord Kṛṣṇa does not give him such benedictions, despite the devotee's prayers. Therefore people who are very attached to material life do not generally become devotees of Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu. Instead they become devotees of the demigods (kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ [Bg. 7.20]). The benedictions of the demigods, however, are condemned in Bhagavad-gītā. Antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām: "Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary." A non-Vaiṣṇava, one who is not engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is considered a fool with a small quantity of brain substance.





TEXT 51



maghavan yāta bhadraṁ vo

dadhyañcam ṛṣi-sattamam

vidyā-vrata-tapaḥ-sāraṁ

gātraṁ yācata mā ciram

SYNONYMS



maghavan-O Indra; yāta-go; bhadram-good fortune; vaḥ-to all of you; dadhyañcam-to Dadhyañca; ṛṣi-sat-tamam-the most exalted saintly person; vidyā-of education; vrata-vow; tapaḥ-and austerities; sāram-the essence; gātram-his body; yācata-ask for; mā ciram-without delay.





O Maghavan [Indra], all good fortune unto you. I advise you to approach the exalted saint Dadhyañca [Dadhīci]. He has become very accomplished in knowledge, vows and austerities, and his body is very strong. Go ask him for his body without delay.





Everyone in this material world, from Lord Brahmā down to the ant, is eager to keep his body comfortable. A pure devotee may also be comfortable, but he is not eager for such a benediction. Since Maghavan, the King of heaven, still aspired for a comfortable bodily situation, Lord Viṣṇu advised him to ask Dadhyañca for his body, which was very strong due to his knowledge, vows and austerity.





TEXT 52



sa vā adhigato dadhyaṅṅ

aśvibhyāṁ brahma niṣkalam

yad vā aśvaśiro nāma

tayor amaratāṁ vyadhāt

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he; vā-certainly; adhigataḥ-having obtained; dadhyaṅ-Dadhyañca; aśvibhyām-to the two Aśvinī-kumāras; brahma-spiritual knowledge; niṣkalam-pure; yat vā-by which; aśvaśiraḥ-Aśvaśira; nāma-named; tayoḥ-of the two; amaratām-liberation in one's life; vyadhāt-awarded.





That saintly Dadhyañca, who is also known as Dadhīci, personally assimilated the spiritual science and then delivered it to the Aśvinī-kumāras. It is said that Dadhyañca gave them mantras through the head of a horse. Therefore the mantras are called Aśvaśira. After obtaining the mantras of spiritual science from Dadhīci, the Aśvinī-kumāras became jīvan-mukta, liberated even in this life.





The following story is narrated by many ācāryas in their commentaries:



niśamyātharvaṇaṁ dakṣaṁ pravargya-brahmavidyayoḥ; dadhyañcaṁ samupāgamya tam ūcatur athāśvinau; bhagavan dehi nau vidyām iti śrutvā sa cābravīt; karmaṇy avasthito 'dyāhaṁ paścād vakṣyāmi gacchatam; tayor nirgatayor eva śakra āgatya taṁ munim; uvāca bhiṣajor vidyāṁ mā vādīr aśvinor mune; yadi mad-vākyam ullaṅghya bravīṣi sahasaiva te; śiraś-chindyāṁ na sandeha ity uktvā sa yayau hariḥ; indre gate tathābhyetya nāsatyāv ūcatur dvijam; tan-mukhād indra-gaditaṁ śrutvā tāv ūcatuḥ punaḥ; āvāṁ tava śiraś chittvā pūrvam aśvasya mastakam; sandhāsyāvas tato brūhi tena vidyāṁ ca nau dvija; tasminn indreṇa sañchinne punaḥ sandhāya mastakam; nijaṁ te dakṣiṇāṁ dattvā gamiṣyāvo yathāgatam; etac chrutvā tadovāca dadhyaṅṅ ātharvaṇas tayoḥ pravargyaṁ brahma-vidyāṁ ca sat-kṛto 'satya-śaṅkitaḥ.

The great saint Dadhīci had perfect knowledge of how to perform fruitive activities, and he had advanced spiritual knowledge as well. Knowing this, the Aśvinī-kumāras once approached him and begged him to instruct them in spiritual science (brahma-vidyā). Dadhīci Muni replied, "I am now engaged in arranging sacrifices for fruitive activities. Come back some time later." When the Aśvinī-kumāras left, Indra, the King of heaven, approached Dadhīci and said, "My dear Muni, the Aśvinī-kumāras are only physicians. Please do not instruct them in spiritual science. If you impart the spiritual science to them despite my warning, I shall punish you by cutting off your head." After warning Dadhīci in this way, Indra returned to heaven. The Aśvinī-kumāras, who understood Indra's desires, returned and begged Dadhīci for brahma-vidyā. When the great saint Dadhīci informed them of Indra's threat, the Aśvinī-kumāras replied, "Let us first cut off your head and replace it with the head of a horse. You can instruct brahma-vidyā through the horse's head, and when Indra returns and cuts off that head, we shall reward you and restore your original head." Since Dadhīci had promised to impart brahma-vidyā to the Aśvinī-kumāras, he agreed to their proposal. Therefore, because Dadhīci imparted brahma-vidyā through the mouth of a horse, this brahma-vidyā is also known as Aśvaśira.





TEXT 53



dadhyaṅṅ ātharvaṇas tvaṣṭre

varmābhedyaṁ mad-ātmakam

viśvarūpāya yat prādāt

tvaṣṭā yat tvam adhās tataḥ

SYNONYMS



dadhyaṅ-Dadhyañca; ātharvaṇaḥ-the son of Atharvā; tvaṣṭre-unto Tvaṣṭā; varma-the protective covering known as Nārāyaṇa-kavaca; abhedyam-invincible; mat-ātmakam-consisting of Myself; viśvarūpāya-unto Viśvarūpa; yat-which; prādāt-delivered; tvaṣṭā-Tvaṣṭā; yat-which; tvam-you; adhāḥ-received; tataḥ-from him.





Dadhyañca's invincible protective covering known as the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca was given to Tvaṣṭā, who delivered it to his son Viśvarūpa, from whom you have received it. Because of this Nārāyaṇa-kavaca, Dadhīci's body is now very strong. You should therefore beg him for his body.





TEXT 54



yuṣmabhyaṁ yācito 'śvibhyāṁ

dharma-jño 'ṅgāni dāsyati

tatas tair āyudha-śreṣṭho

viśvakarma-vinirmitaḥ

yena vṛtra-śiro hartā

mat-teja-upabṛṁhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



yuṣmabhyam-for all of you; yācitaḥ-being asked; aśvibhyām-by the Aśvinī-kumāras; dharma-jñaḥ-Dadhīci, who knows the principles of religion; aṅgāni-his limbs; dāsyati-will give; tataḥ-after that; taiḥ-by those bones; āyudha-of weapons; śreṣṭhaḥ-the most powerful (the thunderbolt); viśvakarma-vinirmitaḥ-manufactured by Viśvakarmā; yena-by which; vṛtra-śiraḥ-the head of Vṛtrāsura; hartā-will be taken away; mat-tejaḥ-by My strength; upabṛṁhitaḥ-increased.





When the Aśvinī-kumāras beg for Dadhyañca's body on your behalf, he will surely give it because of affection. Do not doubt this, for Dadhyañca is very experienced in religious understanding. When Dadhyañca awards you his body, Viśvakarmā will prepare a thunderbolt from his bones. This thunderbolt will certainly kill Vṛtrāsura because it will be invested with My power.





TEXT 55



tasmin vinihate yūyaṁ

tejo-'strāyudha-sampadaḥ

bhūyaḥ prāpsyatha bhadraṁ vo

na hiṁsanti ca mat-parān

SYNONYMS



tasmin-when he (Vṛtrāsura); vinihate-is killed; yūyam-all of you; tejaḥ-power; astra-arrows; āyudha-other weapons; sampadaḥ-and opulence; bhūyaḥ-again; prāpsyatha-will obtain; bhadram-all good fortune; vaḥ-unto you; na-not; hiṁsanti-hurt; ca-also; mat-parān-My devotees.





When Vṛtrāsura is killed because of My spiritual strength, you will regain your strength, weapons and wealth. Thus there will be all good fortune for all of you. Although Vṛtrāsura can destroy all the three worlds, do not fear that he will harm you. He is also a devotee and will never be envious of you.





A devotee of the Lord is never envious of anyone, what to speak of other devotees. As revealed later, Vṛtrāsura was also a devotee. Therefore be was not expected to be envious of the demigods. Indeed, of his own accord, he would try to benefit the demigods. A devotee does not hesitate to give up his own body for a better cause. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita said, san-nimitte varaṁ tyāgo vināśe niyate sati. After all, all one's material possessions, including his body, will be destroyed in due course of time. Therefore if the body and other possessions can be utilized for a better cause, a devotee never hesitates to give up even his own body. Because Lord Viṣṇu wanted to save the demigods, Vṛtrāsura, even though able to swallow the three worlds, would agree to be killed by the demigods. For a devotee there is no difference between living and dying because in this life a devotee engages in devotional service, and after giving up his body, he engages in the same service in the spiritual world. His devotional service is never hindered.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Ninth Chapter, Sixth Canto, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Appearance of the Demon Vṛtrāsura."



Chapter Ten



The Battle Between the Demigods and Vṛtrāsura





As described in this chapter, after Indra obtained the body of Dadhīci, a thunderbolt was prepared from Dadhīci's bones, and a fight took place between Vṛtrāsura and the demigods.





Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demigods approached Dadhīci Muni and begged for his body. Dadhīci Muni, just to hear from the demigods about the principles of religion, jokingly refused to relinquish his body, but for higher purposes he thereafter agreed to give it up, for after death the body is usually eaten by low animals like dogs and jackals. Dadhīci Muni first merged his gross body made of five elements into the original stock of five elements and then engaged his soul at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he gave up his gross body. With the help of Viśvakarmā, the demigods then prepared a thunderbolt from Dadhīci's bones. Armed with the thunderbolt weapon, they prepared themselves to fight and got up on the backs of elephants.





At the end of Satya-yuga and the beginning of Tretā-yuga. a great fight took place between the demigods and the asuras. Unable to tolerate the effulgence of the demigods, the asuras fled the battle. leaving Vṛtrāsura, their commander in chief, to fight for himself. Vṛtrāsura, however, seeing the demons fleeing, instructed them in the importance of fighting and dying in the battlefield. One who is victorious in battle gains material possessions, and one who dies in the battlefield attains a residence at once in the celestial heavens. In either way, the fighter benefits.





TEXT 1



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

indram evaṁ samādiśya

bhagavān viśva-bhāvanaḥ

paśyatām animeṣāṇāṁ

tatraivāntardadhe hariḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; indram-Indra, the heavenly King; evam-thus; samādiśya-after instructing; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viśva-bhāvanaḥ-the original cause of all cosmic manifestations; paśyatām animeṣāṇām-while the demigods were looking on; tatra-then and there; eva-indeed; antardadhe-disappeared; hariḥ-the Lord.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After instructing Indra in this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the cause of the cosmic manifestation, then and there disappeared from the presence of the onlooking demigods.





TEXT 2



tathābhiyācito devair

ṛṣir ātharvaṇo mahān

modamāna uvācedaṁ

prahasann iva bhārata

SYNONYMS



tathā-in that manner; abhiyācitaḥ-being begged; devaiḥ-by the demigods; ṛṣiḥ-the great saintly person; ātharvaṇaḥ-Dadhīci, the son of Atharvā; mahān-the great personality; modamānaḥ-being merry; uvāca-said; idam-this; prahasan-smiling; iva-somewhat; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit.





O King Parīkṣit, following the Lord's instructions, the demigods approached Dadhīci, the son of Atharvā. He was very liberal, and when they begged him to give them his body, he at once partially agreed. However, just to hear religious instructions from them, he smiled and jokingly spoke as follows.





TEXT 3



api vṛndārakā yūyaṁ

na jānītha śarīriṇām

saṁsthāyāṁ yas tv abhidroho

duḥsahaś cetanāpahaḥ

SYNONYMS



api-although; vṛndārakāḥ-O demigods; yūyam-all of you; na jānītha-do not know; śarīriṇām-of those who have material bodies; saṁsthāyām-at the time of death, or while quitting this body; yaḥ-which; tu-then; abhidrohaḥ-severe pain; duḥsahaḥ-unbearable; cetana-the consciousness; apahaḥ-which takes away.





O elevated demigods, at the time of death, severe, unbearable pain takes away the consciousness of all living entities who have accepted material bodies. Don't you know about this pain?





TEXT 4



jijīviṣūṇāṁ jīvānām

ātmā preṣṭha ihepsitaḥ

ka utsaheta taṁ dātuṁ

bhikṣamāṇāya viṣṇave

SYNONYMS



jijīviṣūṇām-aspiring to remain alive; jīvānām-of all living entities; ātmā-the body; preṣṭhaḥ-very dear; iha-here; īpsitaḥ-desired; kaḥ-who; utsaheta-can bear; tam-that body; dātum-to deliver; bhikṣamāṇāya-begging; viṣṇave-even to Lord Viṣṇu.





In this material world, every living entity is very much addicted to his material body. Struggling to keep his body forever, everyone tries to protect it by all means, even at the sacrifice of all his possessions. Therefore, who would be prepared to deliver his body to anyone, even if it were demanded by Lord Viṣṇu?





It is said, ātmānaṁ sarvato rakṣet tato dharmaṁ tato dhanam: one must protect his body by all means; then he may protect his religious principles and thereafter his possessions. This is the natural desire of all living entities. No one wants to give up his body unless it is forcibly given away. Even though the demigods said that they were demanding Dadhīci's body for their benefit in accordance with the order of Lord Viṣṇu, Dadhīci superficially refused to give them his body.





TEXT 5



śrī-devā ūcuḥ

kiṁ nu tad dustyajaṁ brahman

puṁsāṁ bhūtānukampinām

bhavad-vidhānāṁ mahatāṁ

puṇya-ślokeḍya-karmaṇām

SYNONYMS



śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ-the demigods said; kim-what; nu-indeed; tat-that; dustyajam-difficult to give up; brahman-O exalted brāhmaṇa; puṁsām-of persons; bhūta-anukampinām-who are very sympathetic toward the suffering living entities; bhavat-vidhānām-like Your Lordship; mahatām-who are very great; puṇya-śloka-īḍya-karmaṇām-whose pious activities are praised by all great souls.





The demigods replied: O exalted brāhmaṇa, pious persons like you, whose activities are praiseworthy, are very kind and affectionate to people in general. What can't such pious souls give for the benefit of others? They can give everything, including their bodies.





TEXT 6



nūnaṁ svārtha-paro loko

na veda para-saṅkaṭam

yadi veda na yāceta

neti nāha yad īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



nūnam-certainly; sva-artha-paraḥ-interested only in sense gratification in this life or the next; lokaḥ-materialistic people in general; na-not; veda-know; para-saṅkaṭam-the pain of others; yadi-if; veda-know; na-not; yāceta-would ask; na-no; iti-thus; na āha-does not say; yat-since; īśvaraḥ-able to give charity.





Those who are too self-interested beg something from others, not knowing of others' pain. But if the beggar knew the difficulty of the giver, he would not ask for anything. Similarly, he who is able to give charity does not know the beggar's difficulty, for otherwise he would not refuse to give the beggar anything he might want as charity.





This verse describes two people-one who gives charity and one who begs for it. A beggar should not ask charity from a person who is in difficulty. Similarly, one who is able to give charity should not deny a beggar. These are the moral instructions of the śāstra. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, san-nimitte varaṁ tyāgo vināśe niyate sati: everything within this material world will be destroyed, and therefore one should use everything for good purposes. If one is advanced in knowledge, he must always be prepared to sacrifice anything for a better cause. At the present moment the entire world is in a dangerous position under the spell of a godless civilization. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement needs many exalted, learned persons who will sacrifice their lives to revive God consciousness throughout the world. We therefore invite all men and women advanced in knowledge to join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and sacrifice their lives for the great cause of reviving the God consciousness of human society.





TEXT 7



śrī-ṛṣir uvāca

dharmaṁ vaḥ śrotu-kāmena

yūyaṁ me pratyudāhṛtāḥ

eṣa vaḥ priyam ātmānaṁ

tyajantaṁ santyajāmy aham

SYNONYMS



śrī-ṛṣiḥ uvāca-the great saint Dadhīci said; dharmam-the principles of religion; vaḥ-from you; śrotu-kāmena-by the desire to hear; yūyam-you; me-by me; pratyudāhṛtāḥ-replied to the contrary; eṣaḥ-this; vaḥ-for you; priyam-dear; ātmānam-body; tyajantam-leaving me anyway, today or tomorrow; santyajāmi-give up; aham-I.





The great sage Dadhīci said: Just to hear from you about religious principles, I refused to offer my body at your request. Now, although my body is extremely dear to me, I must give it up for your better purposes since I know that it will leave me today or tomorrow.





TEXT 8



yo 'dhruveṇātmanā nāthā

na dharmaṁ na yaśaḥ pumān

īheta bhūta-dayayā

sa śocyaḥ sthāvarair api

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; adhruveṇa-impermanent; ātmanā-by the body; nāthāḥ-O lords; na-not; dharmam-religious principles; na-not; yaśaḥ-fame; pumān-a person; īheta-endeavors for; bhūta-dayayā-by mercy for the living beings; saḥ-that person; śocyaḥ-pitiable; sthāvaraiḥ-by the immobile creatures; api-even.





O demigods, one who has no compassion for humanity in its suffering and does not sacrifice his impermanent body for the higher causes of religious principles or eternal glory is certainly pitied even by the immovable beings.





In this regard, a very exalted example was set by Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana. Concerning Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.34):



tyaktvā sudustyaja-surepsita-rājya-lakṣmīṁ

dharmiṣṭha ārya-vacasā yad agād araṇyam

māyā-mṛgaṁ dayitayepsitam anvadhāvad

vande mahā-puruṣa te caraṇāravindam





"We offer our respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of the Lord. upon whom one should always meditate. He left His householder life, leaving aside His eternal consort, whom even the denizens of heaven adore. He went into the forest to deliver the fallen souls, who are put into illusion by material energy." To accept sannyāsa means to commit civil suicide. but sannyāsa is compulsory, at least for every brāhmaṇa, every first-class human being. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had a very young and beautiful wife and a very affectionate mother. Indeed, the affectionate dealings of His family members were so pleasing that even the demigods could not expect such happiness at home. Nevertheless, for the deliverance of all the fallen souls of the world, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa and left home when He was only twenty-four years old. He lived a very strict life as a sannyāsī, refusing all bodily comforts. Similarly, His disciples the six Gosvāmīs were ministers who held exalted positions in society, but they also left everything to join the movement of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Śrīnivāsa Ācārya says:



tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tucchavat

bhūtvā dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau





These Gosvāmīs left their very comfortable lives as ministers. Zamindars and learned scholars and joined Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's movement, just to show mercy to the fallen souls of the world (dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā). Accepting very humble lives as mendicants, wearing no more than loincloths and torn quilts (kaupīna-kantha). they lived in Vṛndāvana and followed Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's order to excavate Vṛndāvana's lost glories.



Similarly. everyone else with a materially comfortable condition in this world should join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement to elevate the fallen souls. The words bhūta-dayayā, māyā-mṛgaṁ dayitayepsitam and dīna-gaṇeśakau karuṇayā all convey the same sense. These are very significant words for those interested in elevating human society to a proper understanding of life. One should join the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, following the examples of such great personalities as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the six Gosvāmīs and, before them, the great sage Dadhīci. Instead of wasting one's life for temporary bodily comforts. one should always be prepared to give up one's life for better causes. After all, the body will be destroyed. Therefore one should sacrifice it for the glory of distributing religious principles throughout the world.





TEXT 9



etāvān avyayo dharmaḥ

puṇya-ślokair upāsitaḥ

yo bhūta-śoka-harṣābhyām

ātmā śocati hṛṣyati

SYNONYMS



etāvān-this much; avyayaḥ-imperishable; dharmaḥ-religious principle; puṇya-ślokaiḥ-by famous persons who are celebrated as pious; upāsitaḥ-recognized; yaḥ-which; bhūta-of the living beings; śoka-by the distress; harṣābhyām-and by the happiness; ātmā-the mind; śocati-laments; hṛṣyati-feels happiness.





If one is unhappy to see the distress of other living beings and happy to see their happiness, his religious principles are appreciated as imperishable by exalted persons who are considered pious and benevolent.





One generally follows different types of religious principles or performs various occupational duties according to the body given to him by the modes of material nature. In this verse, however, real religious principles are explained. Everyone should be unhappy to see others in distress and happy to see others happy. Ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu: one should feel the happiness and distress of others as his own. It is on this basis that the Buddhist religious principle of nonviolence-ahiṁsaḥ parama-dharmaḥ-is established. We feel pain when someone disturbs us, and therefore we should not inflict pain upon other living beings. Lord Buddha's mission was to stop unnecessary animal killing, and therefore he preached that the greatest religious principle is nonviolence.



One cannot continue killing animals and at the same time be a religious man. That is the greatest hypocrisy. Jesus Christ said, "Do not kill," but hypocrites nevertheless maintain thousands of slaughterhouses while posing as Christians. Such hypocrisy is condemned in this verse. One should be happy to see others happy, and one should be unhappy to see others unhappy. This is the principle to be followed. Unfortunately, at the present moment so-called philanthropists and humanitarians advocate the happiness of humanity at the cost of the lives of poor animals. That is not recommended herein. This verse clearly says that one should be compassionate to all living entities. Regardless of whether human. animal, tree or plant, all living entities are sons of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (14.4):



sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya

mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ

tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir

ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā





"It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kuntī, are made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father." The different forms of these living entities are only their external dresses. Every living being is actually a spirit soul, a part and parcel of God. Therefore one should not favor only one kind of living being. A Vaiṣṇava sees all living entities as part and parcel of God. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (5.18 and 18.54):



vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śvapāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ





"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned and gentle brāhmaṇa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]."



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

[Bg. 18.54]





"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me." A Vaiṣṇava, therefore, is truly a perfect person because he laments to see others unhappy and feels joy at seeing others happy. A Vaiṣṇava is para-duḥkha-duḥkhī; he is always unhappy to see the conditioned souls in an unhappy state of materialism. Therefore a Vaiṣṇava is always busy preaching Kṛṣṇa consciousness throughout the world.





TEXT 10



aho dainyam aho kaṣṭaṁ

pārakyaiḥ kṣaṇa-bhaṅguraiḥ

yan nopakuryād asvārthair

martyaḥ sva-jñāti-vigrahaiḥ

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; dainyam-a miserable condition; aho-alas; kaṣṭam-simply tribulation; pārakyaiḥ-which after death are eatable by dogs and jackals; kṣaṇa-bhaṅguraiḥ-perishable at any moment; yat-because; na-not; upakuryāt-would help; a-sva-arthaiḥ-not meant for self-interest; martyaḥ-a living entity destined to die; sva-with his wealth; jñāti-relatives and friends; vigrahaiḥ-and his body.





This body, which is eatable by jackals and dogs after death, does not actually do any good for me, the spirit soul. It is usable only for a short time and may perish at any moment. The body and its possessions, its riches and relatives, must all be engaged for the benefit of others, or else they will be sources of tribulation and misery.





Similar advice is also given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.22.35):



etāvaj janma-sāphalyaṁ

dehinām iha dehiṣu

prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā

śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā





"It is the duty of every living being to perform welfare activities for the benefit of others with his life, wealth, intelligence and words." This is the mission of life. One's own body and the bodies of his friends and relatives, as well as one's own riches and everything else one has, should be engaged for the benefit of others. This is the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. As stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 9.41):



bhārata-bhūmite haila manuṣya-janma yāra

janma sārthaka kari' kara para-upakāra





"One who has taken birth as a human being in the land of India [Bhārata-varṣa] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all other people.



The word upakuryāt means para-upakāra, helping others. Of course, in human society there are many institutions to help others, but because philanthropists do not know how to help others, their propensity for philanthropy is ineffectual. They do not know the ultimate goal of life (śreya ācaraṇam), which is to please the Supreme Lord. If all philanthropic and humanitarian activities were directed toward achieving the ultimate goal of life-to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead-they would all be perfect. Humanitarian work without Kṛṣṇa is nothing. Kṛṣṇa must be brought to the center of all our activities; otherwise no activity will have value.





TEXT 11



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

evaṁ kṛta-vyavasito

dadhyaṅṅ ātharvaṇas tanum

pare bhagavati brahmaṇy

ātmānaṁ sannayañ jahau

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; kṛta-vyavasitaḥ-making certain of what to do (in giving his body to the demigods); dadhyaṅ-Dadhīci Muni; ātharvaṇaḥ-the son of Atharvā; tanum-his body; pare-to the Supreme; bhagavati-Personality of Godhead; brahmaṇi-the Supreme Brahman; ātmānam-himself. the spirit soul; sannayan-offering; jahau-gave up.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Dadhīci Muni, the son of Atharvā, thus resolved to give his body to the service of the demigods. He placed himself, the spirit soul, at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and in this way gave up his gross material body made of five elements.





As indicated by the words pare bhagavati brahmaṇy ātmānaṁ sannayan, Dadhīci placed himself, as spirit soul, at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this regard, one may refer to the incident of Dhṛtarāṣṭra's leaving his body, as described in the First Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.13.55). Dhṛtarāṣṭra analytically divided his gross material body into the five different elements of which it was made-earth, water, fire, air and ether-and distributed them to the different reservoirs of these elements; in other words, he merged these five elements into the original mahat-tattva. By identifying his material conception of life, he gradually separated his spirit soul from material connections and placed himself at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The example given in this connection is that when an earthen pot is broken, the small portion of the sky within the pot is united with the large sky outside the pot. Māyāvādī philosophers misunderstand this description of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Therefore Śrī Rāmānuja Svāmī, in his book Vedānta-tattva-sāra, has described that this merging of the soul means that after separating himself from the material body made of eight elements-earth, water, fire, air, ether, false ego, mind and intelligence-the individual soul engages himself in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His eternal form (īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ/ anādir ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam [Bs. 5.1]). The material cause of the material elements absorbs the material body, and the spiritual soul assumes its original position. As described by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, jīvera 'svarūpa' haya-kṛṣṇera 'nitya-dāsa': [Cc. Madhya 20.108] the constitutional position of the living entity is that he is the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. When one overcomes the material body through cultivation of spiritual knowledge and devotional service, one can revive his own position and thus engage in the service of the Lord.





TEXT 12



yatākṣāsu-mano-buddhis

tattva-dṛg dhvasta-bandhanaḥ

āsthitaḥ paramaṁ yogaṁ

na dehaṁ bubudhe gatam

SYNONYMS



yata-controlled; akṣa-senses; asu-the life air; manaḥ-the mind; buddhiḥ-intelligence; tattva-dṛk-one who knows the tattvas, the material and spiritual energies; dhvasta-bandhanaḥ-liberated from bondage; āsthitaḥ-being situated in; paramam-the supreme; yogam-absorption, trance; na-not; deham-the material body; bubudhe-perceived; gatam-left.





Dadhīci Muni controlled his senses, life force, mind and intelligence and became absorbed in trance. Thus he cut all his material bonds. He could not perceive how his material body became separated from his self.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (8.5):



anta-kāle ca mām eva

smaran muktvā kalevaram

yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ

yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ





"Whoever, at the time of death, quits his body remembering Me alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt." Of course, one must practice before one is overcome by death, but the perfect yogī, namely the devotee, dies in trance, thinking of Kṛṣṇa. He does not feel his material body being separated from his soul; the soul is immediately transferred to the spiritual world. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti: [Bg. 4.9] the soul does not enter the womb of a material mother again. but is transferred back home, back to Godhead. This yoga, bhakti-yoga, is the highest yoga system, as explained by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith. worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." The bhakti-yogī always thinks of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore at the time of death he can very easily transfer himself to Kṛṣṇaloka, without even perceiving the pains of death.





TEXTS 13–14



athendro vajram udyamya

nirmitaṁ viśvakarmaṇā

muneḥ śaktibhir utsikto

bhagavat-tejasānvitaḥ

vṛto deva-gaṇaiḥ sarvair



gajendropary aśobhata

stūyamāno muni-gaṇais

trailokyaṁ harṣayann iva

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; indraḥ-the King of heaven; vajram-the thunderbolt; udyamya-firmly taking up; nirmitam-manufactured; viśvakarmaṇā-by Viśvakarmā; muneḥ-of the great sage, Dadhīci; śaktibhiḥ-by the power; utsiktaḥ-saturated; bhagavat-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tejasā-with spiritual power; anvitaḥ-endowed; vṛtaḥ-encircled; deva-gaṇaiḥ-by the other demigods; sarvaiḥ-all; gajendra-of his elephant carrier; upari-upon the back; aśobhata-shone; stūyamānaḥ-being offered prayers; muni-gaṇaiḥ-by the saintly persons; trai-lokyam-to the three worlds; harṣayan-causing pleasure; iva-as it were.





Thereafter, King Indra very firmly took up the thunderbolt manufactured by Viśvakarmā from the bones of Dadhīci. Charged with the exalted power of Dadhīci Muni and enlightened by the power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Indra rode on the back of his carrier, Airāvata, surrounded by all the demigods, while all the great sages offered him praise. Thus he shone very beautifully, pleasing the three worlds as he rode off to kill Vṛtrāsura.





TEXT 15



vṛtram abhyadravac chatrum

asurānīka-yūthapaiḥ

paryastam ojasā rājan

kruddho rudra ivāntakam

SYNONYMS



vṛtram-Vṛtrāsura; abhyadravat-attacked; śatrum-the enemy; asura-anīka-yūthapaiḥ-by the commanders or captains of the soldiers of the asuras; paryastam-surrounded; ojasā-with great force; rājan-O King; kruddhaḥ-being angry; rudraḥ-an incarnation of Lord Śiva; iva-like; antakam-Antaka, or Yamarāja.





My dear King Parīkṣit, as Rudra, being very angry at Antaka [Yamarāja] had formerly run toward Antaka to kill him, Indra angrily and with great force attacked Vṛtrāsura, who was surrounded by the leaders of the demoniac armies.





TEXT 16



tataḥ surāṇām asurai

raṇaḥ parama-dāruṇaḥ

tretā-mukhe narmadāyām

abhavat prathame yuge

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; surāṇām-of the demigods; asuraiḥ-with the demons; raṇaḥ-a great battle; parama-dāruṇaḥ-very fearful; tretā-mukhe-in the beginning of Tretā-yuga; narmadāyām-on the bank of the River Narmadā; abhavat-took place; prathame-in the first; yuge-millennium.





Thereafter, at the end of Satya-yuga and the beginning of Tretā-yuga, a fierce battle took place between the demigods and the demons on the bank of the Narmadā.





Herein the Narmadā does not mean the Narmadā River in India. The five sacred rivers in India-Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Narmadā, Kāverī and Kṛṣṇā-are all celestial. Like the Ganges River, the Narmadā River also flows in the higher planetary systems. The battle between the demigods and the demons took place in the higher planets.



The words prathame yuge mean "in the beginning of the first millennium," that is to say, in the beginning of the Vaivasvata manvantara. In one day of Brahmā there are fourteen Manus, who each live for seventy-one millenniums. The four yugas-Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali-constitute one millennium. We are presently in the manvantara of Vaivasvata Manu, who is mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā (imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam/ vivasvān manave prāha [Bg. 4.1]). We are now in the twenty-eighth millennium of Vaivasvata Manu, but this fight took place in the beginning of Vaivasvata Manu's first millennium. One can historically calculate how long ago the battle took place. Since each millennium consists of 4,300,000 years and we are now in the twenty-eighth millennium, some 120,400,000 years have passed since the battle took place on the bank of the River Narmadā.





TEXTS 17–18



rudrair vasubhir ādityair

aśvibhyāṁ pitṛ-vahnibhiḥ

marudbhir ṛbhubhiḥ sādhyair

viśvedevair marut-patim

dṛṣṭvā vajra-dharaṁ śakraṁ



rocamānaṁ svayā śriyā

nāmṛṣyann asurā rājan

mṛdhe vṛtra-puraḥsarāḥ

SYNONYMS



rudraiḥ-by the Rudras; vasubhiḥ-by the Vasus; ādityaiḥ-by the Ādityas; aśvibhyām-by the Aśvinī-kumāras; pitṛ-by the Pitās; vahnibhiḥ-and the Vahnis; marudbhiḥ-by the Maruts; ṛbhubhiḥ-by the Ṛbhus; sādhyaiḥ-by the Sādhyas; viśve-devaiḥ-by the Viśvadevas; marut-patim-Indra, the heavenly King; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; vajra-dharam-bearing the thunderbolt; śakram-another name of Indra; rocamānam-shining; svayā-by his own; śriyā-opulence; na-not; amṛṣyan-tolerated; asurāḥ-all the demons; rājan-O King; mṛdhe-in the fight; vṛtra-puraḥsarāḥ-headed by Vṛtrāsura.





O King, when all the asuras came onto the battlefield, headed by Vṛtrāsura, they saw King Indra carrying the thunderbolt and surrounded by the Rudras, Vasus, Ādityas, Aśvinī-kumāras, Pitās, Vahnis, Maruts, Ṛbhus, Sādhyas and Viśvadevas. Surrounded by his company, Indra shone so brightly that his effulgence was intolerable to the demons.





TEXTS 19–22



namuciḥ śambaro 'narvā

dvimūrdhā ṛṣabho 'suraḥ

hayagrīvaḥ śaṅkuśirā

vipracittir ayomukhaḥ

pulomā vṛṣaparvā ca



prahetir hetir utkalaḥ

daiteyā dānavā yakṣā

rakṣāṁsi ca sahasraśaḥ

sumāli-māli-pramukhāḥ



kārtasvara-paricchadāḥ

pratiṣidhyendra-senāgraṁ

mṛtyor api durāsadam

abhyardayann asambhrāntāḥ



siṁha-nādena durmadāḥ

gadābhiḥ parighair bāṇaiḥ

prāsa-mudgara-tomaraiḥ

SYNONYMS



namuciḥ-Namuci; śambaraḥ-Śambara; anarvā-Anarvā; dvimūrdhā-Dvimūrdhā; ṛṣabhaḥ-Ṛṣabha; asuraḥ-Asura; hayagrīvaḥ-Hayagrīva; śaṅkuśirāḥ-Śaṅkuśirā; vipracittiḥ-Vipracitti; ayomukhaḥ-Ayomukha; pulomā-Pulomā; vṛṣaparvā-Vṛṣaparvā; ca-also; prahetiḥ-Praheti; hetiḥ-Heti; utkalaḥ-Utkala; daiteyāḥ-the Daityas; dānavāḥ-the Dānavas; yakṣāḥ-the Yakṣas; rakṣāṁsi-the Rākṣasas; ca-and; sahasraśaḥ-by the thousands; sumāli-māli-pramukhāḥ-others, headed by Sumāli and Māli; kārtasvara-of gold; paricchadāḥ-dressed in ornaments; pratiṣidhya-keeping back; indra-senā-agram-the front of Indra's army; mṛtyoḥ-for death; api-even; durāsadam-difficult to approach; abhyardayan-harassed; asambhrāntāḥ-without fear; siṁha-nādena-with a sound like a lion; durmadāḥ-furious; gadābhiḥ-with clubs; parighaiḥ-with iron-studded bludgeons; bāṇaiḥ-with arrows; prāsa-mudgara-tomaraiḥ-with barbed missiles, mallets and lances.





Many hundreds and thousands of demons, demi-demons, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas [man-eaters] and others, headed by Sumāli and Māli, resisted the armies of King Indra, which even death personified cannot easily overcome. Among the demons were Namuci, Śambara, Anarvā, Dvimūrdhā, Ṛṣabha, Asura, Hayagrīva, Śaṅkuśirā, Vipracitti, Ayomukha, Pulomā, Vṛṣaparvā, Praheti, Heti and Utkala. Roaring tumultuously and fearlessly like lions, these invincible demons, all dressed in golden ornaments, gave pain to the demigods with weapons like clubs, bludgeons, arrows, barbed darts, mallets and lances.





TEXT 23



śūlaiḥ paraśvadhaiḥ khaḍgaiḥ

śataghnībhir bhuśuṇḍibhiḥ

sarvato 'vākiran śastrair

astraiś ca vibudharṣabhān

SYNONYMS



śūlaiḥ-by spears; paraśvadhaiḥ-by axes; khaḍgaiḥ-by swords; śataghnībhiḥ-by śataghnīs; bhuśuṇḍibhiḥ-by bhuśuṇḍis; sarvataḥ-all around; avākiran-scattered; śastraiḥ-with weapons; astraiḥ-with arrows; ca-and; vibudha-ṛṣabhān-the chiefs of the demigods.





Armed with lances, tridents, axes, swords and other weapons like śataghnīs and bhuśuṇḍis, the demons attacked from different directions and scattered all the chiefs of the demigod armies.





TEXT 24



na te 'dṛśyanta sañchannāḥ

śara-jālaiḥ samantataḥ

puṅkhānupuṅkha-patitair

jyotīṁṣīva nabho-ghanaiḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; te-they (the demigods); adṛśyanta-were seen; sañchannāḥ-being completely covered; śara-jālaiḥ-by networks of arrows; samantataḥ-all around; puṅkha-anupuṅkha-one arrow after another; patitaiḥ-falling; jyotīṁṣi iva-like the stars in the sky; nabhaḥ-ghanaiḥ-by the dense clouds.





As the stars in the sky cannot be seen when covered by dense clouds, the demigods, being completely covered by networks of arrows falling upon them one after another, could not be seen.





TEXT 25



na te śastrāstra-varṣaughā

hy āseduḥ sura-sainikān

chinnāḥ siddha-pathe devair

laghu-hastaiḥ sahasradhā

SYNONYMS



na-not; te-those; śastra-astra-varṣa-oghāḥ-showers of arrows and other weapons; hi-indeed; āseduḥ-reached; sura-sainikān-the armies of the demigods; chinnāḥ-cut; siddha-pathe-in the sky; devaiḥ-by the demigods; laghu-hastaiḥ-quick-handed; sahasradhā-into thousands of pieces.





The showers of various weapons and arrows released to kill the soldiers of the demigods did not reach them because the demigods, acting quickly, cut the weapons into thousands of pieces in the sky.





TEXT 26



atha kṣīṇāstra-śastraughā

giri-śṛṅga-drumopalaiḥ

abhyavarṣan sura-balaṁ

cicchidus tāṁś ca pūrvavat

SYNONYMS



atha-thereupon; kṣīṇa-being reduced; astra-of the arrows released by mantras; śastra-and weapons; oghāḥ-the multitudes; giri-of mountains; śṛṅga-with the peaks; druma-with trees; upalaiḥ-and with stones; abhyavarṣan-showered; sura-balam-the soldiers of the demigods; cicchiduḥ-broke to pieces; tān-them; ca-and; pūrva-vat-as before.





As their weapons and mantras decreased, the demons began showering mountain peaks, trees and stones upon the demigod soldiers, but the demigods were so powerful and expert that they nullified all these weapons by breaking them to pieces in the sky as before.





TEXT 27



tān akṣatān svastimato niśāmya

śastrāstra-pūgair atha vṛtra-nāthāḥ

drumair dṛṣadbhir vividhādri-śṛṅgair

avikṣatāṁs tatrasur indra-sainikān

SYNONYMS



tān-them (the soldiers of the demigods); akṣatān-not injured; svasti-mataḥ-being very healthy; niśāmya-seeing; śastra-astra-pūgaiḥ-by the bunches of weapons and mantras; atha-thereupon; vṛtra-nāthāḥ-the soldiers led by Vṛtrāsura; drumaiḥ-by the trees; dṛṣadbhiḥ-by the stones; vividha-various; adri-of mountain s; śṛṅgaiḥ-by the peaks; avikṣatān-not injured; tatrasuḥ-became afraid; indra-sainikān-the soldiers of King Indra.





When the soldiers of the demons, commanded by Vṛtrāsura, saw that the soldiers of King Indra were quite well, having not been injured at all by their volleys of weapons, not even by the trees, stones and mountain peaks, the demons were very much afraid.





TEXT 28



sarve prayāsā abhavan vimoghāḥ

kṛtāḥ kṛtā deva-gaṇeṣu daityaiḥ

kṛṣṇānukūleṣu yathā mahatsu

kṣudraiḥ prayuktā ūṣatī rūkṣa-vācaḥ

SYNONYMS



sarve-all; prayāsāḥ-endeavors; abhavan-were; vimoghāḥ-futile; kṛtāḥ-performed; kṛtāḥ-again performed; deva-gaṇeṣu-unto the demigods; daityaiḥ-by the demons; kṛṣṇa-anukūleṣu-who were always protected by Kṛṣṇa; yathā-just as; mahatsu-unto the Vaiṣṇavas; kṣudraiḥ-by insignificant persons; prayuktāḥ-used; ūṣatīḥ-unfavorable; rūkṣa-rough; vācaḥ-words.





When insignificant persons use rough words to cast false, angry accusations against saintly persons, their fruitless words do not disturb the great personalities. Similarly, all the efforts of the demons against the demigods, who were favorably situated under the protection of Kṛṣṇa, were futile.





There is a Bengali saying that if a vulture curses a cow to die, the curse will not be effective. Similarly, accusations made by demoniac persons against devotees of Kṛṣṇa cannot have any effect. The demigods are devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and therefore the curses of the demons were futile.





TEXT 29



te sva-prayāsaṁ vitathaṁ nirīkṣya

harāv abhaktā hata-yuddha-darpāḥ

palāyanāyāji-mukhe visṛjya

patiṁ manas te dadhur ātta-sārāḥ

SYNONYMS



te-they (the demons); sva-prayāsam-their own endeavors; vitatham-fruitless; nirīkṣya-seeing; harau abhaktāḥ-the asuras, those who are not devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hata-defeated; yuddha-darpāḥ-their pride in fighting; palāyanāya-for leaving the battlefield; āji-mukhe-in the very beginning of the battle; visṛjya-leaving aside; patim-their commander, Vṛtrāsura; manaḥ-their minds; te-all of them; dadhuḥ-gave; ātta-sārāḥ-whose prowess was taken away.





The asuras, who are never devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, lost their pride in fighting when they found all their endeavors futile. Leaving aside their leader even in the very beginning of the fight, they decided to flee because all their prowess had been taken away by the enemy.





TEXT 30



vṛtro 'surāṁs tān anugān manasvī

pradhāvataḥ prekṣya babhāṣa etat

palāyitaṁ prekṣya balaṁ ca bhagnaṁ

bhayena tīvreṇa vihasya vīraḥ

SYNONYMS



vṛtraḥ-Vṛtrāsura, the commander of the demons; asurān-all the demons; tān-them; anugān-his followers; manasvī-the great-minded; pradhāvataḥ-fleeing; prekṣya-observing; babhāṣa-spoke; etat-this; palāyitam-fleeing; prekṣya-seeing; balam-army; ca-and; bhagnam-broken; bhayena-out of fear; tīvreṇa-intense; vihasya-smiling; vīraḥ-the great hero.





Seeing his army broken and all the asuras, even those known as great heroes, fleeing the battlefield out of intense fear, Vṛtrāsura, who was truly a great-minded hero, smiled and spoke the following words.





TEXT 31



kālopapannāṁ rucirāṁ manasvināṁ

jagāda vācaṁ puruṣa-pravīraḥ

he vipracitte namuce puloman

mayānarvañ chambara me śṛṇudhvam

SYNONYMS



kāla-upapannām-suitable to the time and circumstances; rucirām-very beautiful; manasvinām-to the great, deep-minded personalities; jagāda-spoke; vācam-words; puruṣa-pravīraḥ-the hero among heroes, Vṛtrāsura; he-O; vipracitte-Vipracitti; namuce-O Namuci; puloman-O Pulomā; maya-O Maya; anarvan-O Anarvā; śambara-O Śambara; me-from me; śṛṇudhvam-please hear.





According to his position and the time and circumstances, Vṛtrāsura, the hero among heroes, spoke words that were much to be appreciated by thoughtful men. He called to the heroes of the demons, "O Vipracitti! O Namuci! O Pulomā! O Maya, Anarvā and Śambara! Please hear me and do not flee."





TEXT 32



jātasya mṛtyur dhruva eva sarvataḥ

pratikriyā yasya na ceha kḷptā

loko yaśaś cātha tato yadi hy amuṁ

ko nāma mṛtyuṁ na vṛṇīta yuktam

SYNONYMS



jātasya-of one who has taken birth (all living beings); mṛtyuḥ-death; dhruvaḥ-inevitable; eva-indeed; sarvataḥ-everywhere in the universe; pratikriyā-counteraction; yasya-of which; na-not; ca-also; iha-in this material world; kḷptā-devised; lokaḥ-promotion to higher planets; yaśaḥ-reputation and glory; ca-and; atha-then; tataḥ-from that; yadi-if; hi-indeed; amum-that; kaḥ-who; nāma-indeed; mṛtyum-death; na-not; vṛṇīta-would accept; yuktam-suitable.





Vṛtrāsura said: All living entities who have taken birth in this material world must die. Surely, no one in this world has found any means to be saved from death. Even providence has not provided a means to escape it. Under the circumstances, death being inevitable, if one can gain promotion to the higher planetary systems and be always celebrated here by dying a suitable death, what man will not accept such a glorious death?





If by dying one can be elevated to the higher planetary systems and be ever-famous after his death, who is so foolish that he will refuse such a glorious death? Similar advice was also given by Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna. "My dear Arjuna," the Lord said, "do not desist from fighting. If you gain victory in the fight, you will enjoy a kingdom, and even if you die you will be elevated to the heavenly planets." Everyone should be ready to die while performing glorious deeds. A glorious person is not meant to meet death like cats and dogs.





TEXT 33



dvau sammatāv iha mṛtyū durāpau

yad brahma-sandhāraṇayā jitāsuḥ

kalevaraṁ yoga-rato vijahyād

yad agraṇīr vīra-śaye 'nivṛttaḥ

SYNONYMS



dvau-two; sammatau-approved (by śāstra and great personalities); iha-in this world; mṛtyū-deaths; durāpau-extremely rare; yat-which; brahma-sandhāraṇayā-with concentration on Brahman, Paramātmā or Parabrahma, Kṛṣṇa; jita-asuḥ-controlling the mind and senses; kalevaram-the body; yoga-rataḥ-being engaged in the performance of yoga; vijahyāt-one may leave; yat-which; agraṇīḥ-taking the lead; vīra-śaye-on the battlefield; anivṛttaḥ-not turning back.





There are two ways to meet a glorious death, and both are very rare. One is to die after performing mystic yoga, especially bhakti-yoga, by which one can control the mind and living force and die absorbed in thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The second is to die on the battlefield, leading the army and never showing one's back. These two kinds of death are recommended in the śāstra as glorious.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Battle Between the Demigods and Vṛtrāsura."



Chapter Eleven



The Transcendental Qualities of Vṛtrāsura





This chapter describes Vṛtrāsura's great qualities. When the prominent commanders of the demons fled, not hearing Vṛtrāsura's advice. Vṛtrāsura condemned them all as cowards. Speaking very bravely, he stood alone to face the demigods. When the demigods saw Vṛtrāsura's attitude, they were so afraid that they practically fainted, and Vṛtrāsura began trampling them down. Unable to tolerate this, Indra, the King of the demigods, threw his club at Vṛtrāsura, but Vṛtrāsura was such a great hero that he easily caught the club with his left hand and used it to beat Indra's elephant. Struck by the blow of Vṛtrāsura, the elephant was pushed back fourteen yards and fell, with Indra on its back.





King Indra had first accepted Viśvarūpa as his priest and thereafter killed him. Reminding Indra of his heinous activities, Vṛtrāsura said, "If one is a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, and depends on Lord Viṣṇu in every respect, then victory, opulence and peace of mind are all inevitably available. Such a person has nothing for which to aspire in the three worlds. The Supreme Lord is so kind that He especially favors such a devotee by not giving him opulence that will hamper his devotional service. Therefore I wish to give up everything for the service of the Lord. I wish always to chant the glories of the Lord and engage in His service. Let me become unattached to my worldly family and make friendships with the devotees of the Lord. I do not desire to be promoted to the higher planetary systems, even to Dhruvaloka or Brahmaloka, nor do I desire an unconquerable position within this material world. I have no need for such things."





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

ta evaṁ śaṁsato dharmaṁ

vacaḥ patyur acetasaḥ

naivāgṛhṇanta sambhrāntāḥ

palāyana-parā nṛpa

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; te-they; evam-thus; śaṁsataḥ-praising; dharmam-the principles of religion; vacaḥ-the words; patyuḥ-of their master; acetasaḥ-their minds being very disturbed; na-not; eva-indeed; agṛhṇanta-accepted; sambhrāntāḥ-fearful; palāyana-parāḥ-intent upon fleeing; nṛpa-O King.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, Vṛtrāsura, the commander in chief of the demons, advised his lieutenants in the principles of religion, but the cowardly demoniac commanders, intent upon fleeing the battlefield, were so disturbed by fear that they could not accept his words.





TEXTS 2–3



viśīryamāṇāṁ pṛtanām

āsurīm asurarṣabhaḥ

kālānukūlais tridaśaiḥ

kālyamānām anāthavat

dṛṣṭvātapyata saṅkruddha



indra-śatrur amarṣitaḥ

tān nivāryaujasā rājan

nirbhartsyedam uvāca ha

SYNONYMS



viśīryamāṇām-being shattered; pṛtanām-the army; āsurīm-of the demons; asura-ṛṣabhaḥ-the best of the asuras, Vṛtrāsura; kāla-anukūlaiḥ-following the circumstances presented by time; tridaśaiḥ-by the demigods; kālyamānām-being chased; anātha-vat-as if no one were there to protect them; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; atapyata-felt pain; saṅkruddhaḥ-being very angry; indra-śatruḥ-Vṛtrāsura, the enemy of Indra; amarṣitaḥ-unable to tolerate; tān-them (the demigods); nivārya-blocking; ojasā-with great force; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; nirbhartsya-rebuking; idam-this; uvāca-said; ha-indeed.





O King Parīkṣit, the demigods, taking advantage of a favorable opportunity presented by time, attacked the army of the demons from the rear and began driving away the demoniac soldiers, scattering them here and there as if their army had no leader. Seeing the pitiable condition of his soldiers, Vṛtrāsura, the best of the asuras, who was called Indraśatru, the enemy of Indra, was very much aggrieved. Unable to tolerate such reverses, he stopped and forcefully rebuked the demigods, speaking the following words in an angry mood.





TEXT 4



kiṁ va uccaritair mātur

dhāvadbhiḥ pṛṣṭhato hataiḥ

na hi bhīta-vadhaḥ ślāghyo

na svargyaḥ śūra-māninām

SYNONYMS



kim-what is the benefit; vaḥ-for you; uccaritaiḥ-with those like the stool; mātuḥ-of the mother; dhāvadbhiḥ-running away; pṛṣṭhataḥ-from the back; hataiḥ-killed; na-not; hi-certainly; bhīta-vadhaḥ-the killing of a person who is afraid; ślāghyaḥ-glorious; na-nor; svargyaḥ-leading to the heavenly planets; śūra-māninām-of persons who consider themselves heroes.





O demigods, these demoniac soldiers have taken birth uselessly. Indeed, they have come from the bodies of their mothers exactly like stool. What is the benefit of killing such enemies from behind while they are running in fear? One who considers himself a hero should not kill an enemy who is afraid of losing his life. Such killing is never glorious, nor can it promote one to the heavenly planets.





Vṛtrāsura rebuked both the demigods and the demoniac soldiers because the demons were running in fear of their lives and the demigods were killing them from behind. The actions of both were abominable. When a fight takes place, the opposing parties must be prepared to fight like heroes. A hero never runs from the field of battle. He always fights face to face, determined to gain victory or lay down his life in the fight. That is heroic. Killing an enemy from behind is also inglorious. When an enemy turns his back and runs in fear of his life, he should not be killed. This is the etiquette of military science.



Vṛtrāsura insulted the demoniac soldiers by comparing them to the stool of their mothers. Both stool and a cowardly son come from the abdomen of the mother, and Vṛtrāsura said that there is no difference between them. A similar comparison was given by Tulasī dāsa, who commented that a son and urine both come from the same channel. In other words, semen and urine both come from the genitals, but semen produces a child whereas urine produces nothing. Therefore if a child is neither a hero nor a devotee, he is not a son but urine. Similarly, Cāṇakya Paṇḍita also says:



ko 'rthaḥ putreṇa jātena

yo na vidvān na dhārmikaḥ

kāṇena cakṣuṣā kiṁ vā

cakṣuḥ pīḍaiva kevalam





"What is the use of a son who is neither glorious nor devoted to the Lord? Such a son is like a blind eye, which simply gives pain but cannot help one see."





TEXT 5



yadi vaḥ pradhane śraddhā

sāraṁ vā kṣullakā hṛdi

agre tiṣṭhata mātraṁ me

na ced grāmya-sukhe spṛhā

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; vaḥ-of you; pradhane-in battle; śraddhā-faith; sāram-patience; vā-or; kṣullakāḥ-O insignificant ones; hṛdi-in the core of the heart; agre-in front; tiṣṭhata-just stand; mātram-for a moment; me-of me; na-not; cet-if; grāmya-sukhe-in sense gratification; spṛhā-desire.





O insignificant demigods, if you truly have faith in your heroism, if you have patience in the cores of your hearts and if you are not ambitious for sense gratification, please stand before me for a moment.





Rebuking the demigods, Vṛtrāsura challenged, "O demigods, if you are actually heroes, stand before me now and try to show your prowess. If you do not wish to fight, if you are afraid of losing your lives, I shall not kill you, for unlike you, I am not so evil minded as to kill persons who are neither heroic nor willing to fight. If you have faith in your heroism, please stand before me."





TEXT 6



evaṁ sura-gaṇān kruddho

bhīṣayan vapuṣā ripūn

vyanadat sumahā-prāṇo

yena lokā vicetasaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; sura-gaṇān-the demigods; kruddhaḥ-being very angry; bhīṣayan-terrifying; vapuṣā-by his body; ripūn-his enemies; vyanadat-roared; su-mahā-prāṇaḥ-the most powerful Vṛtrāsura; yena-by which; lokāḥ-all people; vicetasaḥ-unconscious.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Vṛtrāsura, the angry and most powerful hero, terrified the demigods with his stout and strongly built body. When he roared with a resounding voice, nearly all living entities fainted.





TEXT 7



tena deva-gaṇāḥ sarve

vṛtra-visphoṭanena vai

nipetur mūrcchitā bhūmau

yathaivāśaninā hatāḥ

SYNONYMS



tena-by that; deva-gaṇāḥ-the demigods; sarve-all; vṛtra-visphoṭanena-the tumultuous sound of Vṛtrāsura; vai-indeed; nipetuḥ-fell; mūrcchitāḥ-fainted; bhūmau-on the ground; yathā-just as if; eva-indeed; aśaninā-by a thunderbolt; hatāḥ-struck.





When all the demigods heard Vṛtrāsura's tumultuous roar, which resembled that of a lion, they fainted and fell to the ground as if struck by thunderbolts.





TEXT 8



mamarda padbhyāṁ sura-sainyam āturaṁ

nimīlitākṣaṁ raṇa-raṅga-durmadaḥ

gāṁ kampayann udyata-śūla ojasā

nālaṁ vanaṁ yūtha-patir yathonmadaḥ

SYNONYMS



mamarda-trampled; padbhyām-by his feet; sura-sainyam-the army of the demigods; āturam-who were very afraid; nimīlita-akṣam-closing their eyes; raṇa-raṅga-durmadaḥ-arrogant on the battlefield; gām-the surface of the globe; kampayan-causing to tremble; udyata-śūlaḥ-taking up his trident; ojasā-with his strength; nālam-of hollow bamboo sticks; vanam-a forest; yūtha-patiḥ-an elephant; yathā-just as; unmadaḥ-maddened.





As the demigods closed their eyes in fear, Vṛtrāsura, taking up his trident and making the earth tremble with his great strength, trampled the demigods beneath his feet on the battlefield the way a mad elephant tramples hollow bamboos in the forest.





TEXT 9



vilokya taṁ vajra-dharo 'tyamarṣitaḥ

sva-śatrave 'bhidravate mahā-gadām

cikṣepa tām āpatatīṁ suduḥsahāṁ

jagrāha vāmena kareṇa līlayā

SYNONYMS



vilokya-seeing; tam-him (Vṛtrāsura); vajra-dharaḥ-the carrier of the thunderbolt (King Indra); ati-very much; amarṣitaḥ-intolerant; sva-his own; śatrave-toward the enemy; abhidravate-running; mahā-gadām-a very powerful club; cikṣepa-threw; tām-that (club); āpatatīm-flying toward him; su-duḥsahām-very difficult to counteract; jagrāha-caught; vāmena-with his left; kareṇa-hand; līlayā-very easily.





Seeing Vṛtrāsura's disposition, Indra, the King of heaven, became intolerant and threw at him one of his great clubs, which are extremely difficult to counteract. However, as the club flew toward him, Vṛtrāsura easily caught it with his left hand.





TEXT 10



sa indra-śatruḥ kupito bhṛśaṁ tayā

mahendra-vāhaṁ gadayoru-vikramaḥ

jaghāna kumbha-sthala unnadan mṛdhe

tat karma sarve samapūjayan nṛpa

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that; indra-śatruḥ-Vṛtrāsura; kupitaḥ-being angry; bhṛśam-very much; tayā-with that; mahendra-vāham-the elephant who is the carrier of Indra; gadayā-by the club; uru-vikramaḥ-who is famous for his great strength; jaghāna-struck; kumbha-sthale-on the head; unnadan-roaring loudly; mṛdhe-in that fight; tat karma-that action (striking the head of Indra's elephant with the club in his left hand); sarve-all the soldiers (on both sides); samapūjayan-glorified; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit.





O King Parīkṣit, the powerful Vṛtrāsura, the enemy of King Indra, angrily struck the head of Indra's elephant with that club, making a tumultuous sound on the battlefield. For this heroic deed, the soldiers on both sides glorified him.





TEXT 11



airāvato vṛtra-gadābhimṛṣṭo

vighūrṇito 'driḥ kuliśāhato yathā

apāsarad bhinna-mukhaḥ sahendro

muñcann asṛk sapta-dhanur bhṛśārtaḥ

SYNONYMS



airāvataḥ-Airāvata, the elephant of King Indra; vṛtra-gadā-abhimṛṣṭaḥ-struck by the club in Vṛtrāsura's hand; vighūrṇitaḥ-shaken; adriḥ-a mountain; kuliśa-by a thunderbolt; āhataḥ-struck; yathā-just like; apāsarat-was pushed back; bhinna-mukhaḥ-having a broken mouth; saha-indraḥ-with King Indra; muñcan-spitting; asṛk-blood; sapta-dhanuḥ-a distance measured by seven bows (approximately fourteen yards); bhṛśa-very severely; ārtaḥ-aggrieved.





Struck with the club by Vṛtrāsura like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt, the elephant Airāvata, feeling great pain and spitting blood from its broken mouth, was pushed back fourteen yards. In great distress, the elephant fell, with Indra on its back.





TEXT 12



na sanna-vāhāya viṣaṇṇa-cetase

prāyuṅkta bhūyaḥ sa gadāṁ mahātmā

indro 'mṛta-syandi-karābhimarśa-

vīta-vyatha-kṣata-vāho 'vatasthe

SYNONYMS



na-not; sanna-fatigued; vāhāya-upon him whose carrier; viṣaṇṇa-cetase-morose in the core of his heart; prāyuṅkta-used; bhūyaḥ-again; saḥ-he (Vṛtrāsura); gadām-the club; mahā-ātmā-the great soul (who refrained from striking Indra with the club when he saw Indra morose and aggrieved); indraḥ-Indra; amṛta-syandi-kara-of his hand, which produces nectar; abhimarśa-by the touch; vīta-was relieved; vyatha-from pains; kṣata-and cuts; vāhaḥ-whose carrier elephant; avatasthe-stood there.





When he saw Indra's carrier elephant thus fatigued and injured and when he saw Indra morose because his carrier had been harmed in that way, the great soul Vṛtrāsura, following religious principles, refrained from again striking Indra with the club. Taking this opportunity, Indra touched the elephant with his nectar-producing hand, thus relieving the animal's pain and curing its injuries. Then the elephant and Indra both stood silently.





TEXT 13



sa taṁ nṛpendrāhava-kāmyayā ripuṁ

vajrāyudhaṁ bhrātṛ-haṇaṁ vilokya

smaraṁś ca tat-karma nṛ-śaṁsam aṁhaḥ

śokena mohena hasañ jagāda

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Vṛtrāsura); tam-him (the King of heaven, Indra); nṛpa-indra-O King Parīkṣit; āhava-kāmyayā-with a desire to fight; ripum-his enemy; vajra-āyudham-whose weapon was the thunderbolt (made from the bones of Dadhīci); bhrātṛ-haṇam-who was the killer of his brother; vilokya-seeing; smaran-remembering; ca-and; tat-karma-his activities; nṛ-śaṁsam-cruel; aṁhaḥ-a great sin; śokena-with lamentation; mohena-by bewilderment; hasan-laughing; jagāda-said.





O King, when the great hero Vṛtrāsura saw Indra, his enemy, the killer of his brother, standing before him with a thunderbolt in his hand, desiring to fight, Vṛtrāsura remembered how Indra had cruelly killed his brother. Thinking of Indra's sinful activities, he became mad with lamentation and forgetfulness. Laughing sarcastically, he spoke as follows.





TEXT 14



śrī-vṛtra uvāca

diṣṭyā bhavān me samavasthito ripur

yo brahma-hā guru-hā bhrātṛ-hā ca

diṣṭyānṛṇo 'dyāham asattama tvayā

mac-chūla-nirbhinna-dṛṣad-dhṛdācirāt

SYNONYMS



śrī-vṛtraḥ uvāca-the great hero Vṛtrāsura said; diṣṭyā-by good fortune; bhavān-Your Lordship; me-of me; samavasthitaḥ-situated (in front); ripuḥ-my enemy; yaḥ-who; brahma-hā-the killer of a brāhmaṇa; guru-hā-the killer of your guru; bhrātṛ-hā-the killer of my brother; ca-also; diṣṭyā-by good fortune; anṛṇaḥ-free from debt (to my brother); adya-today; aham-I; asat-tama-O most abominable one; tvayā-through you; mat-śūla-by my trident; nirbhinna-being pierced; dṛṣat-like stone; hṛdā-whose heart; acirāt-very soon.





Śrī Vṛtrāsura said: He who has killed a brāhmaṇa, he who has killed his spiritual master-indeed, he who has killed my brother-is now, by good fortune, standing before me face to face as my enemy. O most abominable one, when I pierce your stonelike heart with my trident, I shall be freed from my debt to my brother.





TEXT 15



yo no 'grajasyātma-vido dvijāter

guror apāpasya ca dīkṣitasya

viśrabhya khaḍgena śirāṁsy avṛścat

paśor ivākaruṇaḥ svarga-kāmaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-he who; naḥ-our; agra-jasya-of the elder brother; ātma-vidaḥ-who was fully self-realized; dvi-jāteḥ-a qualified brāhmaṇa; guroḥ-your spiritual master; apāpasya-free from all sinful activities; ca-also; dīkṣitasya-appointed as the initiator of your yajña; viśrabhya-trustfully; khaḍgena-by your sword; śirāṁsi-the heads; avṛścat-cut off; paśoḥ-of an animal; iva-like; akaruṇaḥ-merciless; svarga-kāmaḥ-desiring the heavenly planets.





Only for the sake of living in the heavenly planets, you killed my elder brother-a self-realized, sinless, qualified brāhmaṇa who had been appointed your chief priest. He was your spiritual master, but although you entrusted him with the performance of your sacrifice, you later mercilessly severed his heads from his body the way one butchers an animal.





TEXT 16



śrī-hrī-dayā-kīrtibhir ujjhitaṁ tvāṁ

sva-karmaṇā puruṣādaiś ca garhyam

kṛcchreṇa mac-chūla-vibhinna-deham

aspṛṣṭa-vahniṁ samadanti gṛdhrāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-opulence or beauty; hrī-shame; dayā-mercy; kīrtibhiḥ-and glory; ujjhitam-bereft of; tvām-you; sva-karmaṇā-by your own activities; puruṣa-adaiḥ-by the Rākṣasas (man-eaters); ca-and; garhyam-condemnable; kṛcchreṇa-with great difficulty; mat-śūla-by my trident; vibhinna-pierced; deham-your body; aspṛṣṭa-vahnim-not even touched by fire; samadanti-will eat; gṛdhrāḥ-the vultures.





Indra, you are bereft of all shame, mercy, glory and good fortune. Deprived of these good qualities by the reactions of your fruitive activities, you are to be condemned even by the man-eaters [Rākṣasas]. Now I shall pierce your body with my trident, and after you die with great pain, even fire will not touch you; only the vultures will eat your body.





TEXT 17



anye 'nu ye tveha nṛ-śaṁsam ajñā

yad udyatāstrāḥ praharanti mahyam

tair bhūta-nāthān sagaṇān niśāta-

triśūla-nirbhinna-galair yajāmi

SYNONYMS



anye-others; anu-follow; ye-who; tvā-you; iha-in this connection; nṛ-śaṁsam-very cruel; ajñāḥ-persons unaware of my prowess; yat-if; udyata-astrāḥ-with their swords raised; praharanti-attack; mahyam-me; taiḥ-with those; bhūta-nāthān-to such leaders of the ghosts as Bhairava; sa-gaṇān-with their hordes; niśāta-sharpened; tri-śūla-by the trident; nirbhinna-separated or pierced; galaiḥ-having their necks; yajāmi-I shall offer sacrifices.





You are naturally cruel. If the other demigods, unaware of my prowess, follow you by attacking me with raised weapons, I shall sever their heads with this sharp trident. With those heads I shall perform a sacrifice to Bhairava and the other leaders of the ghosts, along with their hordes.





TEXT 18



atho hare me kuliśena vīra

hartā pramathyaiva śiro yadīha

tatrānṛṇo bhūta-baliṁ vidhāya

manasvināṁ pāda-rajaḥ prapatsye

SYNONYMS



atho-otherwise; hare-O King Indra; me-of me; kuliśena-by your thunderbolt; vīra-O great hero; hartā-you cut off; pramathya-destroying my army; eva-certainly; śiraḥ-head; yadi-if; iha-in this battle; tatra-in that case; anṛṇaḥ-relieved of all debts in this material world; bhūta-balim-a presentation for all living entities; vidhāya-arranging; manasvinām-of great sages like Nārada Muni; pāda-rajaḥ-the dust of the lotus feet; prapatsye-I shall achieve.





But if in this battle you cut off my head with your thunderbolt and kill my soldiers, O Indra, O great hero, I shall take great pleasure in offering my body to other living entities [such as jackals and vultures]. I shall thus be relieved of my obligations to the reactions of my karma, and my fortune will be to receive the dust from the lotus feet of great devotees like Nārada Muni.





Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings:



ei chaya gosāñi yāra, mui tāra dāsa

tāṅ' sabāra pada-reṇu mora pañca-grāsa





"I am the servant of the six Gosvāmīs, and the dust of their lotus feet provides my five kinds of food." A Vaiṣṇava always desires the dust of the lotus feet of previous ācāryas and Vaiṣṇavas. Vṛtrāsura was certain that he would be killed in the battle with Indra, because this was the desire of Lord Viṣṇu. He was prepared for death because he knew that after his death he was destined to return home, back to Godhead. This is a great destination, and it is achieved by the grace of a Vaiṣṇava. Chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: no one has ever gone back to Godhead without being favored by a Vaiṣṇava. In this verse, therefore, we find the words manasvināṁ pāda-rajaḥ prapatsye: "I shall receive the dust of the lotus feet of great devotees." The word manasvinām refers to great devotees who always think of Kṛṣṇa. They are always peaceful, thinking of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore they are called dhīra. The best example of such a devotee is Nārada Muni. If one receives the dust of the lotus feet of a manasvī, a great devotee, he certainly returns home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 19



sureśa kasmān na hinoṣi vajraṁ

puraḥ sthite vairiṇi mayy amogham

mā saṁśayiṣṭhā na gadeva vajraḥ

syān niṣphalaḥ kṛpaṇārtheva yācñā

SYNONYMS



sura-īśa-O King of the demigods; kasmāt-why; na-not; hinoṣi-you hurl; vajram-the thunderbolt; puraḥ sthite-standing in front; vairiṇi-your enemy; mayi-at me; amogham-which is infallible (your thunderbolt); mā-do not; saṁśayiṣṭhāḥ-doubt; na-not; gadā iva-like the club; vajraḥ-the thunderbolt; syāt-may be; niṣphalaḥ-with no result; kṛpaṇa-from a miserly person; arthā-for money; iva-like; yācñā-a request.





O King of the demigods, since I, your enemy, am standing before you, why don't you hurl your thunderbolt at me? Although your attack upon me with your club was certainly useless, like a request of money from a miser, the thunderbolt you carry will not be useless. You need have no doubts about this.





When King Indra threw his club at Vṛtrāsura, Vṛtrāsura caught it in his left hand and retaliated by using it to strike the head of Indra's elephant. Thus Indra's attack was a disastrous failure. Indeed, Indra's elephant was injured and thrown back fourteen yards. Therefore even though Indra stood with the thunderbolt to hurl against Vṛtrāsura, he was doubtful, thinking that the thunderbolt might also fail. Vṛtrāsura, however, being a Vaiṣṇava, assured Indra that the thunderbolt would not fail, for Vṛtrāsura knew that it had been prepared in accordance with the instructions of Lord Viṣṇu. Although Indra had doubts because he could not understand that Lord Viṣṇu's order never fails, Vṛtrāsura understood Lord Viṣṇu's purpose. Vṛtrāsura was eager to be killed by the thunderbolt manufactured according to Lord Viṣṇu's instructions because he was sure that he would thus return home, back to Godhead. He was simply waiting for the opportunity of the thunderbolt's being released. In effect, therefore, Vṛtrāsura told Indra, "If you want to kill me, since I am your enemy, take this opportunity. Kill me. You will gain victory, and I shall go back to Godhead. Your deed will be equally beneficial for both of us. Do it immediately."





TEXT 20



nanv eṣa vajras tava śakra tejasā

harer dadhīces tapasā ca tejitaḥ

tenaiva śatruṁ jahi viṣṇu-yantrito

yato harir vijayaḥ śrīr guṇās tataḥ

SYNONYMS



nanu-certainly; eṣaḥ-this; vajraḥ-thunderbolt; tava-of yours; śakra-O Indra; tejasā-by the prowess; hareḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadhīceḥ-of Dadhīci; tapasā-by the austerities; ca-as well as; tejitaḥ-empowered; tena-with that; eva-certainly; śatrum-your enemy; jahi-kill; viṣṇu-yantritaḥ-ordered by Lord Viṣṇu; yataḥ-wherever; hariḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; vijayaḥ-victory; śrīḥ-opulences; guṇāḥ-and other good qualities; tataḥ-there.





O Indra, King of heaven, the thunderbolt you carry to kill me has been empowered by the prowess of Lord Viṣṇu and the strength of Dadhīci's austerities. Since you have come here to kill me in accordance with Lord Viṣṇu's order, there is no doubt that I shall be killed by the release of your thunderbolt. Lord Viṣṇu has sided with you. Therefore your victory, opulence and all good qualities are assured.





Vṛtrāsura not only assured King Indra that the thunderbolt was invincible, but also encouraged Indra to use it against him as soon as possible. Vṛtrāsura was eager to die with the stroke of the thunderbolt sent by Lord Viṣṇu so that he could immediately return home, back to Godhead. By hurling the thunderbolt, Indra would gain victory and enjoy the heavenly planets, remaining in the material world for repeated birth and death. Indra wanted to gain victory over Vṛtrāsura and thereby become happy, but that would not at all be happiness. The heavenly planets are just below Brahmaloka, but as stated by the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna: [Bg. 8.16] even if one achieves Brahmaloka, he must still fall to the lower planetary systems again and again. However, if one goes back to Godhead, he never returns to this material world. By killing Vṛtrāsura, Indra would not actually gain; he would remain in the material world. Vṛtrāsura, however, would go to the spiritual world. Therefore victory was destined for Vṛtrāsura, not for Indra.





TEXT 21



ahaṁ samādhāya mano yathāha naḥ

saṅkarṣaṇas tac-caraṇāravinde

tvad-vajra-raṁho-lulita-grāmya-pāśo

gatiṁ muner yāmy apaviddha-lokaḥ

SYNONYMS



aham-I; samādhāya-fixing firmly; manaḥ-the mind; yathā-just as; āha-said; naḥ-our; saṅkarṣaṇaḥ-Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa; tat-caraṇa-aravinde-at His lotus feet; tvat-vajra-of your thunderbolt; raṁhaḥ-by the force; lulita-torn; grāmya-of material attachment; pāśaḥ-the rope; gatim-the destination; muneḥ-of Nārada Muni and other devotees; yāmi-I shall achieve; apaviddha-giving up; lokaḥ-this material world (where one desires all kinds of impermanent things).





By the force of your thunderbolt, I shall be freed of material bondage and shall give up this body and this world of material desires. Fixing my mind upon the lotus feet of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, I shall attain the destination of such great sages as Nārada Muni, just as Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa has said.





The words ahaṁ samādhāya manaḥ indicate that the most important duty at the time of death is to concentrate one's mind. If one can fix his mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, Viṣṇu, Saṅkarṣaṇa or any Viṣṇu mūrti, his life will be successful. To be killed while fixing his mind at the lotus feet of Saṅkarṣaṇa, Vṛtrāsura asked Indra to release his vajra, or thunderbolt. He was destined to be killed by the thunderbolt given by Lord Viṣṇu; there was no question of its being baffled. Therefore Vṛtrāsura requested Indra to release the thunderbolt immediately, and he prepared himself by fixing his mind at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. A devotee is always ready to give up his material body, which is described herein as grāmya-pāśa, the rope of material attachment. The body is not at all good; it is simply a cause of bondage to the material world. Unfortunately, even though the body is destined for destruction, fools and rascals invest all their faith in the body and are never eager to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 22



puṁsāṁ kilaikānta-dhiyāṁ svakānāṁ

yāḥ sampado divi bhūmau rasāyām

na rāti yad dveṣa udvega ādhir

madaḥ kalir vyasanaṁ samprayāsaḥ

SYNONYMS



puṁsām-unto persons; kila-certainly; ekānta-dhiyām-who are advanced in spiritual consciousness; svakānām-who are recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as His own; yāḥ-which; sampadaḥ-opulences; divi-in the upper planetary systems; bhūmau-in the middle planetary systems; rasāyām-and in the lower planetary systems; na-not; rāti-bestows; yat-from which; dveṣaḥ-envy; udvegaḥ-anxiety; ādhiḥ-mental agitation; madaḥ-pride; kaliḥ-quarrel; vyasanam-distress due to loss; samprayāsaḥ-great endeavor.





Persons who fully surrender at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and always think of His lotus feet are accepted and recognized by the Lord as His own personal assistants or servants. The Lord never bestows upon such servants the brilliant opulences of the upper, lower and middle planetary systems of this material world. When one possesses material opulence in any of these three divisions of the universe, his possessions naturally increase his enmity, anxiety, mental agitation, pride and belligerence. Thus one goes through much endeavor to increase and maintain his possessions, and he suffers great unhappiness when he loses them.





In Bhagavad-gītā (4.11) the Lord says:



ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ





"As devotees surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of Pṛthā." Both Indra and Vṛtrāsura were certainly devotees of the Lord, although Indra took instructions from Viṣṇu to kill Vṛtrāsura. The Lord was actually more favorable to Vṛtrāsura because after being killed by Indra's thunderbolt, Vṛtrāsura would go back to Godhead, whereas the victorious Indra would rot in this material world. Because both of them were devotees, the Lord awarded them the respective benedictions they wanted. Vṛtrāsura never wanted material possessions, for he knew very well the nature of such possessions. To accumulate material possessions, one must labor very hard, and when he gets them he creates many enemies because this material world is always full of rivalry. If one becomes rich, his friends or relatives are envious. For ekānta-bhaktas, unalloyed devotees, Kṛṣṇa therefore never provides material possessions. A devotee sometimes needs some material possessions for preaching, but the possessions of a preacher are not like those of a karmī. A karmī's possessions are achieved as a result of karma, but those of a devotee are arranged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead just to facilitate his devotional activities. Because a devotee never uses material possessions for any purpose other than the service of the Lord, the possessions of a devotee are not to be compared to those of a karmī.





TEXT 23



trai-vargikāyāsa-vighātam asmat-

patir vidhatte puruṣasya śakra

tato 'numeyo bhagavat-prasādo

yo durlabho 'kiñcana-gocaro 'nyaiḥ

SYNONYMS



trai-vargika-for the three objectives, namely religiosity, economic development, and satisfaction of the senses; āyāsa-of endeavor; vighātam-the ruin; asmat-our; patiḥ-Lord; vidhatte-performs; puruṣasya-of a devotee; śakra-O Indra; tataḥ-whereby; anumeyaḥ-to be inferred; bhagavat-prasādaḥ-the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaḥ-which; durlabhaḥ-very difficult to obtain; akiñcana-gocaraḥ-within the reach of the unalloyed devotees; anyaiḥ-by others, who aspire for material happiness.





Our Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, forbids His devotees to endeavor uselessly for religion, economic development and sense gratification. O Indra, one can thus infer how kind the Lord is. Such mercy is obtainable only by unalloyed devotees, not by persons who aspire for material gains.





There are four objectives in human life-namely, religiosity (dharma), economic development (artha), sense gratification (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa) from the bondage of material existence. People generally aspire for religiosity, economic development and sense gratification, but a devotee has no other desire than to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead both in this life and in the next. The special mercy for the unalloyed devotee is that the Lord saves him from hard labor to achieve the results of religion, economic development and sense gratification. Of course, if one wants such benefits, the Lord certainly awards them. Indra, for example, although a devotee, was not much interested in release from material bondage; instead, he desired sense gratification and a high standard of material happiness in the heavenly planets. Vṛtrāsura, however, being an unalloyed devotee, aspired only to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord arranged for him to go back to Godhead after his bodily bondage was destroyed by Indra. Vṛtrāsura requested Indra to release his thunderbolt against him as soon as possible so that both he and Indra would benefit according to their proportionate advancement in devotional service.





TEXT 24



ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ

SYNONYMS



aham-I; hare-O my Lord; tava-of Your Lordship; pāda-eka-mūla-whose only shelter is the lotus feet; dāsa-anudāsaḥ-the servant of Your servant; bhavitāsmi-shall I become; bhūyaḥ-again; manaḥ-my mind; smareta-may remember; asu-pateḥ-of the Lord of my life; guṇān-the attributes; te-of Your Lordship; gṛṇīta-may chant; vāk-my words; karma-activities of service to You; karotu-may perform; kāyaḥ-my body.





O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, will I again be; able to be a servant of Your eternal servants who find shelter only at Your lotus feet? O Lord of my life, may I again become their servant so that my mind may always think of Your transcendental attributes, my words always glorify those attributes, and my body always engage in the loving service of Your Lordship?





This verse gives the sum and substance of devotional life. One must first become a servant of the servant of the servant of the Lord (dāsānudāsa). Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised, and He also showed by His own example, that a living entity should always desire to be a servant of the servant of the servant of Kṛṣṇa, the maintainer of the gopīs (gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ). This means that one must accept a spiritual master who comes in the disciplic succession and is a servant of the servant of the Lord. Under his direction, one must then engage one's three properties, namely his body, mind and words. The body should be engaged in physical activity under the order of the master, the mind should think of Kṛṣṇa incessantly, and one's words should be engaged in preaching the glories of the Lord. If one is thus engaged in the loving service of the Lord, one's life is successful.





TEXT 25



na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

na sārva-bhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

samañjasa tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe

SYNONYMS



na-not; nāka-pṛṣṭham-the heavenly planets or Dhruvaloka; na-nor; ca-also; pārameṣṭhyam-the planet on which Lord Brahmā resides; na-nor; sārva-bhaumam-sovereignty of the whole earthly planetary system; na-nor; rasā-ādhipatyam-sovereignty of the lower planetary systems; na-nor; yoga-siddhīḥ-eight kinds of mystic yogic power (aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, etc.); apunaḥ-bhavam-liberation from rebirth in a material body; vā-or; samañjasa-O source of all opportunities; tvā-You; virahayya-being separated from; kāṅkṣe-I desire.





O my Lord, source of all opportunities, I do not desire to enjoy in Dhruvaloka, the heavenly planets or the planet where Lord Brahmā resides, nor do I want to be the supreme ruler of all the earthly planets or the lower planetary systems. I do not desire to be master of the powers of mystic yoga, nor do I want liberation if I have to give up Your lotus feet.





A pure devotee never desires to gain material opportunities by rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord. A pure devotee desires only to engage in loving service to the Lord in the constant association of the Lord and His eternal associates, as stated in the previous verse (dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi). As confirmed by Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura:



tāṅdera caraṇa sevi bhakta-sane vāsa

janame janame haya, ei abhilāṣa





To serve the Lord and the servants of His servants, in the association of devotees, is the only objective of a pure, unalloyed devotee.





TEXT 26



ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ

stanyaṁ yathā vatsatarāḥ kṣudh-ārtāḥ

priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā

mano 'ravindākṣa didṛkṣate tvām

SYNONYMS



ajāta-pakṣāḥ-who have not yet grown wings; iva-like; mātaram-the mother; khagāḥ-small birds; stanyam-the milk from the udder; yathā-just as; vatsatarāḥ-the young calves; kṣudh-ārtāḥ-distressed by hunger; priyam-the beloved or husband; priyā-the wife or lover; iva-like; vyuṣitam-who is away from home; viṣaṇṇā-morose; manaḥ-my mind; aravinda-akṣa-O lotus-eyed one; didṛkṣate-wants to see; tvām-You.





O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds that have not yet developed their wings always look for their mother to return and feed them, as small calves tied with ropes await anxiously the time of milking, when they will be allowed to drink the milk of their mothers, or as a morose wife whose husband is away from home always longs for him to return and satisfy her in all respects, I always yearn for the opportunity to render direct service unto You.





A pure devotee always yearns to associate personally with the Lord and render service unto Him. The examples given in this regard are most appropriate. A small baby bird is practically never satisfied except when the mother bird comes to feed it, a small calf is not satisfied unless allowed to suck the milk from the mother's udder, and a chaste, devoted wife whose husband is away from home is never satisfied until she has the association of her beloved husband.





TEXT 27



mamottamaśloka-janeṣu sakhyaṁ

saṁsāra-cakre bhramataḥ sva-karmabhiḥ

tvan-māyayātmātmaja-dāra-geheṣv

āsakta-cittasya na nātha bhūyāt

SYNONYMS



mama-my; uttama-śloka-janeṣu-among devotees who are simply attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sakhyam-friendship; saṁsāra-cakre-in the cycle of birth and death; bhramataḥ-who am wandering; sva-karmabhiḥ-by the results of my own fruitive activities; tvat-māyayā-by Your external energy; ātma-to the body; ātma-ja-children; dāra-wife; geheṣu-and home; āsakta-attached; cittasya-whose mind; na-not; nātha-O my Lord; bhūyāt-may there be.





O my Lord, my master, I am wandering throughout this material world as a result of my fruitive activities. Therefore I simply seek friendship in the association of Your pious and enlightened devotees. My attachment to my body, wife, children and home is continuing by the spell of Your external energy, but I wish to be attached to them no longer. Let my mind, my consciousness and everything I have be attached only to You.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Sixth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Transcendental Qualities of Vṛtrāsura."



Chapter Twelve



Vṛtrāsura's Glorious Death





This chapter describes how Indra, the King of heaven, killed Vṛtrāsura despite great reluctance.





After Vṛtrāsura finished speaking, he released his trident against King Indra with great anger, but Indra, using his thunderbolt, which was many times more powerful than the trident, broke the trident to pieces and cut off one of Vṛtrāsura's arms. Nevertheless, Vṛtrāsura used his remaining arm to strike Indra with an iron mace, making the thunderbolt fall from Indra's hand. Indra, being very ashamed of this, did not pick up the thunderbolt from the ground, but Vṛtrāsura encouraged King Indra to pick it up and fight. Vṛtrāsura then spoke to King Indra as follows, instructing him very well.





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead," he said, "is the cause of victory and defeat. Not knowing that the Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes, fools and rascals try to take credit for victory or defeat themselves, but everything is actually under the control of the Lord. No one but Him has any independence. The puruṣa (the enjoyer) and prakṛti (the enjoyed) are under the control of the Lord, for it is by His supervision that everything works systematically. Not seeing the hand of the Supreme in every action, a fool considers himself the ruler and controller of everything. When one understands, however, that the real controller is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is freed from the relativities of the world, such as distress, happiness, fear and impurity." Thus Indra and Vṛtrāsura not only fought, but also engaged in philosophical discourses. Then they began to fight again.





This time Indra was more powerful, and he severed Vṛtrāsura's remaining arm. Vṛtrāsura then assumed a gigantic form and swallowed King Indra, but Indra, being protected by the talisman known as Nārāyaṇa-kavaca, was able to protect himself even within Vṛtrāsura's body. Thus he emerged from Vṛtrāsura's abdomen and severed the demon's head from his body with his powerful thunderbolt. Severing the demon's head took one complete year to accomplish.





TEXT 1



śrī-ṛṣir uvāca

evaṁ jihāsur nṛpa deham ājau

mṛtyuṁ varaṁ vijayān manyamānaḥ

śūlaṁ pragṛhyābhyapatat surendraṁ

yathā mahā-puruṣaṁ kaiṭabho 'psu

SYNONYMS



śrī-ṛṣiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; jihāsuḥ-very eager to give up; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; deham-the body; ājau-in battle; mṛtyum-death; varam-better; vijayāt-than victory; manyamānaḥ-thinking; śūlam-trident; pragṛhya-taking up; abhyapatat-attacked; sura-indram-the King of heaven, Indra; yathā-just as; mahā-puruṣam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaiṭabhaḥ-the demon Kaiṭabha; apsu-when the whole universe was inundated.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Desiring to give up his body, Vṛtrāsura considered death in the battle preferable to victory. O King Parīkṣit, he vigorously took up his trident and with great force attacked Lord Indra, the King of heaven, just as Kaiṭabha had forcefully attacked the Supreme Personality of Godhead when the universe was inundated.





Although Vṛtrāsura repeatedly encouraged Indra to kill him with the thunderbolt, King Indra was morose at having to kill such a great devotee and was hesitant to throw it. Vṛtrāsura, disappointed that King Indra was reluctant despite his encouragement, took the initiative very forcefully by throwing his trident at Indra. Vṛtrāsura was not at all interested in victory; he was interested in being killed so that he could immediately return home, back to Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9), tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti: after giving up his body, a devotee immediately returns to Lord Kṛṣṇa and never returns to accept another body. This was Vṛtrāsura's interest.





TEXT 2



tato yugāntāgni-kaṭhora-jihvam

āvidhya śūlaṁ tarasāsurendraḥ

kṣiptvā mahendrāya vinadya vīro

hato 'si pāpeti ruṣā jagāda

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; yuga-anta-agni-like the fire at the end of every millennium; kaṭhora-sharp; jihvam-possessing points; āvidhya-twirling; śūlam-the trident; tarasā-with great force; asura-indraḥ-the great hero of the demons, Vṛtrāsura; kṣiptvā-throwing; mahā-indrāya-unto King Indra; vinadya-roaring; vīraḥ-the great hero (Vṛtrāsura); hataḥ-killed; asi-you are; pāpa-O sinful one; iti-thus; ruṣā-with great anger; jagāda-be cried out.





Then Vṛtrāsura, the great hero of the demons, whirled his trident, which had points like the flames of the blazing fire at the end of the millennium. With great force and anger he threw it at Indra, roaring and exclaiming loudly, "O sinful one, thus shall I kill you!"





TEXT 3



kha āpatat tad vicalad graholkavan

nirīkṣya duṣprekṣyam ajāta-viklavaḥ

vajreṇa vajrī śata-parvaṇācchinad

bhujaṁ ca tasyoraga-rāja-bhogam

SYNONYMS



khe-in the sky; āpatat-flying toward him; tat-that trident; vicalat-rotating; graha-ulka-vat-like a falling star; nirīkṣya-observing; duṣprekṣyam-unbearable to see; ajāta-viklavaḥ-not afraid; vajreṇa-with the thunderbolt; vajrī-Indra, the holder of the thunderbolt; śata-parvaṇā-possessing one hundred joints; ācchinat-cut; bhujam-the arm; ca-and; tasya-of him (Vṛtrāsura); uraga-rāja-of the great serpent Vāsuki; bhogam-like the body.





Flying in the sky, Vṛtrāsura's trident resembled a brilliant meteor. Although the blazing weapon was difficult to look upon, King Indra, unafraid, cut it to pieces with his thunderbolt. Simultaneously, he cut off one of Vṛtrāsura's arms, which was as thick as the body of Vāsuki, the King of the serpents.





TEXT 4



chinnaika-bāhuḥ parigheṇa vṛtraḥ

saṁrabdha āsādya gṛhīta-vajram

hanau tatāḍendram athāmarebhaṁ

vajraṁ ca hastān nyapatan maghonaḥ

SYNONYMS



chinna-cut off; eka-one; bāhuḥ-whose arm; parigheṇa-with a mace of iron; vṛtraḥ-Vṛtrāsura; saṁrabdhaḥ-being very angry; āsādya-reaching; gṛhīta-taking up; vajram-the thunderbolt; hanau-on the jaw; tatāḍa-struck; indram-Lord Indra; atha-also; amara-ibham-his elephant; vajram-the thunderbolt; ca-and; hastāt-from the hand; nyapatat-fell; maghonaḥ-of King Indra.





Although one of his arms was severed from his body, Vṛtrāsura angrily approached King Indra and struck him on the jaw with an iron mace. He also struck the elephant that carried Indra. Thus Indra dropped the thunderbolt from his hand.





TEXT 5



vṛtrasya karmāti-mahādbhutaṁ tat

surāsurāś cāraṇa-siddha-saṅghāḥ

apūjayaṁs tat puruhūta-saṅkaṭaṁ

nirīkṣya hā heti vicukruśur bhṛśam

SYNONYMS



vṛtrasya-of Vṛtrāsura; karma-the accomplishment; ati-very; mahā-greatly; adbhutam-wonderful; tat-that; sura-the demigods; asurāḥ-and the demons; cāraṇa-the Cāraṇas; siddha-saṅghāḥ-and the society of Siddhas; apūjayan-glorified; tat-that; puruhūta-saṅkaṭam-the dangerous position of Indra; nirīkṣya-seeing; hā hā-alas, alas; iti-thus; vicukruśuḥ-lamented; bhṛśam-very much.





The denizens of various planets, like the demigods, demons, Cāraṇas and Siddhas, praised Vṛtrāsura's deed, but when they observed that Indra was in great danger, they lamented, "Alas! Alas!"





TEXT 6



indro na vajraṁ jagṛhe vilajjitaś

cyutaṁ sva-hastād ari-sannidhau punaḥ

tam āha vṛtro hara ātta-vajro

jahi sva-śatruṁ na viṣāda-kālaḥ

SYNONYMS



indraḥ-King Indra; na-not; vajram-the thunderbolt; jagṛhe-took up; vilajjitaḥ-being ashamed; cyutam-fallen; sva-hastāt-from his own hand; ari-sannidhau-in front of his enemy; punaḥ-again; tam-unto him; āha-said; vṛtraḥ-Vṛtrāsura; hare-O Indra; ātta-vajraḥ-taking up your thunderbolt; jahi-kill; sva-śatrum-your enemy; na-not; viṣāda-kālaḥ-the time for lamentation.





Having dropped the thunderbolt from his hand in the presence of his enemy, Indra was practically defeated and was very much ashamed. He dared not pick up his weapon again. Vṛtrāsura, however, encouraged him, saying, "Take up your thunderbolt and kill your enemy. This is not the time to lament your fate."





TEXT 7



yuyutsatāṁ kutracid ātatāyināṁ

jayaḥ sadaikatra na vai parātmanām

vinaikam utpatti-laya-sthitīśvaraṁ

sarvajñam ādyaṁ puruṣaṁ sanātanam

SYNONYMS



yuyutsatām-of those who are belligerent; kutracit-sometimes; ātatāyinām-armed with weapons; jayaḥ-victory; sadā-always; ekatra-in one place; na-not; vai-indeed; para-ātmanām-of the subordinate living entities, who work only under the direction of the Supersoul; vinā-except; ekam-one; utpatti-of the creation; laya-annihilation; sthiti-and maintenance; īśvaram-the controller; sarva-jñam-who knows everything (past, present and future); ādyam-the original; puruṣam-enjoyer; sanātanam-eternal.





Vṛtrāsura continued: O Indra, no one is guaranteed of being always victorious but the original enjoyer, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān. He is the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation, and He knows everything. Being dependent and being obliged to accept material bodies, belligerent subordinates are sometimes victorious and sometimes defeated.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15):



sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca





"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." When two parties fight, the fighting actually goes on under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is Paramātmā, the Supersoul. Elsewhere in the Gītā (3.27) the Lord says:



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by nature." The living entities work only under the direction of the Supreme Lord. The Lord gives orders to material nature, and she arranges facilities for the living entities. The living entities are not independent, although they foolishly think themselves the doers (kartā).



Victory is always with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As for the subordinate living entities, they fight under the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Victory or defeat is not actually theirs; it is an arrangement by the Lord through the agency of material nature. Pride in victory, or moroseness in defeat, is useless. One should fully depend on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is responsible for the victory and defeat of all living entities. The Lord advises, niyataṁ kuru karma tvaṁ karma jyāyo hy akarmaṇaḥ: "Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction." The living entity is ordered to act according to his position. Victory or defeat depends on the Supreme Lord. Karmaṇy evādhikāras te mā phaleṣu kadācana: "You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the fruits of actions." One must act sincerely, according to his position. Victory or defeat depends on the Lord.



Vṛtrāsura encouraged Indra, saying, "Don't be morose because of my victory. There is no need to stop fighting. Instead, you should go on with your duty. When Kṛṣṇa desires, you will certainly be victorious." This verse is very instructive for sincere workers in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. We should not be jubilant in victory or morose in defeat. We should make a sincere effort to implement the will of Kṛṣṇa, or Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and we should not be concerned with victory and defeat. Our only duty is to work sincerely, so that our activities may be recognized by Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 8



lokāḥ sapālā yasyeme

śvasanti vivaśā vaśe

dvijā iva śicā baddhāḥ

sa kāla iha kāraṇam

SYNONYMS



lokāḥ-the worlds; sa-pālāḥ-with their chief deities or controllers; yasya-of whom; ime-all these; śvasanti-live; vivaśāḥ-fully dependent; vaśe-under the control; dvijāḥ-birds; iva-like; śicā-by a net; baddhāḥ-bound; saḥ-that; kālaḥ-time factor; iha-in this; kāraṇam-the cause.





All living beings in all the planets of this universe, including the presiding deities of all the planets, are fully under the control of the Lord. They work like birds caught in a net, who cannot move independently.





The difference between the suras and the asuras is that the suras know that nothing can happen without the desire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas the asuras cannot understand the supreme will of the Lord. In this fight, Vṛtrāsura is actually the sura, whereas Indra is the asura. No one can act independently; rather, everyone acts under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore victory and defeat come according to the results of one's karma, and the judgment is given by the Supreme Lord (karmaṇā-daiva-netreṇa). Since we act under the control of the Supreme according to our karma, no one is independent, from Brahmā down to the insignificant ant. Whether we are defeated or victorious, the Supreme Lord is always victorious because everyone acts under His directions.





TEXT 9



ojaḥ saho balaṁ prāṇam

amṛtaṁ mṛtyum eva ca

tam ajñāya jano hetum

ātmānaṁ manyate jaḍam

SYNONYMS



ojaḥ-the strength of the senses; sahaḥ-the strength of the mind; balam-the strength of the body; prāṇam-the living condition; amṛtam-immortality; mṛtyum-death; eva-indeed; ca-also; tam-Him (the Supreme Lord); ajñāya-without knowing; janaḥ-a foolish person; hetum-the cause; ātmānam-the body; manyate-considers; jaḍam-although as good as stone.





Our sensory prowess, mental power, bodily strength, living force, immortality and mortality are all subject to the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Not knowing this, foolish people think the dull material body to be the cause of their activities.





TEXT 10



yathā dārumayī nārī

yathā patramayo mṛgaḥ

evaṁ bhūtāni maghavann

īśa-tantrāṇi viddhi bhoḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; dāru-mayī-made of wood; nārī-a woman; yathā-just as; patra-mayaḥ-made of leaves; mṛgaḥ-an animal; evam-thus; bhūtāni-all things; maghavan-O King Indra; īśa-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tantrāṇi-depending upon; viddhi-please know; bhoḥ-O sir.





O King Indra, as a wooden doll that looks like a woman or as an animal made of grass and leaves cannot move or dance independently, but depends fully on the person who handles it, all of us dance according to the desire of the supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead. No one is independent.





This is confirmed in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 5.142):



ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya

yāre yaiche nācāya, se taiche kare nṛtya





"Lord Kṛṣṇa alone is the supreme controller, and all others are His servants. They dance as He makes them do so." We are all servants of Kṛṣṇa; we have no independence. We are dancing according to the desire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but out of ignorance and illusion we think we are independent of the supreme will. Therefore it is said:



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam





"Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes." (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.1)





TEXT 11



puruṣaḥ prakṛtir vyaktam

ātmā bhūtendriyāśayāḥ

śaknuvanty asya sargādau

na vinā yad-anugrahāt

SYNONYMS



puruṣaḥ-the generator of the total material energy; prakṛtiḥ-the material energy or material nature; vyaktam-the principles of manifestation (mahat-tattva); ātmā-the false ego; bhūta-the five material elements; indriya-the ten senses; āśayāḥ-the mind, intelligence and consciousness; śaknuvanti-are able; asya-of this universe; sarga-ādau-in the creation, etc.; na-not; vinā-without; yat-of whom; anugrahāt-the mercy.





The three puruṣas-Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī-Viṣṇu-the material nature, the total material energy, the false ego, the five material elements, the material senses, the mind, the intelligence and consciousness cannot create the material manifestation without the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





As confirmed in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis tathedam akhilaṁ jagat: whatever manifestations we experience are nothing but various energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These energies cannot create anything independently. This is also confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10): mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram. "This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and it is producing all moving and unmoving living beings." Only under the direction of the Lord, the Supreme Person, can prakṛti, which is manifested in twenty-four elements, create different situations for the living entity. In the Vedas the Lord says:



madīyaṁ mahimānaṁ ca

parabrahmeti śabditam

vetsyasy anugṛhītaṁ me

sampraśnair vivṛtaṁ hṛdi





"Since everything is a manifestation of My energy, I am known as Parabrahman. Therefore everyone should hear from Me about My glorious activities." The Lord also says in Bhagavad-gītā (10.2), aham ādir hi devānām: "I am the origin of all the demigods." Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the origin of everything, and no one is independent of Him. Śrīla Madhvācārya also says, anīśa jīva-rūpeṇa: the living entity is anīśa, never the controller, but is always controlled. Therefore when a living entity becomes proud of being an independent īśvara, or god, that is his foolishness. Such foolishness is described in the following verse.





TEXT 12



avidvān evam ātmānaṁ

manyate 'nīśam īśvaram

bhūtaiḥ sṛjati bhūtāni

grasate tāni taiḥ svayam

SYNONYMS



avidvān-one who is foolish, without knowledge; evam-thus; ātmānam-himself; manyate-considers; anīśam-although totally dependent on others; īśvaram-as the supreme controller, independent; bhūtaiḥ-by the living entities; sṛjati-He (the Lord) creates; bhūtāni-other living entities; grasate-He devours; tāni-them; taiḥ-by other living beings; svayam-Himself.





A foolish, senseless person cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although always dependent, he falsely thinks himself the Supreme. If one thinks, "According to one's previous fruitive actions, one's material body is created by the father and mother, and the same body is annihilated by another agent, as another animal is devoured by a tiger," this is not proper understanding. The Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself creates and devours the living beings through other living beings.





According to the conclusion of the philosophy known as karma-mīmāṁsā, one's karma, or previous fruitive activity, is the cause of everything, and therefore there is no need to work. Those who arrive at this conclusion are foolish. When a father creates a child, he does not do so independently; he is induced to do so by the Supreme Lord. As the Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: "I am in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Unless one receives dictation from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who sits within everyone's heart, one cannot be induced to create anything. Therefore the father and mother are not the creators of the living entity. According to the living entity's karma, fruitive activities, he is put into the semen of the father, who injects the living entity into the womb of the mother. Then according to the body of the mother and father (yathā-yoni yathā-bījam), the living entity accepts a body and takes birth to suffer or enjoy. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the original cause of one's birth. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the cause of one's being killed. No one is independent; everyone is dependent. The true conclusion is that the only independent person is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 13



āyuḥ śrīḥ kīrtir aiśvaryam

āśiṣaḥ puruṣasya yāḥ

bhavanty eva hi tat-kāle

yathānicchor viparyayāḥ

SYNONYMS



āyuḥ-longevity; śrīḥ-opulence; kīrtiḥ-fame; aiśvaryam-power; āśiṣaḥ-benedictions; puruṣasya-of the living entity; yāḥ-which; bhavanti-arise; eva-indeed; hi-certainly; tat-kāle-at that proper time; yathā-just as; anicchoḥ-of one not desiring; viparyayāḥ-reverse conditions.





Just as a person not inclined to die must nonetheless give up his longevity, opulence, fame and everything else at the time of death, so, at the appointed time of victory, one can gain all these when the Supreme Lord awards them by His mercy.





It is not good to be falsely puffed up, saying that by one's own effort one has become opulent, learned, beautiful and so on. All such good fortune is achieved through the mercy of the Lord. From another point of view, no one wants to die, and no one wants to be poor or ugly. Therefore, why does the living entity, against his will, receive such unwanted troubles? It is due to the mercy or chastisement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that one gains or loses everything material. No one is independent; everyone is dependent on the mercy or chastisement of the Supreme Lord. There is a common saying in Bengal that the Lord has ten hands. This means that He has control everywhere-in the eight directions and up and down. If He wants to take everything away from us with His ten hands, we cannot protect anything with our two hands. Similarly, if He wants to bestow benedictions upon us with His ten hands, we cannot factually receive them all with our two hands; in other words, the benedictions exceed our ambitions. The conclusion is that even though we do not wish to be separated from our possessions, sometimes the Lord forcibly takes them from us; and sometimes He showers such benedictions upon us that we are unable to receive them all. Therefore either in opulence or in distress we are not independent; everything is dependent on the sweet will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 14



tasmād akīrti-yaśasor

jayāpajayayor api

samaḥ syāt sukha-duḥkhābhyāṁ

mṛtyu-jīvitayos tathā

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore (because of being fully dependent on the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead); akīrti-of defamation; yaśasoḥ-and fame; jaya-of victory; apajayayoḥ-and defeat; api-even; samaḥ-equal; syāt-one should be; sukha-duḥkhābhyām-with the distress and happiness; mṛtyu-of death; jīvitayoḥ-or of living; tathā-as well as.





Since everything is dependent on the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead, one should be equipoised in fame and defamation, victory and defeat, life and death. In their effects, represented as happiness and distress, one should maintain oneself in equilibrium, without anxiety.





TEXT 15



sattvaṁ rajas tama iti

prakṛter nātmano guṇāḥ

tatra sākṣiṇam ātmānaṁ

yo veda sa na badhyate

SYNONYMS



sattvam-the mode of goodness; rajaḥ-the mode of passion; tamaḥ-the mode of ignorance; iti-thus; prakṛteḥ-of the material nature; na-not; ātmanaḥ-of the spirit soul; guṇāḥ-the qualities; tatra-in such a position; sākṣiṇam-an observer; ātmānam-the self; yaḥ-anyone who; veda-knows; saḥ-he; na-not; badhyate-is bound.





One who knows that the three qualities-goodness, passion and ignorance-are not qualities of the soul but qualities of material nature, and who knows that the pure soul is simply an observer of the actions and reactions of these qualities, should be understood to be a liberated person. He is not bound by these qualities.





As the Lord explains in Bhagavad-gītā (18.54):



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām





"One who is transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me." When one attains self-realization, the brahma-bhūta stage, one knows that whatever happens during his life is due to the contamination of the modes of material nature. The living being, the pure soul, has nothing to do with these modes. In the midst of the hurricane of the material world, everything changes very quickly, but if one remains silent and simply observes the actions and reactions of the hurricane, he is understood to be liberated. The real qualification of the liberated soul is that he remains Kṛṣṇa conscious, undisturbed by the actions and reactions of the material energy. Such a liberated person is always jubilant. He never laments or aspires for anything. Since everything is supplied by the Supreme Lord, the living entity, being fully dependent on Him, should not protest or accept anything in terms of his personal sense gratification; rather, he should receive everything as the mercy of the Lord and remain steady in all circumstances.





TEXT 16



paśya māṁ nirjitaṁ śatru

vṛkṇāyudha-bhujaṁ mṛdhe

ghaṭamānaṁ yathā-śakti

tava prāṇa-jihīrṣayā

SYNONYMS



paśya-look; mām-at me; nirjitam-already defeated; śatru-O enemy; vṛkṇa-cut off; āyudha-my weapon; bhujam-and my arm; mṛdhe-in this fight; ghaṭamānam-still trying; yathā-śakti-according to my ability; tava-of you; prāṇa-the life; jihīrṣayā-with the desire to take away.





O my enemy, just look at me. I have already been defeated, for my weapon and arm have been cut to pieces. You have already overwhelmed me, but nonetheless, with a desire to kill you, I am trying my best to fight. I am not at all morose, even under such adverse conditions. Therefore you should give up your moroseness and continue fighting.





Vṛtrāsura was so great and powerful that in effect he was acting as the spiritual master of Indra. Although Vṛtrāsura was on the verge of defeat, he was not at all affected. He knew that he was going to be defeated by Indra, and he voluntarily accepted that, but since he was supposed to be Indra's enemy, he tried his best to kill Indra. Thus he performed his duty. One should perform his duty under all circumstances, even though one may know what the result will be.





TEXT 17



prāṇa-glaho 'yaṁ samara

iṣv-akṣo vāhanāsanaḥ

atra na jñāyate 'muṣya

jayo 'muṣya parājayaḥ

SYNONYMS



prāṇa-glahaḥ-life is the stake; ayam-this; samaraḥ-battle; iṣu-akṣaḥ-the arrows are the dice; vāhana-āsanaḥ-the carriers such as the horses and elephants are the game board; atra-here (in this gambling match); na-not; jñāyate-is known; amuṣya-of that one; jayaḥ-victory; amuṣya-of that one; parājayaḥ-defeat.





O my enemy, consider this battle a gambling match in which our lives are the stakes, the arrows are the dice, and the animals acting as carriers are the game board. No one can understand who will be defeated and who will be victorious. It all depends on providence.





TEXT 18



śrī-śuka uvāca

indro vṛtra-vacaḥ śrutvā

gatālīkam apūjayat

gṛhīta-vajraḥ prahasaṁs

tam āha gata-vismayaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; indraḥ-King Indra; vṛtra-vacaḥ-the words of Vṛtrāsura; śrutvā-hearing; gata-alīkam-without duplicity; apūjayat-worshiped; gṛhīta-vajraḥ-taking up the thunderbolt; prahasan-smiling; tam-unto Vṛtrāsura; āha-said; gata-vismayaḥ-giving up his wonder.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hearing the straightforward, instructive words of Vṛtrāsura, King Indra praised him and again took the thunderbolt in his hand. Without bewilderment or duplicity, he then smiled and spoke to Vṛtrāsura as follows.





King Indra, the greatest of the demigods, was astonished to hear the instructions of Vṛtrāsura, who was supposed to be a demon. He was struck with wonder that a demon could speak so intelligently. Then he remembered great devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja and Bali Mahārāja, who had been born in the families of demons, and thus he came to his senses. Even so-called demons sometimes have exalted devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore Indra smiled reassuringly at Vṛtrāsura.





TEXT 19



indra uvāca

aho dānava siddho 'si

yasya te matir īdṛśī

bhaktaḥ sarvātmanātmānaṁ

suhṛdaṁ jagad-īśvaram

SYNONYMS



indraḥ uvāca-Indra said; aho-hello; dānava-O demon; siddhaḥ asi-you are now perfect; yasya-whose; te-your; matiḥ-consciousness; īdṛśī-such as this; bhaktaḥ-a great devotee; sarva-ātmanā-without diversion; ātmānam-to the Supersoul; suhṛdam-the greatest friend; jagat-īśvaram-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Indra said: O great demon, I see by your discrimination and endurance in devotional service, despite your dangerous position, that you are a perfect devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul and friend of everyone.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (6.22):



yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ

manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ

yasmin sthito na duḥkhena

guruṇāpi vicālyate





"Established in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one never departs from the truth, and upon gaining this he thinks there is no greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken, even in the midst of the greatest difficulty." An unalloyed devotee is never disturbed by any kind of trying circumstance. Indra was surprised to see that Vṛtrāsura, undisturbed, was fixed in devotional service to the Lord, for such a mentality is impossible for a demon. However, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, anyone can become an exalted devotee (striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim). An unalloyed devotee is sure to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 20



bhavān atārṣīn māyāṁ vai

vaiṣṇavīṁ jana-mohinīm

yad vihāyāsuraṁ bhāvaṁ

mahā-puruṣatāṁ gataḥ

SYNONYMS



bhavān-your good self; atārṣīt-has surmounted; māyām-the illusory energy; vai-indeed; vaiṣṇavīm-of Lord Viṣṇu; jana-mohinīm-which deludes the mass of people; yat-since; vihāya-giving up; āsuram-of the demons; bhāvam-the mentality; mahā-puruṣatām-the position of an exalted devotee; gataḥ-obtained.





You have surmounted the illusory energy of Lord Viṣṇu, and because of this liberation, you have given up the demoniac mentality and have attained the position of an exalted devotee.





Lord Viṣṇu is the mahā-puruṣa. Therefore one who becomes a Vaiṣṇava attains the position of a mahā-pauruṣya. This position was attained by Mahārāja Parīkṣit. It is said in the Padma Purāṇa that the distinction between a demigod and a demon is that a demigod is a devotee of Lord Viṣṇu whereas a demon is just the opposite: viṣṇu-bhaktaḥ smṛto daiva āsuras tad-viparyayaḥ. Vṛtrāsura was considered a demon, but actually he was more than qualified as a devotee, or mahā-pauruṣya. If one somehow becomes a devotee of the Supreme Lord, whatever his position, he can be brought to the position of a perfect person. This is possible if an unalloyed devotee tries to serve the Lord by delivering him in this way. Therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī says in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.18):



kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ





"Kirātas, Hūṇas, Āndhras, Pulindas, Pulkaśas, Ābhīras, Śumbhas, Yavanas and members of the Khasa races, and even others addicted to sinful acts can be purified by taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme power. I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him." Anyone can be purified if he takes shelter of a pure devotee and molds his character according to the pure devotee's direction. Then, even if one is a Kirāta, Āndhra, Pulinda or whatever, he can be purified and elevated to the position of a mahā-pauruṣya.





TEXT 21



khalv idaṁ mahad āścaryaṁ

yad rajaḥ-prakṛtes tava

vāsudeve bhagavati

sattvātmani dṛḍhā matiḥ

SYNONYMS



khalu-indeed; idam-this; mahat āścaryam-great wonder; yat-which; rajaḥ-influenced by the mode of passion; prakṛteḥ-whose nature; tava-of you; vāsudeve-in Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sattva-ātmani-who is situated in pure goodness; dṛḍhā-firm; matiḥ-consciousness.





O Vṛtrāsura, demons are generally conducted by the mode of passion. Therefore, what a great wonder it is that although you are a demon, you have adopted the mentality of a devotee and have fixed your mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, who is always situated in pure goodness.





King Indra wondered how Vṛtrāsura could have been elevated to the position of an exalted devotee. As for Prahlāda Mahārāja, he was initiated by Nārada Muni, and therefore it was possible for him to become a great devotee, although he was born in a family of demons. For Vṛtrāsura, however, Indra could not detect such causes. Therefore he was struck with wonder that Vṛtrāsura was such an exalted devotee that he could fix his mind without deviation upon the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva.





TEXT 22



yasya bhaktir bhagavati

harau niḥśreyaseśvare

vikrīḍato 'mṛtāmbhodhau

kiṁ kṣudraiḥ khātakodakaiḥ

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; bhaktiḥ-devotional service; bhagavati-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harau-Lord Hari; niḥśreyasa-īśvare-the controller of the supreme perfection of life, or supreme liberation; vikrīḍataḥ-swimming or playing; amṛta-ambhodhau-in the ocean of nectar; kim-what is the use; kṣudraiḥ-with small; khātaka-udakaiḥ-ditches of water.





A person fixed in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the Lord of the highest auspiciousness, swims in the ocean of nectar. For him what is the use of the water in small ditches?





Vṛtrāsura has formerly prayed (Bhāg. 6.11.25), na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ na sāma-bhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam. "I do not want the facilities for happiness on Brahmaloka, Svargaloka or even Dhruvaloka, not to speak of this earth or the lower planets. I simply want to return home, back to Godhead." This is the determination of a pure devotee. A pure devotee is never attracted to any exalted position within this material world. He simply wants to associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead like the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana-Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa's father and mother (Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā), Kṛṣṇa's friends and Kṛṣṇa's servants. He wants to associate with Kṛṣṇa's atmosphere of Vṛndāvana's beauty. These are the highest ambitions of a devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Devotees of Lord Viṣṇu may aspire for a position in Vaikuṇṭhaloka, but a devotee of Kṛṣṇa never aspires even for the facilities of Vaikuṇṭha; he wants to return to Goloka Vṛndāvana and associate with Lord Kṛṣṇa in His eternal pastimes. Any material happiness is like water in a ditch, whereas the spiritual happiness eternally enjoyed in the spiritual world is like an ocean of nectar in which a devotee wants to swim.





TEXT 23



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti bruvāṇāv anyonyaṁ

dharma-jijñāsayā nṛpa

yuyudhāte mahā-vīryāv

indra-vṛtrau yudhām patī

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; bruvāṇau-speaking; anyonyam-to one another; dharma-jijñāsayā-with a desire to know the supreme, ultimate religious principle (devotional service); nṛpa-O King; yuyudhāte-fought; mahā-vīryau-both very powerful; indra-King Indra; vṛtrau-and Vṛtrāsura; yudhām patī-both great military commanders.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Vṛtrāsura and King Indra spoke about devotional service even on the battlefield, and then as a matter of duty they again began fighting. My dear King, both of them were great fighters and were equally powerful.





TEXT 24



āvidhya parighaṁ vṛtraḥ

kārṣṇāyasam arindamaḥ

indrāya prāhiṇod ghoraṁ

vāma-hastena māriṣa

SYNONYMS



āvidhya-whirling; parigham-the club; vṛtraḥ-Vṛtrāsura; kārṣṇa-ayasam-made of iron; arim-damaḥ-who was competent to subdue his enemy; indrāya-at Indra; prāhiṇot-threw; ghoram-very fearful; vāma-hastena-with his left hand; māriṣa-O best of kings, Mahārāja Parīkṣit.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Vṛtrāsura, who was completely able to subdue his enemy, took his iron club, whirled it around, aimed it at Indra and then threw it at him with his left hand.





TEXT 25



sa tu vṛtrasya parighaṁ

karaṁ ca karabhopamam

ciccheda yugapad devo

vajreṇa śata-parvaṇā

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (King Indra); tu-however; vṛtrasya-of Vṛtrāsura; parigham-the iron club; karam-his hand; ca-and; karabha-upamam-as strong as the trunk of an elephant; ciccheda-cut to pieces; yugapat-simultaneously; devaḥ-Lord Indra; vajreṇa-with the thunderbolt; śata-parvaṇā-having one hundred joints.





With his thunderbolt named Śataparvan, Indra simultaneously cut to pieces Vṛtrāsura's club and his remaining hand.





TEXT 26



dorbhyām utkṛtta-mūlābhyāṁ

babhau rakta-sravo 'suraḥ

chinna-pakṣo yathā gotraḥ

khād bhraṣṭo vajriṇā hataḥ

SYNONYMS



dorbhyām-from the two arms; utkṛtta-mūlābhyām-cut from the very root; babhau-was; rakta-sravaḥ-profusely discharging blood; asuraḥ-Vṛtrāsura; chinna-pakṣaḥ-whose wings are cut; yathā-just as; gotraḥ-a mountain; khāt-from the sky; bhraṣṭaḥ-falling; vajriṇā-by Indra, the carrier of the thunderbolt; hataḥ-struck.





Vṛtrāsura, bleeding profusely, his two arms cut off at their roots, looked very beautiful, like a flying mountain whose wings have been cut to pieces by Indra.





It appears from the statement of this verse that sometimes there are flying mountains and that their wings are cut by the thunderbolt of Indra. Vṛtrāsura's huge body resembled such a mountain.





TEXTS 27–29



mahā-prāṇo mahā-vīryo

mahā-sarpa iva dvipam

kṛtvādharāṁ hanuṁ bhūmau

daityo divy uttarāṁ hanum

nabho-gambhīra-vaktreṇa

leliholbaṇa-jihvayā

daṁṣṭrābhiḥ kāla-kalpābhir



grasann iva jagat-trayam

atimātra-mahā-kāya

ākṣipaṁs tarasā girīn

giri-rāṭ pāda-cārīva



padbhyāṁ nirjarayan mahīm

jagrāsa sa samāsādya

vajriṇaṁ saha-vāhanam

SYNONYMS



mahā-prāṇaḥ-very great in bodily strength; mahā-vīryaḥ-showing uncommon prowess; mahā-sarpaḥ-the biggest snake; iva-like; dvipam-an elephant; kṛtvā-placing; adharām-the lower; hanum-jaw; bhūmau-on the ground; daityaḥ-the demon; divi-in the sky; uttarām hanum-the upper jaw; nabhaḥ-like the sky; gambhīra-deep; vaktreṇa-with his mouth; leliha-like a snake; ulbaṇa-fearful; jihvayā-with a tongue; daṁṣṭrābhiḥ-with teeth; kāla-kalpābhiḥ-exactly like the time factor, or death; grasan-devouring; iva-as if; jagat-trayam-the three worlds; ati-mātra-very high; mahā-kāyaḥ-whose great body; ākṣipan-shaking; tarasā-with great force; girīn-the mountains; giri-rāṭ-the Himalaya Mountains; pāda-cārī-moving on foot; iva-as if; padbhyām-by his feet; nirjarayan-crushing; mahīm-the surface of the world; jagrāsa-swallowed; saḥ-he; samāsādya-reaching; vajriṇam-Indra, who carries the thunderbolt; saha-vāhanam-with his carrier, the elephant.





Vṛtrāsura was very powerful in physical strength and influence. He placed his lower jaw on the ground and his upper jaw in the sky. His mouth became very deep, like the sky itself, and his tongue resembled a large serpent. With his fearful, deathlike teeth, he seemed to be trying to devour the entire universe. Thus assuming a gigantic body, the great demon Vṛtrāsura shook even the mountains and began crushing the surface of the earth with his legs, as if he were the Himalayas walking about. He came before Indra and swallowed him and Airāvata, his carrier, just as a big python might swallow an elephant.





TEXT 30



vṛtra-grastaṁ tam ālokya

saprajāpatayaḥ surāḥ

hā kaṣṭam iti nirviṇṇāś

cukruśuḥ samaharṣayaḥ

SYNONYMS



vṛtra-grastam-swallowed by Vṛtrāsura; tam-him (Indra); ālokya-seeing; sa-prajāpatayaḥ-with Lord Brahmā and other prajāpatis; surāḥ-all the demigods; hā-alas; kaṣṭam-what a tribulation; iti-thus; nirviṇṇāḥ-being very morose; cukruśuḥ-lamented; sa-mahā-ṛṣayaḥ-with the great sages.





When the demigods, along with Brahmā, other prajāpatis and other great saintly persons, saw that Indra had been swallowed by the demon, they became very morose. "Alas," they lamented. "What a calamity ! What a calamity !"





TEXT 31



nigīrṇo 'py asurendreṇa

na mamārodaraṁ gataḥ

mahāpuruṣa-sannaddho

yogamāyā-balena ca

SYNONYMS



nigīrṇaḥ-swallowed; api-although; asura-indreṇa-by the best of the demons, Vṛtrāsura; na-not; mamāra-died; udaram-the abdomen; gataḥ-reaching; mahā-puruṣa-by the armor of the Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa; sannaddhaḥ-being protected; yoga-māyā-balena-by the mystic power that Indra himself possessed; ca-also.





The protective armor of Nārāyaṇa, which Indra possessed, was identical with Nārāyaṇa Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Protected by that armor and by his own mystic power, King Indra, although swallowed by Vṛtrāsura, did not die within the demon's belly.





TEXT 32



bhittvā vajreṇa tat-kukṣiṁ

niṣkramya bala-bhid vibhuḥ

uccakarta śiraḥ śatror

giri-śṛṅgam ivaujasā

SYNONYMS



bhittvā-piercing; vajreṇa-by the thunderbolt; tat-kukṣim-the abdomen of Vṛtrāsura; niṣkramya-getting out; bala-bhit-the slayer of the demon Bala; vibhuḥ-the powerful Lord Indra; uccakarta-cut off; śiraḥ-the head; śatroḥ-of the enemy; giri-śṛṅgam-the peak of a mountain; iva-like; ojasā-with great force.





With his thunderbolt, King Indra, who was also extremely powerful, pierced through Vṛtrāsura's abdomen and came out. Indra, the killer of the demon Bala, then immediately cut off Vṛtrāsura's head, which was as high as the peak of a mountain.





TEXT 33



vajras tu tat-kandharam āśu-vegaḥ

kṛntan samantāt parivartamānaḥ

nyapātayat tāvad ahar-gaṇena

yo jyotiṣām ayane vārtra-hatye

SYNONYMS



vajraḥ-the thunderbolt; tu-but; tat-kandharam-his neck; āśu-vegaḥ-although very fast; kṛntan-cutting; samantāt-all around; parivartamānaḥ-revolving; nyapātayat-caused to fall; tāvat-so many; ahaḥ-gaṇena-by days; yaḥ-which; jyotiṣām-of the luminaries like the sun and moon; ayane-in moving to both sides of the equator; vārtra-hatye-at the time suitable for killing Vṛtrāsura.





Although the thunderbolt revolved around Vṛtrāsura's neck with great speed, separating his head from his body took one complete year-360 days, the time in which the sun, moon and other luminaries complete a northern and southern journey. Then, at the suitable time for Vṛtrāsura to be killed, his head fell to the ground.





TEXT 34



tadā ca khe dundubhayo vinedur

gandharva-siddhāḥ samaharṣi-saṅghāḥ

vārtra-ghna-liṅgais tam abhiṣṭuvānā

mantrair mudā kusumair abhyavarṣan

SYNONYMS



tadā-at that time; ca-also; khe-in the higher planetary systems in the sky; dundubhayaḥ-the kettledrums; vineduḥ-sounded; gandharva-the Gandharvas; siddhāḥ-and the Siddhas; sa-maharṣi-saṅghāḥ-with the assembly of saintly persons; vārtra-ghna-liṅgaiḥ-celebrating the prowess of the killer of Vṛtrāsura; tam-him (Indra); abhiṣṭuvānāḥ-praising; mantraiḥ-by various mantras; mudā-with great pleasure; kusumaiḥ-with flowers; abhyavarṣan-showered.





When Vṛtrāsura was killed, the Gandharvas and Siddhas in the heavenly planets beat kettledrums in jubilation. With Vedic hymns they celebrated the prowess of Indra, the killer of Vṛtrāsura, praising Indra and showering flowers upon him with great pleasure.





TEXT 35



vṛtrasya dehān niṣkrāntam

ātma-jyotir arindama

paśyatāṁ sarva-devānām

alokaṁ samapadyata

SYNONYMS



vṛtrasya-of Vṛtrāsura; dehāt-from the body; niṣkrāntam-coming out; ātma-jyotiḥ-the spirit soul, which was as brilliant as the effulgence of Brahman; arim-dama-O King Parīkṣit, subduer of enemies; paśyatām-were watching; sarva-devānām-while all the demigods; alokam-the supreme abode, filled with the Brahman effulgence; samapadyata-achieved.





O King Parīkṣit, subduer of enemies, the living spark then came forth from Vṛtrāsura's body and returned home, back to Godhead. While all the demigods looked on, he entered the transcendental world to become an associate of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that Indra, not Vṛtrāsura, was actually killed. He says that when Vṛtrāsura swallowed King Indra and his carrier, the elephant, he thought, "Now I have killed Indra, and therefore there is no more need of fighting. Now let me return home, back to Godhead." Thus he stopped all his bodily activities and became situated in trance. Taking advantage of the silence of Vṛtrāsura's body, Indra pierced the demon's abdomen, and because of Vṛtrāsura's trance, Indra was able to come out. Now, Vṛtrāsura was in yoga-samadhi, and therefore although King Indra wanted to cut his throat, the demon's neck was so stiff that Indra's thunderbolt took 360 days to cut it to pieces. Actually it was the body left by Vṛtrāsura that was cut to pieces by Indra; Vṛtrāsura himself was not killed. In his original consciousness, Vṛtrāsura returned home, back to Godhead, to become an associate of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. Here the word alokam means the transcendental world, Vaikuṇṭhaloka, where Saṅkarṣaṇa eternally resides.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Vṛtrāsura's Glorious Death."



Chapter Thirteen



King Indra Afflicted by Sinful Reaction





This chapter describes Indra's fear at having killed a brāhmaṇa (Vṛtrāsura), and it also describes how he fled and was saved by the grace of Lord Viṣṇu.





When all the demigods requested Indra to kill Vṛtrāsura, he refused because Vṛtrāsura was a brāhmaṇa. The demigods, however, encouraged Indra not to fear killing him because Indra was protected by the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, Lord Nārāyaṇa. Even by a glimpse of the chanting of Nārāyaṇa's name, one becomes free from all the sinful reactions of killing a woman, a cow or a brāhmaṇa. The demigods advised Indra to perform an aśvamedha sacrifice, by which Nārāyaṇa would be pleased, for the performer of such a sacrifice is not implicated in sinful reactions even if he kills the entire universe.





Following this instruction from the demigods, King Indra fought Vṛtrāsura, but when Vṛtrāsura was killed, everyone was satisfied but King Indra, who knew Vṛtrāsura's position. This is the nature of a great personality. Even if a great personality acquires some opulence, he is always ashamed and regretful if he acquires it illegally. Indra could understand that he was certainly entangled by sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa. Indeed, he could see sinful reaction personified following him, and thus he fled here and there in fear, thinking of how to rid himself of his sins. He went to Mānasa-sarovara, and there, under the protection of the goddess of fortune, he meditated for one thousand years. During this time, Nahuṣa reigned over the heavenly planets as the representative of Indra. Unfortunately, however, he was attracted by the beauty of Indra's wife, Śacīdevī, and because of his sinful desire he had to accept the body of a serpent in his next life. Indra later performed a great sacrifice with the help of exalted brāhmaṇas and saints. In this way he was released from the reactions of his sinful killing of a brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

vṛtre hate trayo lokā

vinā śakreṇa bhūrida

sapālā hy abhavan sadyo

vijvarā nirvṛtendriyāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vṛtre hate-when Vṛtrāsura was killed; trayaḥ lokāḥ-the three planetary systems (upper, middle and lower); vinā-except; śakreṇa-Indra, who is also called Śakra; bhūri-da-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, giver of great charity; sa-pālāḥ-with the rulers of the various planets; hi-indeed; abhavan-became; sadyaḥ-immediately; vijvarāḥ-without fear of death; nirvṛta-very much pleased; indriyāḥ-whose senses.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, who are so charitably disposed, when Vṛtrāsura was killed, all the presiding deities and everyone else in the three planetary systems was immediately pleased and free from trouble-everyone, that is, except Indra.





TEXT 2



devarṣi-pitṛ-bhūtāni

daityā devānugāḥ svayam

pratijagmuḥ sva-dhiṣṇyāni

brahmeśendrādayas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



deva-demigods; ṛṣi-great saintly persons; pitṛ-the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; bhūtāni-and the other living entities; daityāḥ-demons; deva-anugāḥ-the inhabitants of other planets following the principles of the demigods; svayam-independently (without asking permission from Indra); pratijagmuḥ-returned; sva-dhiṣṇyāni-to their respective planets and homes; brahma-Lord Brahmā; īśa-Lord Śiva; indra-ādayaḥ-and the demigods headed by Indra; tataḥ-thereafter.





Thereafter, the demigods, the great saintly persons, the inhabitants of Pitṛloka and Bhūtaloka, the demons, the followers of the demigods, and also Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the demigods subordinate to Indra all returned to their respective homes. While departing, however, no one spoke to Indra.





In this connection Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments:



brahmeśendrādaya iti; indrasya sva-dhiṣṇya-gamanaṁ nopapadyate vṛtra-vadha-kṣaṇa eva brahma-hatyopadrava-prāpteḥ; tasmāt tata ity anena mānasa-sarovarād āgatya pravartitād aśvamedhāt parata iti vyākhyeyam.

Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the other demigods returned to their respective abodes, but Indra did not, for he was disturbed at having killed Vṛtrāsura, who was actually a brāhmaṇa. After killing Vṛtrāsura, Indra went to the Mānasa-sarovara Lake to become free from sinful reactions. When he left the lake, he performed an aśvamedha-yajña and then returned to his own abode.





TEXT 3



śrī-rājovāca

indrasyānirvṛter hetuṁ

śrotum icchāmi bho mune

yenāsan sukhino devā

harer duḥkhaṁ kuto 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit inquired; indrasya-of King Indra; anirvṛteḥ-of the moroseness; hetum-the reason; śrotum-to hear; icchāmi-I wish; bhoḥ-O my lord; mune-O great sage, Śukadeva Gosvāmī; yena-by which; āsan-were; sukhinaḥ-very happy; devāḥ-all the demigods; hareḥ-of Indra; duḥkham-moroseness; kutaḥ-from where; abhavat-was.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O great sage, what was the reason for Indra's unhappiness? I wish to hear about this. When he killed Vṛtrāsura, all the demigods were extremely happy. Why, then, was Indra himself unhappy?





This, of course, is a very intelligent question. When a demon is killed, certainly all the demigods are happy. In this case, however, when all the demigods were happy because of Vṛtrāsura's having been killed, Indra was unhappy. Why? It may be suggested that Indra was unhappy because he knew that he had killed a great devotee and brāhmaṇa. Vṛtrāsura outwardly appeared to be a demon, but inwardly he was a great devotee and therefore a great brāhmaṇa.



Herein it is clearly indicated that a person who is not at all demoniac, such as Prahlāda Mahārāja and Bali Mahārāja, may outwardly be a demon or be born in a family of demons. Therefore in terms of real culture one should not be considered a demigod or demon simply according to birth. In his dealings while fighting with Indra, Vṛtrāsura proved himself a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Furthermore, as soon as he finished fighting with Indra and was apparently killed, Vṛtrāsura was transferred to Vaikuṇṭhaloka to become an associate of Saṅkarṣaṇa. Indra knew this, and therefore he was morose at having killed such a demon, who was actually a Vaiṣṇava or brāhmaṇa.



A Vaiṣṇava is already a brāhmaṇa, although a brāhmaṇa may not be a Vaiṣṇava. The Padma Purāṇa says:



ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ





One may be a brāhmaṇa in terms of his culture and family and may be expert in Vedic knowledge (mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ), but if he is not a Vaiṣṇava, he cannot be a guru. This means that an expert brāhmaṇa may not be a Vaiṣṇava, but a Vaiṣṇava is already a brāhmaṇa. A millionaire may very easily possess hundreds and thousands of dollars, but a person with hundreds and thousands of dollars is not necessarily a millionaire. Vṛtrāsura was a perfect Vaiṣṇava, and therefore he was also a brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 4



śrī-śuka uvāca

vṛtra-vikrama-saṁvignāḥ

sarve devāḥ saharṣibhiḥ

tad-vadhāyārthayann indraṁ

naicchad bhīto bṛhad-vadhāt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vṛtra-of Vṛtrāsura; vikrama-by the powerful activities; saṁvignāḥ-being full of anxieties; sarve-all; devāḥ-the demigods; saha ṛṣibhiḥ-with the great sages; tat-vadhāya-for the killing of him; ārthayan-requested; indram-Indra; na aicchat-declined; bhītaḥ-being afraid; bṛhat-vadhāt-due to killing a brāhmaṇa.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī answered: When all the great sages and demigods were disturbed by the extraordinary power of Vṛtrāsura, they had assembled to ask Indra to kill him. Indra, however, being afraid of killing a brāhmaṇa, declined their request.





TEXT 5



indra uvāca

strī-bhū-druma-jalair eno

viśvarūpa-vadhodbhavam

vibhaktam anugṛhṇadbhir

vṛtra-hatyāṁ kva mārjmy aham

SYNONYMS



indraḥ uvāca-King Indra replied; strī-by women; bhū-the earth; druma-the trees; jalaiḥ-and water; enaḥ-this (sin); viśvarūpa-of Viśvarūpa; vadha-from the killing; udbhavam-produced; vibhaktam-divided; anugṛhṇadbhiḥ-showing their favor (to me); vṛtra-hatyām-the killing of Vṛtra; kva-how; mārjmi-shall become free from; aham-I.





King Indra replied: When I killed Viśvarūpa, I received extensive sinful reactions, but I was favored by the women, land, trees and water, and therefore I was able to divide the sin among them. But now if I kill Vṛtrāsura, another brāhmaṇa, how shall I free myself from the sinful reactions?





TEXT 6



śrī-śuka uvāca

ṛṣayas tad upākarṇya

mahendram idam abruvan

yājayiṣyāma bhadraṁ te

hayamedhena mā sma bhaiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ṛṣayaḥ-the great sages; tat-that; upākarṇya-hearing; mahā-indram-unto King Indra; idam-this; abruvan-spoke; yājayiṣyāmaḥ-we shall perform a great sacrifice; bhadram-good fortune; te-unto you; hayamedhena-by the horse sacrifice; mā sma bhaiḥ-do not be afraid.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hearing this, the great sages replied to King Indra, "O King of heaven, all good fortune unto you. Do not fear. We shall perform an aśvamedha sacrifice to release you from any sin you may accrue by killing the brāhmaṇa."





TEXT 7



hayamedhena puruṣaṁ

paramātmānam īśvaram

iṣṭvā nārāyaṇaṁ devaṁ

mokṣyase 'pi jagad-vadhāt

SYNONYMS



hayamedhena-by the sacrifice known as aśvamedha; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; paramātmānam-the Supersoul; īśvaram-the supreme controller; iṣṭvā-worshiping; nārāyaṇam-Lord Nārāyaṇa; devam-the Supreme Lord; mokṣyase-you will be liberated; api-even; jagat-vadhāt-from the sin for killing the whole world.





The ṛṣis continued: O King Indra, by performing an aśvamedha sacrifice and thereby pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul, Lord Nārāyaṇa, the supreme controller, one can be relieved even of the sinful reactions for killing the entire world, not to speak of killing a demon like Vṛtrāsura.





TEXTS 8–9



brahma-hā pitṛ-hā go-ghno

mātṛ-hācārya-hāghavān

śvādaḥ pulkasako vāpi

śuddhyeran yasya kīrtanāt

tam aśvamedhena mahā-makhena



śraddhānvito 'smābhir anuṣṭhitena

hatvāpi sabrahma-carācaraṁ tvaṁ

na lipyase kiṁ khala-nigraheṇa

SYNONYMS



brahma-hā-a person who has killed a brāhmaṇa; pitṛ-hā-a person who has killed his father; go-ghnaḥ-a person who has killed a cow; mātṛ-hā-a person who has killed his mother; ācārya-hā-a person who has killed his spiritual master; agha-vān-such a sinful person; śva-adaḥ-a dog-eater; pulkasakaḥ-a caṇḍāla, one who is less than a śūdra; vā-or; api-even; śuddhyeran-may be purified; yasya-of whom (Lord Nārāyaṇa); kīrtanāt-from chanting the holy name; tam-Him; aśvamedhena-by the aśvamedha sacrifice; mahā-makhena-the topmost of all sacrifices; śraddhā-anvitaḥ-endowed with faith; asmābhiḥ-by us; anuṣṭhitena-conducted or managed; hatvā-killing; api-even; sa-brahma-cara-acaram-all the living entities, including the brāhmaṇas; tvam-you; na-not; lipyase-are contaminated; kim-what then; khala-nigraheṇa-by killing one disturbing demon.





One who has killed a brāhmaṇa, one who has killed a cow or one who has killed his father, mother or spiritual master can be immediately freed from all sinful reactions simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Other sinful persons, such as dog-eaters and caṇḍālas, who are less than śūdras, can also be freed in this way. But you are a devotee, and we shall help you by performing the great horse sacrifice. If you please Lord Nārāyaṇa in that way, why should you be afraid? You will be freed even if you kill the entire universe, including the brāhmaṇas, not to speak of killing a disturbing demon like Vṛtrāsura.





It is said in the Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa:



nāmno hi yāvatī śaktiḥ

pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ

tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti

pātakaṁ pātakī naraḥ





Also, in the Prema-vivarta by Jagadānanda Paṇḍita it is said:



eka kṛṣṇa-nāme pāpīra yata pāpa-kṣaya

bahu janme sei pāpī karite nāraya





This means that by once chanting the holy name of the Lord, one can be freed from the reactions of more sins that he can even imagine performing. The holy name is so spiritually potent that simply by chanting the holy name one can be freed from the reactions to all sinful activities. What, then, is to be said of those who chant the holy name regularly or worship the Deity regularly? For such purified devotees, freedom from sinful reaction is certainly assured. This does not mean, however, that one should intentionally commit sinful acts and think himself free from the reactions because he is chanting the holy name. Such a mentality is a most abominable offense at the lotus feet of the holy name. Nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhiḥ: the Lord's holy name certainly has the potency to neutralize all sinful activities, but if one repeatedly and intentionally commits sins while chanting the holy name, he is most condemned.



These verses name the performers of various sinful deeds. In the Manu-saṁhitā the following names are given. A son begotten by a brāhmaṇa and born from the womb of a śūdra mother is called a pāraśava or niṣāda, a hunter accustomed to stealing. A son begotten by a niṣāda in the womb of a śūdra woman is called a pukkasa. A child begotten by a kṣatriya in the womb of the daughter of a śūdra is called an ugra. A child begotten by a śūdra in the womb of the daughter of a kṣatriya is called a kṣattā. A child begotten by a kṣatriya in the womb of a lower-class woman is called a śvāda, or dog-eater. All such offspring are considered extremely sinful, but the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so strong that all of them can be purified simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.



The Hare Kṛṣṇa movement offers everyone a chance to be purified, regardless of birth or family. As confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.18):



kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ





"Kirātas, Hūṇas, Āndhras, Pulindas, Pulkaśas, Ābhīras, Śumbhas, Yavanas, members of the Khasa races, and even others addicted to sinful acts can be purified by taking shelter of devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme power. I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him." Even such sinful persons can certainly all be purified if they chant the holy name of the Lord under the direction of a pure devotee.



Herein the sages encourage King Indra to kill Vṛtrāsura even at the risk of brahma-hatyā, the killing of a brāhmaṇa, and they guarantee to release him from sinful reactions by performing an aśvamedha-yajña. Such purposefully devised atonement, however, cannot relieve the performer of sinful acts. This will be seen from the following verse.





TEXT 10



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ sañcodito viprair

marutvān ahanad ripum

brahma-hatyā hate tasminn

āsasāda vṛṣākapim

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; sañcoditaḥ-being encouraged; vipraiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; marutvān-Indra; ahanat-killed; ripum-his enemy, Vṛtrāsura; brahma-hatyā-the sinful reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa; hate-was killed; tasmin-when he (Vṛtrāsura); āsasāda-approached; vṛṣākapim-Indra, who is also named Vṛṣākapi.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Encouraged by the words of the sages, Indra killed Vṛtrāsura, and when he was killed the sinful reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa [brahma-hatyā] certainly took shelter of Indra.





After killing Vṛtrāsura, Indra could not surpass the brahma-hatyā, the sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa. Formerly he had killed one brāhmaṇa, Viśvarūpa, out of circumstantial anger, but this time, following the advice of the sages, he killed another brāhmaṇa purposely. Therefore the sinful reaction was greater than before. Indra could not be relieved from the reaction simply by performing sacrifices for atonement. He had to undergo a severe series of sinful reactions, and when he was freed by such suffering, the brāhmaṇas allowed him to perform the horse sacrifice. The planned execution of sinful deeds on the strength of chanting the holy name of the Lord or undergoing prāyaścitta, atonement, cannot give relief to anyone, even to Indra or Nahuṣa. Nahuṣa was officiating for Indra while Indra, absent from heaven, was going here and there to gain release from his sinful reactions.





TEXT 11



tayendraḥ smāsahat tāpaṁ

nirvṛtir nāmum āviśat

hrīmantaṁ vācyatāṁ prāptaṁ

sukhayanty api no guṇāḥ

SYNONYMS



tayā-by that action; indraḥ-King Indra; sma-indeed; asahat-suffered; tāpam-misery; nirvṛtiḥ-happiness; na-not; amum-him; āviśat-entered; hrīmantam-one who is shameful; vācyatām-ill fame; prāptam-obtaining; sukhayanti-give pleasure; api-although; no-not; guṇāḥ-good qualifications like possessing opulence.





Following the advice of the demigods, Indra killed Vṛtrāsura, and he suffered because of this sinful killing. Although the other demigods were happy, he could not derive happiness from the killing of Vṛtrāsura. Indra's other good qualities, such as tolerance and opulence, could not help him in his grief.





One cannot be happy by committing sinful acts, even if one is endowed with material opulence. Indra found this to be true. People began to blaspheme him, saying, "This person has killed a brāhmaṇa for the sake of enjoying heavenly material happiness." Therefore in spite of being King of heaven and enjoying material opulence, Indra was always unhappy because of the accusations of the populace.





TEXTS 12–13



tāṁ dadarśānudhāvantīṁ

cāṇḍālīm iva rūpiṇīm

jarayā vepamānāṅgīṁ

yakṣma-grastām asṛk-paṭām

vikīrya palitān keśāṁs



tiṣṭha tiṣṭheti bhāṣiṇīm

mīna-gandhy-asu-gandhena

kurvatīṁ mārga-dūṣaṇam

SYNONYMS



tām-the sinful reaction; dadarśa-he saw; anudhāvantīm-chasing; cāṇḍālīm-a woman of the lowest class; iva-like; rūpiṇīm-taking a form; jarayā-because of old age; vepamāna-aṅgīm-whose bodily limbs were trembling; yakṣma-grastām-infected with tuberculosis; asṛk-paṭām-whose clothes were covered with blood; vikīrya-scattering; palitān-grayed; keśān-hair; tiṣṭha tiṣṭha-wait, wait; iti-thus; bhāṣiṇīm-calling; mīna-gandhi-the smell of fish; asu-whose breath; gandhena-by the odor; kurvatīm-bringing about; mārga-dūṣaṇam-the pollution of the whole street.





Indra saw personified sinful reaction chasing him, appearing like a caṇḍāla woman, a woman of the lowest class. She seemed very old, and all the limbs of her body trembled. Because she was afflicted with tuberculosis, her body and garments were covered with blood. Breathing an unbearable fishy odor that polluted the entire street, she called to Indra, "Wait! Wait!"





When a person is afflicted with tuberculosis, he often vomits blood, which makes his garments bloody.





TEXT 14



nabho gato diśaḥ sarvāḥ

sahasrākṣo viśāmpate

prāg-udīcīṁ diśaṁ tūrṇaṁ

praviṣṭo nṛpa mānasam

SYNONYMS



nabhaḥ-to the sky; gataḥ-going; diśaḥ-to the directions; sarvāḥ-all; sahasra-akṣaḥ-Indra, who is endowed with one thousand eyes; viśāmpate-O King; prāk-udīcīm-to the northeast; diśam-direction; tūrṇam-very speedily; praviṣṭaḥ-entered; nṛpa-O King; mānasam-the lake known as Mānasa-sarovara.





O King, Indra first fled to the sky, but there also he saw the woman of personified sin chasing him. This witch followed him wherever he went. At last he very quickly went to the northeast and entered the Mānasa-sarovara Lake.





TEXT 15



sa āvasat puṣkara-nāla-tantūn

alabdha-bhogo yad ihāgni-dūtaḥ

varṣāṇi sāhasram alakṣito 'ntaḥ

sañcintayan brahma-vadhād vimokṣam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Indra); āvasat-lived; puṣkara-nāla-tantūn-in the network of the fibers of a lotus stem; alabdha-bhogaḥ-not getting any material comfort (practically starving for all material needs); yat-which; iha-here; agni-dūtaḥ-the fire-god messenger; varṣāṇi-celestial years; sāhasram-one thousand; alakṣitaḥ-invisible; antaḥ-within his heart; sañcintayan-always thinking of; brahma-vadhāt-from the killing of a brāhmaṇa; vimokṣam-liberation.





Always thinking of how he could be relieved from the sinful reaction for killing a brāhmaṇa, King Indra, invisible to everyone, lived in the lake for one thousand years in the subtle fibers of the stem of a lotus. The fire-god used to bring him his share of all yajñas, but because the fire-god was afraid to enter the water, Indra was practically starving.





TEXT 16



tāvat triṇākaṁ nahuṣaḥ śaśāsa

vidyā-tapo-yoga-balānubhāvaḥ

sa sampad-aiśvarya-madāndha-buddhir

nītas tiraścāṁ gatim indra-patnyā

SYNONYMS



tāvat-for so long; triṇākam-the heavenly planet; nahuṣaḥ-Nahuṣa; śaśāsa-ruled; vidyā-by education; tapaḥ-austerities; yoga-mystic power; bala-and strength; anubhāvaḥ-being equipped; saḥ-he (Nahuṣa); sampat-of so much wealth; aiśvarya-and opulence; mada-by the madness; andha-blinded; buddhiḥ-his intelligence; nītaḥ-was brought; tiraścām-of a snake; gatim-to the destination; indra-patnyā-by Indra's wife Śacīdevī.





As long as King Indra lived in the water, wrapped in the stem of the lotus, Nahuṣa was equipped with the ability to rule the heavenly kingdom, due to his knowledge, austerity and mystic power. Nahuṣa, however, blinded and maddened by power and opulence, made undesirable proposals to Indra's wife with a desire to enjoy her. Thus Nahuṣa was cursed by a brāhmaṇa and later became a snake.





TEXT 17



tato gato brahma-giropahūta

ṛtambhara-dhyāna-nivāritāghaḥ

pāpas tu digdevatayā hataujās

taṁ nābhyabhūd avitaṁ viṣṇu-patnyā

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; gataḥ-gone; brahma-of the brāhmaṇas; girā-by the words; upahūtaḥ-being invited; ṛtambhara-on the Supreme Lord, who maintains truth; dhyāna-by meditation; nivārita-impeded; aghaḥ-whose sin; pāpaḥ-the sinful activity; tu-then; dik-devatayā-by the demigod Rudra; hata-ojāḥ-with all prowess diminished; tam-him (Indra); na abhyabhūt-could not overcome; avitam-being protected; viṣṇu-patnyā-by Lord Viṣṇu's wife, the goddess of fortune.





Indra's sins were diminished by the influence of Rudra, the demigod of all directions. Because Indra was protected by the goddess of fortune, Lord Viṣṇu's wife, who resides in the lotus clusters of Mānasa-sarovara Lake, Indra's sins could not affect him. Indra was ultimately relieved of all the reactions of his sinful deeds by strictly worshiping Lord Viṣṇu. Then he was called back to the heavenly planets by the brāhmaṇas and reinstated in his position.





TEXT 18



taṁ ca brahmarṣayo 'bhyetya

hayamedhena bhārata

yathāvad dīkṣayāṁ cakruḥ

puruṣārādhanena ha

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Lord Indra); ca-and; brahma-ṛṣayaḥ-the great saints and brāhmaṇas; abhyetya-approaching; hayamedhena-with an aśvamedha sacrifice; bhārata-O King Parīkṣit; yathāvat-according to the rules and regulations; dīkṣayām cakruḥ-initiated; puruṣa-ārādhanena-which consists of worship of the Supreme Person, Hari; ha-indeed.





O King, when Lord Indra reached the heavenly planets, the saintly brāhmaṇas approached him and properly initiated him into a horse sacrifice [aśvamedha-yajña] meant to please the Supreme Lord.





TEXTS 19–20



athejyamāne puruṣe

sarva-devamayātmani

aśvamedhe mahendreṇa

vitate brahma-vādibhiḥ

sa vai tvāṣṭra-vadho bhūyān



api pāpa-cayo nṛpa

nītas tenaiva śūnyāya

nīhāra iva bhānunā

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; ijyamāne-when worshiped; puruṣe-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-all; deva-maya-ātmani-the Supersoul and maintainer of the demigods; aśvamedhe-through the aśvamedha-yajña; mahā-indreṇa-by King Indra; vitate-being administered; brahma-vādibhiḥ-by the saints and brāhmaṇas expert in Vedic knowledge; saḥ-that; vai-indeed; tvāṣṭra-vadhaḥ-the killing of Vṛtrāsura, the son of Tvaṣṭā; bhūyāt-may be; api-although; pāpacayaḥ-mass of sin; nṛpa-O King; nītaḥ-was brought; tena-by that (the horse sacrifice); eva-certainly; śūnyāya-to nothing; nīhāraḥ-fog; iva-like; bhānunā-by the brilliant sun.





The horse sacrifice performed by the saintly brāhmaṇas relieved Indra of the reactions to all his sins because he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead in that sacrifice. O King, although he had committed a gravely sinful act, it was nullified at once by that sacrifice, just as fog is vanquished by the brilliant sunrise.





TEXT 21



sa vājimedhena yathoditena

vitāyamānena marīci-miśraiḥ

iṣṭvādhiyajñaṁ puruṣaṁ purāṇam

indro mahān āsa vidhūta-pāpaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Indra); vājimedhena-by the aśvamedha sacrifice; yathā-just as; uditena-described; vitāyamānena-being performed; marīci-miśraiḥ-by the priests, headed by Marīci; iṣṭvā-worshiping; adhiyajñam-the Supreme Supersoul; puruṣam purāṇam-the original Personality of Godhead; indraḥ-King Indra; mahān-worshipable; āsa-became; vidhūta-pāpaḥ-being cleansed of all sinful reactions.





King Indra was favored by Marīci and the other great sages. They performed the sacrifice just according to the rules and regulations, worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, the original person. Thus Indra regained his exalted position and was again honored by everyone.





TEXTS 22–23



idaṁ mahākhyānam aśeṣa-pāpmanāṁ

prakṣālanaṁ tīrthapadānukīrtanam

bhakty-ucchrayaṁ bhakta-janānuvarṇanaṁ

mahendra-mokṣaṁ vijayaṁ marutvataḥ

paṭheyur ākhyānam idaṁ sadā budhāḥ



śṛṇvanty atho parvaṇi parvaṇīndriyam

dhanyaṁ yaśasyaṁ nikhilāgha-mocanaṁ

ripuñjayaṁ svasty-ayanaṁ tathāyuṣam

SYNONYMS



idam-this; mahā-ākhyānam-great historical incident; aśeṣa-pāpmanām-of unlimited numbers of sinful acts; prakṣālanam-cleansing; tīrthapada-anukīrtanam-glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Tīrthapada; bhakti-of devotional service; ucchrayam-in which there is an increase; bhakta-jana-the devotees; anuvarṇanam-describing; mahā-indra-mokṣam-the liberation of the King of heaven; vijayam-the victory; marutvataḥ-of King Indra; paṭheyuḥ-should read; ākhyānam-narration; idam-this; sadā-always; budhāḥ-learned scholars; śṛṇvanti-continue to hear; atho-as well; parvaṇi parvaṇi-on the occasion of great festivals; indriyam-which makes the senses sharp; dhanyam-brings wealth; yaśasyam-brings fame; nikhila-all; agha-mocanam-releasing from sins; ripum-jayam-makes one victorious over his enemies; svasti-ayanam-brings good fortune for all; tathā-so also; āyuṣam-longevity.





In this very great narrative there is glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, there are statements about the exaltedness of devotional service, there are descriptions of devotees like Indra and Vṛtrāsura, and there are statements about King Indra's release from sinful life and about his victory in fighting the demons. By understanding this incident, one is relieved of all sinful reactions. Therefore the learned are always advised to read this narration. If one does so, one will become expert in the activities of the senses, his opulence will increase, and his reputation will become widespread. One will also be relieved of all sinful reactions, he will conquer all his enemies, and the duration of his life will increase. Because this narration is auspicious in all respects, learned scholars regularly hear and repeat it on every festival day.



Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Indra Afflicted by Sinful Reaction."



Chapter Fourteen



King Citraketu's Lamentation





In this Fourteenth Chapter, Parīkṣit Mahārāja asks his spiritual master, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, how such a demon as Vṛtrāsura could become an exalted devotee. In this connection the previous life of Vṛtrāsura is discussed. This involves the story of Citraketu and how he was victimized by lamentation because of the death of his son.





Among many millions of living entities, the number of human beings is extremely small, and among human beings who are actually religious, only some are eager to be liberated from material existence. Among many thousands of people who desire relief from material existence, one is freed from the association of unwanted persons or is relieved of material contamination. And among many millions of such liberated persons, one may become a devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Therefore such devotees are extremely rare. Since bhakti, devotional service, is not ordinary, Parīkṣit Mahārāja was astonished that an asura could rise to the exalted position of a devotee. Being doubtful, Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who then described Vṛtrāsura with reference to his previous birth as Citraketu, the King of Śūrasena.





Citraketu, who had no sons, got an opportunity to meet the great sage Aṅgirā. When Aṅgirā inquired from the King about his welfare, the King expressed his moroseness, and therefore by the grace of the great sage, the King's first wife, Kṛtadyuti, gave birth to a son, who was the cause of both happiness and lamentation. Upon the birth of this son, the King and all the residents of the palace were very happy. The co-wives of Kṛtadyuti, however, were envious, and later they administered poison to the child. Citraketu was overwhelmed by shock at his son's death. Then Nārada Muni and Aṅgirā went to see him.





TEXT 1



śrī-parīkṣid uvāca

rajas-tamaḥ-svabhāvasya

brahman vṛtrasya pāpmanaḥ

nārāyaṇe bhagavati

katham āsīd dṛḍhā matiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-parīkṣit uvāca-King Parīkṣit inquired; rajaḥ-of the mode of passion; tamaḥ-and of the mode of ignorance; sva-bhāvasya-having a nature; brahman-O learned brāhmaṇa; vṛtrasya-of Vṛtrāsura; pāpmanaḥ-who was supposedly sinful; nārāyaṇe-in Lord Nārāyaṇa; bhagavati-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; katham-how; āsīt-was there; dṛḍhā-very strong; matiḥ-consciousness.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O learned brāhmaṇa, demons are generally sinful, being obsessed with the modes of passion and ignorance. How, then, could Vṛtrāsura have attained such exalted love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa?





In this material world, everyone is obsessed with the modes of passion and ignorance. However, unless one conquers these modes and comes to the platform of goodness, there is no chance of one's becoming a pure devotee. This is confirmed by Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (7.28):



yeṣāṁ tv anta-gataṁ pāpaṁ

janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām

te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā

bhajante māṁ dṛḍha-vratāḥ





"Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life, whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with determination." Since Vṛtrāsura was among the demons, Mahārāja Parīkṣit wondered how it was possible for him to have become such an exalted devotee.





TEXT 2



devānāṁ śuddha-sattvānām

ṛṣīṇāṁ cāmalātmanām

bhaktir mukunda-caraṇe

na prāyeṇopajāyate

SYNONYMS



devānām-of the demigods; śuddha-sattvānām-whose minds are purified; ṛṣīṇām-of great saintly persons; ca-and; amala-ātmanām-who have purified their existence; bhaktiḥ-devotional service; mukunda-caraṇe-to the lotus feet of Mukunda, the Lord, who can give liberation; na-not; prāyeṇa-almost always; upajāyate-develops.





Demigods situated in the mode of goodness and great saints cleansed of the dirt of material enjoyment hardly ever render pure devotional service at the lotus feet of Mukunda. [Therefore how could Vṛtrāsura have become such a great devotee?]





TEXT 3



rajobhiḥ sama-saṅkhyātāḥ

pārthivair iha jantavaḥ

teṣāṁ ye kecanehante

śreyo vai manujādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



rajobhiḥ-with the atoms; sama-saṅkhyātāḥ-having the same numerical strength; pārthivaiḥ-of the earth; iha-in this world; jantavaḥ-the living entities; teṣām-of them; ye-those who; kecana-some; īhante-act; śreyaḥ-for religious principles; vai-indeed; manuja-ādayaḥ-the human beings and so on.





In this material world there are as many living entities as atoms. Among these living entities, a very few are human beings, and among them, few are interested in following religious principles.





TEXT 4



prāyo mumukṣavas teṣāṁ

kecanaiva dvijottama

mumukṣūṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścin mucyeta sidhyati

SYNONYMS



prāyaḥ-almost always; mumukṣavaḥ-persons interested in liberation; teṣām-of them; kecana-some; eva-indeed; dvija-uttama-O best of the brāhmaṇas; mumukṣūṇām-of those who desire to be liberated; sahasreṣu-in many thousands; kaścit-someone; mucyeta-may be actually liberated; sidhyati-someone is perfect.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, out of many persons who follow religious principles, only a few desire liberation from the material world. Among many thousands who desire liberation, one may actually achieve liberation, giving up material attachment to society, friendship, love, country, home, wife and children. And among many thousands of such liberated persons, one who can understand the true meaning of liberation is very rare.





There are four classes of men, namely karmīs, jñānīs, yogīs and bhaktas. This statement pertains especially to karmīs and jñānīs. A karmī tries to he happy within this material world by changing from one body to another. His objective is bodily comfort, either in this planet or in another. When such a person becomes a jñānī, however, be aspires for liberation from material bondage. Among many such persons who aspire for liberation, one may actually be liberated during his life. Such a person gives up his attachment for society, friendship, love, country, family, wife and children. Among many such persons, who are in the vānaprastha stage, one may understand the value of becoming a sannyāsī, completely accepting the renounced order of life.





TEXT 5



muktānām api siddhānāṁ

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā

koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

SYNONYMS



muktānām-of those who are liberated during this life (who are unattached to the bodily comforts of society, friendship and love); api-even; siddhānām-who are perfect (because they understand the insignificance of bodily comforts); nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ-a person who has concluded that Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme; su-durlabhaḥ-very rarely found; praśānta-fully pacified; ātmā-whose mind; koṭiṣu-out of millions and trillions; api-even; mahā-mune-O great sage.





O great sage, among many millions who are liberated and perfect in knowledge of liberation, one may be a devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa. Such devotees, who are fully peaceful, are extremely rare.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives the following purport to this verse. Simply desiring mukti, or liberation, is insufficient; one must become factually liberated. When one understands the futility of the materialistic way of life, one becomes advanced in knowledge, and therefore he situates himself in the vānaprastha order, unattached to family, wife and children. One should then further progress to the platform of sannyāsa, the actual renounced order, never to fall again and be afflicted by materialistic life. Even though one desires to be liberated, this does not mean he is liberated. Only rarely is someone liberated. Indeed, although many men take sannyāsa to become liberated, because of their imperfections they again become attached to women, material activities, social welfare work and so on.



Jñānīs, yogīs and karmīs devoid of devotional service are called offenders. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, māyāvādī kṛṣṇe aparādhī: one who thinks that everything is māyā instead of thinking that everything is Kṛṣṇa is called an aparādhī, or offender. Although the Māyāvādīs, impersonalists, are offenders at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, they may nonetheless be counted among the siddhas, those who have realized the self. They may be considered nearer to spiritual perfection because at least they have realized what spiritual life is. If such a person becomes nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇa, a devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa, he is better than a jīvan-mukta, one who is liberated or perfect. This requires higher intelligence.



There are two kinds of jñānīs. One is inclined to devotional service and the other to impersonal realization. Impersonalists generally undergo great endeavor for no tangible benefit, and therefore it is said that they are husking paddy that has no grain (sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinaḥ). The other class of jñānīs, whose jñāna is mixed with bhakti, are also of two kinds-those who are devoted to the so-called false form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and those who understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the actual spiritual form. The Māyāvādī devotees worship Nārāyaṇa or Viṣṇu with the idea that Viṣṇu has accepted a form of māyā and that the ultimate truth is actually impersonal. The pure devotee, however, never thinks that Viṣṇu has accepted a body of māyā; instead, he knows perfectly well that the original Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person. Such a devotee is actually situated in knowledge. He never merges in the Brahman effulgence. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32):



ye 'nye 'ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ





"O Lord, the intelligence of those who think themselves liberated but who have no devotion is impure. Even though they rise to the highest point of liberation by dint of severe penances and austerities, they are sure to fall down again into material existence, for they do not take shelter at Your lotus feet." Evidence of this same point is also given in Bhagavad-gītā (9.11), wherein the Lord says:



avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram

[Bg. 9.11]





"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." When rascals (mūḍhas) see that Kṛṣṇa acts exactly like a human being, they deride the transcendental form of the Lord because they do not know the paraṁ bhāvam, His transcendental form and activities. Such persons are further described in Bhagavad-gītā (9.12) as follows:



moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo

mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ

rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva

prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ





"Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demoniac and atheistic views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities and their culture of knowledge are all defeated." Such persons do not know that Kṛṣṇa's body is not material. There is no distinction between Kṛṣṇa's body and His soul, but because less intelligent men see Kṛṣṇa as a human being, they deride Him. They cannot imagine how a person like Kṛṣṇa could be the origin of everything (govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **). Such persons are described as moghāśāḥ, baffled in their hopes. Whatever they desire for the future will be baffled. Even if they apparently engage in devotional service, they are described as moghāśāḥ because they ultimately desire to merge into the Brahman effulgence.



Those who aspire to be elevated to the heavenly planets by devotional service will also be frustrated, because this is not the result of devotional service. However, they are also given a chance to engage in devotional service and be purified. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17):



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām





"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted."



Unless the dirt within the core of one's heart is cleansed away, one cannot become a pure devotee. Therefore the word sudurlabhaḥ ("very rarely found") is used in this verse. Not only among hundreds and thousands, but among millions of perfectly liberated souls, a pure devotee is hardly ever found. Therefore the words koṭiṣv api are used herein. Śrīla Madhvācārya gives the following quotations from the Tantra Bhāgavata:



nava-koṭyas tu devānām

ṛṣayaḥ sapta-koṭayaḥ

nārāyaṇāyanāḥ sarve

ye kecit tat-parāyaṇāḥ





"There are ninety million demigods and seventy million sages, who are all called nārāyaṇāyana, devotees of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Among them, only a few are called nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇa."



nārāyaṇāyanā devā

ṛṣy-ādyās tat-parāyaṇāḥ

brahmādyāḥ kecanaiva syuḥ

siddho yogya-sukhaṁ labhan





The difference between the siddhas and nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇas is that direct devotees are called nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇas whereas those who perform various types of mystic yoga are called siddhas.





TEXT 6



vṛtras tu sa kathaṁ pāpaḥ

sarva-lokopatāpanaḥ

itthaṁ dṛḍha-matiḥ kṛṣṇa

āsīt saṅgrāma ulbaṇe

SYNONYMS



vṛtraḥ-Vṛtrāsura; tu-but; saḥ-he; katham-how; pāpaḥ-although sinful (getting the body of a demon); sarva-loka-of all the three worlds; upatāpanaḥ-the cause of suffering; ittham-such; dṛḍha-matiḥ-firmly fixed intelligence; kṛṣṇe-in Kṛṣṇa; āsīt-there was; saṅgrāme ulbaṇe-in the great blazing fire of battle.





Vṛtrāsura was situated in the blazing fire of battle and was an infamous, sinful demon, always engaged in giving troubles and anxieties to others. How could such a demon become so greatly Kṛṣṇa conscious?





It has been described that a nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇa, a pure devotee, is rarely found even among millions and millions of persons. Therefore Parīkṣit Mahārāja was surprised that Vṛtrāsura, whose purpose was to give trouble and anxiety to others, was one of these devotees, even on a battlefield. What was the reason for Vṛtrāsura's advancement?





TEXT 7



atra naḥ saṁśayo bhūyāñ

chrotuṁ kautūhalaṁ prabho

yaḥ pauruṣeṇa samare

sahasrākṣam atoṣayat

SYNONYMS



atra-in this connection; naḥ-our; saṁśayaḥ-doubt; bhūyān-great; śrotum-to hear; kautūhalam-eagerness; prabho-O my lord; yaḥ-he who; pauruṣeṇa-by bravery and strength; samare-in battle; sahasra-akṣam-Lord Indra, who has one thousand eyes; atoṣayat-pleased.





My dear lord, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, although Vṛtrāsura was a sinful demon, he showed the prowess of a most exalted kṣatriya and satisfied Lord Indra in battle. How could such a demon be a great devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa? These contradictions have caused me great doubt, and they have made me eager to hear of this from you.





TEXT 8



śrī-sūta uvāca

parīkṣito 'tha sampraśnaṁ

bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ

niśamya śraddadhānasya

pratinandya vaco 'bravīt

SYNONYMS



śrī-sūtaḥ uvāca-Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; parīkṣitaḥ-of Mahārāja Parīkṣit; atha-thus; sampraśnam-the perfect question; bhagavān-the most powerful; bādarāyaṇiḥ-Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva; niśamya-hearing; śraddadhānasya-of his disciple, who was so faithful in understanding the truth; pratinandya-congratulating; vacaḥ-words; abravīt-spoke.





Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: After hearing Mahārāja Parīkṣit's very intelligent question, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the most powerful sage, began answering his disciple with great affection.





TEXT 9



śrī-śuka uvāca

śṛṇuṣvāvahito rājann

itihāsam imaṁ yathā

śrutaṁ dvaipāyana-mukhān

nāradād devalād api

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; śṛṇuṣva-please hear; avahitaḥ-with great attention; rājan-O King; itihāsam-history; imam-this; yathā-just as; śrutam-heard; dvaipāyana-of Vyāsadeva; mukhāt-from the mouth; nāradāt-from Nārada; devalāt-from Devala Ṛṣi; api-also.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, I shall speak to you the same history I have heard from the mouths of Vyāsadeva, Nārada and Devala. Please listen with attention.





TEXT 10



āsīd rājā sārvabhaumaḥ

śūraseneṣu vai nṛpa

citraketur iti khyāto

yasyāsīt kāmadhuṅ mahī

SYNONYMS



āsīt-there was; rājā-one king; sārva-bhaumaḥ-an emperor of the entire surface of the globe; śūraseneṣu-in the country known as Śūrasena; vai-indeed; nṛpa-O King; citraketuḥ-Citraketu; iti-thus; khyātaḥ-celebrated; yasya-of whom; āsīt-was; kāma-dhuk-supplying all the necessities; mahī-the earth.





O King Parīkṣit, in the province of Śūrasena there was a king named Citraketu, who ruled the entire earth. During his reign, the earth produced all the necessities for life.





Here the most significant statement is that the earth completely produced all the necessities of life during the time of King Citraketu. As stated in the Īśopaniṣad (Mantra 1):



īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ

yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā

mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam





"Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is controlled and owned by the Lord. One should therefore accept only those things necessary for himself, which are set aside as his quota, and one should not accept other things, knowing well to whom they belong." Kṛṣṇa, the supreme controller, has created the material world, which is completely perfect and free from scarcity. The Lord supplies the necessities of all living entities. These necessities come from the earth, and thus the earth is the source of supply. When there is a good ruler, that source produces the necessities of life abundantly. However, when there is not such a good ruler, there will be scarcity. This is the significance of the word kāmadhuk. Elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.10.4) it is said, kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ sarva-kāma-dughā mahī: "During the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the clouds showered all the water that people needed, and the earth produced all the necessities of men in profusion." We have experience that in some seasons the rains produce abundance and in other seasons there is scarcity. We have no control over the earth's productiveness, for it is naturally under the full control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By His order, the Lord can make the earth produce sufficiently or insufficiently. If a pious king rules the earth according to the śāstric injunctions, there will naturally be regular rainfall and sufficient produce to provide for all men. There will be no question of exploitation, for everyone will have enough. Black-marketeering and other corrupt dealings will then automatically stop. Simply ruling the land cannot solve man's problems unless the leader has spiritual capabilities. He must be like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Parīkṣit Mahārāja or Rāmacandra. Then all the inhabitants of the land will be extremely happy.





TEXT 11



tasya bhāryā-sahasrāṇāṁ

sahasrāṇi daśābhavan

sāntānikaś cāpi nṛpo

na lebhe tāsu santatim

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (King Citraketu); bhāryā-of wives; sahasrāṇām-of thousands; sahasrāṇi-thousands; daśa-ten; abhavan-there were; sāntānikaḥ-quite capable of begetting sons; ca-and; api-although; nṛpaḥ-the King; na-not; lebhe-obtained; tāsu-in them; santatim-a son.





This Citraketu had ten million wives, but although he was capable of producing children, he did not receive a child from any of them. By chance, all the wives were barren.





TEXT 12



rūpaudārya-vayo-janma-

vidyaiśvarya-śriyādibhiḥ

sampannasya guṇaiḥ sarvaiś

cintā bandhyā-pater abhūt

SYNONYMS



rūpa-with beauty; audārya-magnanimity; vayaḥ-youth; janma-aristocratic birth; vidyā-education; aiśvarya-opulence; śriya-ādibhiḥ-wealth and so on; sampannasya-endowed; guṇaiḥ-with good qualities; sarvaiḥ-all; cintā-anxiety; bandhyā-pateḥ-of Citraketu, the husband of so many sterile wives; abhūt-there was.





Citraketu, the husband of these millions of wives, was endowed with a beautiful form, magnanimity and youth. He was born in a high family, he had a complete education, and he was wealthy and opulent. Nevertheless, in spite of being endowed with all these assets, he was full of anxiety because he did not have a son.





It appears that the King first married one wife, but she could not bear a child. Then he married a second, a third, a fourth and so on, but none of the wives could bear children. In spite of the material assets of janmaiśvarya-śruta-śrī-birth in an aristocratic family with full opulence, wealth, education and beauty-he was very much aggrieved because in spite of having so many wives, he had no son. Certainly his grief was natural. Gṛhastha life does not mean having a wife and no children. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, putra-hīnaṁ gṛhaṁ śūnyam: if a family man has no son, his home is no better than a desert. The King was certainly most unhappy that he could not get a son, and this is why he had married so many times. Kṣatriyas especially are allowed to marry more than one wife, and this King did so. Nonetheless, he had no issue.





TEXT 13



na tasya sampadaḥ sarvā

mahiṣyo vāma-locanāḥ

sārvabhaumasya bhūś ceyam

abhavan prīti-hetavaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; tasya-of him (Citraketu); sampadaḥ-the great opulences; sarvāḥ-all; mahiṣyaḥ-the queens; vāma-locanāḥ-having very attractive eyes; sārva-bhaumasya-of the emperor; bhūḥ-land; ca-also; iyam-this; abhavan-were; prīti-hetavaḥ-sources of pleasure.





His queens all had beautiful faces and attractive eyes, yet neither his opulences, his hundreds and thousands of queens, nor the lands of which he was the supreme proprietor were sources of happiness for him.





TEXT 14



tasyaikadā tu bhavanam

aṅgirā bhagavān ṛṣiḥ

lokān anucarann etān

upāgacchad yadṛcchayā

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him; ekadā-once upon a time; tu-but; bhavanam-to the palace; aṅgirāḥ-Aṅgirā; bhagavān-very powerful; ṛṣiḥ-sage; lokān-planets; anucaran-traveling around; etān-these; upāgacchat-came; yadṛcchayā-suddenly.





Once upon a time, when the powerful sage named Aṅgirā was traveling all over the universe without engagement, by his sweet will he came to the palace of King Citraketu.





TEXT 15



taṁ pūjayitvā vidhivat

pratyutthānārhaṇādibhiḥ

kṛtātithyam upāsīdat

sukhāsīnaṁ samāhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-him; pūjayitvā-after worshiping; vidhi-vat-according to the rules and regulations for receiving exalted guests; pratyutthāna-by standing from the throne; arhaṇa-ādibhiḥ-offering worship and so on; kṛta-atithyam-who was given hospitality; upāsīdat-sat down near; sukha-āsīnam-who was seated very comfortably; samāhitaḥ-controlling his mind and senses.





Citraketu immediately stood up from his throne and offered him worship. He offered drinking water and eatables and in this way performed his duty as a host to a great guest. When the ṛṣi was seated very comfortably, the King, restraining his mind and senses, sat on the ground at the side of the ṛṣi's feet.





TEXT 16



maharṣis tam upāsīnaṁ

praśrayāvanataṁ kṣitau

pratipūjya mahārāja

samābhāṣyedam abravīt

SYNONYMS



mahā-ṛṣiḥ-the great sage; tam-unto him (the King); upāsīnam-sitting near; praśraya-avanatam-bowing in humility; kṣitau-on the ground; pratipūjya-congratulating; mahārāja-O King Parīkṣit; samābhāṣya-addressing; idam-this; abravīt-said.





O King Parīkṣit, when Citraketu, bent low in humility, was seated at the lotus feet of the great sage, the sage congratulated him for his humility and hospitality. The sage addressed him in the following words.





TEXT 17



aṅgirā uvāca

api te 'nāmayaṁ svasti

prakṛtīnāṁ tathātmanaḥ

yathā prakṛtibhir guptaḥ

pumān rājā ca saptabhiḥ

SYNONYMS



aṅgirāḥ uvāca-the great sage Aṅgirā said; api-whether; te-of you; anāmayam-health; svasti-auspiciousness; prakṛtīnām-of your royal elements (associates and paraphernalia); tathā-as well as; ātmanaḥ-of your own body, mind and soul; yathā-like; prakṛtibhiḥ-by the elements of material nature; guptaḥ-protected; pumān-the living being; rājā-the king; ca-also; saptabhiḥ-by seven.





The great sage Aṅgirā said: My dear King, I hope that your body and mind and your royal associates and paraphernalia are well. When the seven properties of material nature [the total material energy, the ego and the five objects of sense gratification] are in proper order, the living entity within the material elements is happy. Without these seven elements one cannot exist. Similarly, a king is always protected by seven elements-his instructor (svāmī or guru), his ministers, his kingdom, his fort, his treasury, his royal order and his friends.





As it is quoted by Śrīdhara Svāmī in his Bhāgavatam commentary:



svāmy-amātyau janapadā

durga-draviṇa-sañcayāḥ

daṇḍo mitraṁ ca tasyaitāḥ

sapta-prakṛtayo matāḥ





A king is not alone. He first has his spiritual master, the supreme guide. Then come his ministers, his kingdom, his fortifications, his treasury, his system of law and order, and his friends or allies. If these seven are properly maintained, the king is happy. Similarly, as explained in Bhagavad-gītā (dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]), the living entity, the soul, is within the material covering of the mahat-tattva, ego and pañca-tanmātrā, the five objects of sense gratification. When these seven are in proper order, the living entity is in a mood of pleasure. Generally when the associates of the king are quiet and obedient, the king can be happy. Therefore the great sage Aṅgirā Ṛṣi inquired about the King's personal health and the good fortune of his seven associates. When we inquire from a friend whether everything is well, we are concerned not only with his personal self but also with his family, his source of income, and his assistants or servants. All of them must be well, and then a person can be happy.





TEXT 18



ātmānaṁ prakṛtiṣv addhā

nidhāya śreya āpnuyāt

rājñā tathā prakṛtayo

naradevāhitādhayaḥ

SYNONYMS



ātmānam-himself; prakṛtiṣu-under these seven royal elements; addhā-directly; nidhāya-placing; śreyaḥ-ultimate happiness; āpnuyāt-may obtain; rājñā-by the king; tathā-so also; prakṛtayaḥ-the dependent royal elements; nara-deva-O King; āhita-adhayaḥ-offering wealth and other items.





O King, O lord of humanity, when a king directly depends upon his associates and follows their instructions, he is happy. Similarly, when his associates offer their gifts and activities to the king and follow his orders, they are also happy.





The actual happiness of a king and his dependents is described in this verse. A king should not simply give orders to his dependents because he is supreme; sometimes he must follow their instructions. Similarly, the dependents should depend on the king. This mutual dependence will make everyone happy.





TEXT 19



api dārāḥ prajāmātyā

bhṛtyāḥ śreṇyo 'tha mantriṇaḥ

paurā jānapadā bhūpā

ātmajā vaśa-vartinaḥ

SYNONYMS



api-whether; dārāḥ-wives; prajā-citizens; amātyāḥ-and secretaries; bhṛtyāḥ-servants; śreṇyaḥ-merchants; atha-as well as; mantriṇaḥ-ministers; paurāḥ-inmates of the palace; jānapadāḥ-the provincial governors; bhūpāḥ-landholders; ātma-jāḥ-sons; vaśa-vartinaḥ-under your full control.





O King, are your wives, citizens, secretaries and servants and the merchants who sell spices and oil under your control? Are you also in full control of ministers, the inhabitants of your palace, your provincial governors, your sons and your other dependents?





The master or king and his subordinates should be interdependent. Through cooperation, both of them can be happy.





TEXT 20



yasyātmānuvaśaś cet syāt

sarve tad-vaśagā ime

lokāḥ sapālā yacchanti

sarve balim atandritāḥ

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom; ātmā-mind; anuvaśaḥ-under control; cet-if; syāt-may be; sarve-all; tat-vaśa-gāḥ-under the control of him; ime-these; lokāḥ-the worlds; sa-pālāḥ-with their governors; yacchanti-offer; sarve-all; balim-contribution; atandritāḥ-becoming free from laziness.





If the king's mind is fully controlled, all his family members and governmental officers are subordinate to him. His provincial governors present taxes on time, without resistance, and what to speak of lesser servants?





Aṅgirā Ṛṣi asked the King whether his mind was also under control. This is most essential for happiness.





TEXT 21



ātmanaḥ prīyate nātmā

parataḥ svata eva vā

lakṣaye 'labdha-kāmaṁ tvāṁ

cintayā śabalaṁ mukham

SYNONYMS



ātmanaḥ-of you; prīyate-is pleased; na-not; ātmā-the mind; parataḥ-due to other causes; svataḥ-due to yourself; eva-indeed; vā-or; lakṣaye-I can see; alabdha-kāmam-not achieving your desired goals; tvām-you; cintayā-by anxiety; śabalam-pale; mukham-face.





O King Citraketu, I can observe that your mind is not pleased. You seem not to have achieved your desired goal. Is this because of you yourself, or has it been caused by others? Your pale face reflects your deep anxiety.





TEXT 22



evaṁ vikalpito rājan

viduṣā munināpi saḥ

praśrayāvanato 'bhyāha

prajā-kāmas tato munim

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; vikalpitaḥ-questioned; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; viduṣā-greatly learned; muninā-by the philosopher; api-although; saḥ-he (King Citraketu); praśraya-avanataḥ-being bent low due to humility; abhyāha-replied; prajā-kāmaḥ-desiring offspring; tataḥ-thereafter; munim-to the great sage.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, although the great sage Aṅgirā knew everything, he inquired from the King in this way. Thus King Citraketu, desiring a son, bent low in great humility and spoke to the great sage as follows.





Since the face is the index to the mind, a saintly person can study the condition of one's mind by seeing his face. When Aṅgirā Ṛṣi remarked about the King's discolored face, King Citraketu explained the cause of his anxiety as follows.





TEXT 23



citraketur uvāca

bhagavan kiṁ na viditaṁ

tapo-jñāna-samādhibhiḥ

yogināṁ dhvasta-pāpānāṁ

bahir antaḥ śarīriṣu

SYNONYMS



citraketuḥ uvāca-King Citraketu replied; bhagavan-O most powerful sage; kim-what; na-not; viditam-is understood; tapaḥ-by austerity; jñāna-knowledge; samādhibhiḥ-and by samādhi (trance, transcendental meditation); yoginām-by the great yogīs or devotees; dhvasta-pāpānām-who are fully freed from all sinful reactions; bahiḥ-externally; antaḥ-internally; śarīriṣu-in conditioned souls, who have material bodies.





King Citraketu said: O great lord Aṅgirā, because of austerity, knowledge and transcendental samādhi, you are freed from all the reactions of sinful life. Therefore, as a perfect yogī, you can understand everything external and internal regarding embodied, conditioned souls like us.





TEXT 24



tathāpi pṛcchato brūyāṁ

brahmann ātmani cintitam

bhavato viduṣaś cāpi

coditas tvad-anujñayā

SYNONYMS



tathāpi-still; pṛcchataḥ-asking; brūyām-let me speak; brahman-O great brāhmaṇa; ātmani-in the mind; cintitam-anxiety; bhavataḥ-to you; viduṣaḥ-who know everything; ca-and; api-although; coditaḥ-being inspired; tvat-your; anujñayā-by the order.





O great soul, you are aware of everything, yet you are asking me why I am full of anxiety. Therefore, in response to your order, let me disclose the cause.





TEXT 25



loka-pālair api prārthyāḥ

sāmrājyaiśvarya-sampadaḥ

na nandayanty aprajaṁ māṁ

kṣut-tṛṭ-kāmam ivāpare

SYNONYMS



loka-pālaiḥ-by great demigods; api-even; prārthyāḥ-desirable; sāmrājya-a great empire; aiśvarya-material opulence; sampadaḥ-possessions; na nandayanti-do not give pleasure; aprajam-because of having no son; mām-unto me; kṣut-hunger; tṛṭ-thirst; kāmam-desiring to satisfy; iva-like; apare-other enjoyable sense objects.





As a person aggrieved by hunger and thirst is not pleased by the external gratification of flower garlands or sandalwood pulp, I am not pleased with my empire, opulence or possessions, which are desirable even for great demigods, because I have no son.





TEXT 26



tataḥ pāhi mahā-bhāga

pūrvaiḥ saha gataṁ tamaḥ

yathā tarema duṣpāraṁ

prajayā tad vidhehi naḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-therefore, because of this; pāhi-kindly save; mahā-bhāga-O great sage; pūrvaiḥ saha-along with my forefathers; gatam-gone; tamaḥ-to darkness; yathā-so that; tarema-we can cross; duṣpāram-very difficult to cross; prajayā-by getting a son; tat-that; vidhehi-kindly do; naḥ-for us.





Therefore, O great sage, please save me and my forefathers, who are descending to the darkness of hell because I have no progeny. Kindly do something so that I may have a son to deliver us from hellish conditions.





According to Vedic civilization, one gets married simply to have a son, who is needed to offer oblations to his forefathers. King Citraketu responsibly desired to beget a child so that he and his forefathers might be delivered from the darkest regions. He was concerned with how to get piṇḍa, oblations, in the next life, not only for himself but also for his forefathers. Therefore he requested Aṅgirā Ṛṣi to favor him by doing something that could help him get a son.





TEXT 27



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity arthitaḥ sa bhagavān

kṛpālur brahmaṇaḥ sutaḥ

śrapayitvā caruṁ tvāṣṭraṁ

tvaṣṭāram ayajad vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; arthitaḥ-being requested; saḥ-he (Aṅgirā Ṛṣi); bhagavān-the most powerful; kṛpāluḥ-being very merciful; brahmaṇaḥ-of Lord Brahmā; sutaḥ-a son (born of Lord Brahmā's mind); śrapayitvā-after causing to cook; carum-a specific oblation of sweetrice; tvāṣṭram-meant for the demigod known as Tvaṣṭā; tvaṣṭāram-Tvaṣṭā; ayajat-he worshiped; vibhuḥ-the great sage.





In response to the request of Mahārāja Citraketu, Aṅgirā Ṛṣi, who was born of Lord Brahmā's mind, was very merciful toward him. Because the sage was a greatly powerful personality, he performed a sacrifice by offering oblations of sweetrice to Tvaṣṭā.





TEXT 28



jyeṣṭhā śreṣṭhā ca yā rājño

mahiṣīṇāṁ ca bhārata

nāmnā kṛtadyutis tasyai

yajñocchiṣṭam adād dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



jyeṣṭhā-the senior; śreṣṭhā-the most perfect; ca-and; yā-she who; rājñaḥ-of the King; mahiṣīṇām-among all the queens; ca-also; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the best of the Bhāratas; nāmnā-by name; kṛtadyutiḥ-Kṛtadyuti; tasyai-unto her; yajña-of the sacrifice; ucchiṣṭam-the remnants of food; adāt-delivered; dvijaḥ-the great sage (Aṅgirā).





O Parīkṣit Mahārāja, best of the Bhāratas, the remnants of the food offered in the yajña were given by the great sage Aṅgirā to the first and most perfect among Citraketu's millions of queens, whose name was Kṛtadyuti.





TEXT 29



athāha nṛpatiṁ rājan

bhavitaikas tavātmajaḥ

harṣa-śoka-pradas tubhyam

iti brahma-suto yayau

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; āha-said; nṛpatim-unto the King; rājan-O King Citraketu; bhavitā-there will be; ekaḥ-one; tava-your; ātmajaḥ-son; harṣa-śoka-jubilation and lamentation; pradaḥ-who will give; tubhyam-unto you; iti-thus; brahma-sutaḥ-Aṅgirā Ṛṣi, the son of Lord Brahmā; yayau-left.





Thereafter, the great sage told the King, "O great King, now you will have a son who will be the cause of both jubilation and lamentation." The sage then left, without waiting for Citraketu's response.





The word harṣa means "jubilation," and śoka means "lamentation." The King was overwhelmed with joy when he understood that he would have a son. Because of his great jubilation, he could not actually understand the statement of the sage Aṅgirā. He accepted it to mean that there would certainly be jubilation because of the birth of his future son, but that he would be the King's only son and, being very proud of his great wealth and empire, would not be very obedient to his father. Thus the King was satisfied, thinking, "Let there be a son. It does not matter if he is not very obedient." In Bengal there is a proverb that instead of having no maternal uncle, it is better to have a maternal uncle who is blind. The King accepted this philosophy, thinking that a disobedient son would be better than no son at all. The great sage Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says:



ko 'rthaḥ putreṇa jātena

yo na vidvān na dhārmikaḥ

kāṇena cakṣuṣā kiṁ vā

cakṣuḥ pīḍaiva kevalam





"What is the use of a son who is neither a learned scholar nor a devotee? Such a son is like a blind, diseased eye, which always causes suffering." Nevertheless, the material world is so polluted that one wants to have a son even though he is useless. This attitude was represented in the history of King Citraketu.





TEXT 30



sāpi tat-prāśanād eva

citraketor adhārayat

garbhaṁ kṛtadyutir devī

kṛttikāgner ivātmajam

SYNONYMS



sā-she; api-even; tat-prāśanāt-by eating the remnants of food from the great sacrifice; eva-indeed; citraketoḥ-from King Citraketu; adhārayat-bore; garbham-pregnancy; kṛtadyutiḥ-Queen Kṛtadyuti; devī-the goddess; kṛttikā-Kṛttikā; agneḥ-from Agni; iva-as; ātma-jam-a son.





As Kṛttikādevī, after receiving the semen of Lord Śiva from Agni, conceived a child named Skanda [Kārttikeya], Kṛtadyuti, having received semen from Citraketu, became pregnant after eating remnants of food from the yajña performed by Aṅgirā.





TEXT 31



tasyā anudinaṁ garbhaḥ

śukla-pakṣa ivoḍupaḥ

vavṛdhe śūraseneśa-

tejasā śanakair nṛpa

SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-her; anudinam-day after day; garbhaḥ-embryo; śukla-pakṣe-during the fortnight of the waxing moon; iva-like; uḍupaḥ-the moon; vavṛdhe-gradually developed; śūrasena-īśa-of the King of Śūrasena; tejasā-by the semen; śanakaiḥ-little by little; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit.





After receiving semen from Mahārāja Citraketu, the King of Śūrasena, Queen Kṛtadyuti gradually developed in her pregnancy, O King Parīkṣit, just as the moon develops during the bright fortnight.





TEXT 32



atha kāla upāvṛtte

kumāraḥ samajāyata

janayan śūrasenānāṁ

śṛṇvatāṁ paramāṁ mudam

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; kāle upāvṛtte-in due course of time; kumāraḥ-the son; samajāyata-took birth; janayan-creating; śūrasenānām-of the inhabitants of Śūrasena; śṛṇvatām-hearing; paramām-the highest; mudam-delight.





Thereafter, in due course of time, a son was born to the King. Hearing news of this, all the inhabitants of the state of Śūrasena were extremely pleased.





TEXT 33



hṛṣṭo rājā kumārasya

snātaḥ śucir alaṅkṛtaḥ

vācayitvāśiṣo vipraiḥ

kārayām āsa jātakam

SYNONYMS



hṛṣṭaḥ-very happy; rājā-the King; kumārasya-of his newly born son; snātaḥ-having bathed; śuciḥ-being purified; alaṅkṛtaḥ-being decorated with ornaments; vācayitvā-having caused to be spoken; āśiṣaḥ-words of benediction; vipraiḥ-by learned brāhmaṇas; kārayām āsa-caused to be performed; jātakam-the birth ceremony.





King Citraketu was especially pleased. After purifying himself by bathing and by decorating himself with ornaments, he engaged learned brāhmaṇas in offering benedictions to the child and performing the birth ceremony.





TEXT 34



tebhyo hiraṇyaṁ rajataṁ

vāsāṁsy ābharaṇāni ca

grāmān hayān gajān prādād

dhenūnām arbudāni ṣaṭ

SYNONYMS



tebhyaḥ-unto them (the learned brāhmaṇas); hiraṇyam-gold; rajatam-silver; vāsāṁsi-garments; ābharaṇāni-ornaments; ca-also; grāmān-villages; hayān-horses; gajān-elephants; prādāt-gave in charity; dhenūnām-of cows; arbudāni-groups of one hundred million; ṣaṭ-six.





Unto the brāhmaṇas who took part in the ritualistic ceremony the King gave charity of gold, silver, garments, ornaments, villages, horses and elephants, as well as sixty crores of cows [six hundred million cows].





TEXT 35



vavarṣa kāmān anyeṣāṁ

parjanya iva dehinām

dhanyaṁ yaśasyam āyuṣyaṁ

kumārasya mahā-manāḥ

SYNONYMS



vavarṣa-showered, gave in charity; kāmān-all desirable things; anyeṣām-of others; parjanyaḥ-a cloud; iva-like; dehinām-of all living entities; dhanyam-with the desire for an increase of opulence; yaśasyam-an increase of reputation; āyuṣyam-and an increase of the duration of life; kumārasya-of the newly born child; mahā-manāḥ-the beneficent King Citraketu.





As a cloud indiscriminately pours water on the earth, the beneficent King Citraketu, to increase the reputation, opulence and longevity of his son, distributed like rainfall all desirable things to everyone.





TEXT 36



kṛcchra-labdhe 'tha rājarṣes

tanaye 'nudinaṁ pituḥ

yathā niḥsvasya kṛcchrāpte

dhane sneho 'nvavardhata

SYNONYMS



kṛcchra-with great difficulty; labdhe-gained; atha-thereafter; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of the pious King Citraketu; tanaye-for the son; anudinam-day after day; pituḥ-of the father; yathā-exactly as; niḥsvasya-of a poor man; kṛcchra-āpte-gained after great difficulty; dhane-for riches; snehaḥ-affection; anvavardhata-increased.





When a poor man gets some money after great difficulty, his affection for the money increases daily. Similarly, when King Citraketu, after great difficulty, received a son, his affection for the son increased day after day.





TEXT 37



mātus tv atitarāṁ putre

sneho moha-samudbhavaḥ

kṛtadyuteḥ sapatnīnāṁ

prajā-kāma-jvaro 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



mātuḥ-of the mother; tu-also; atitarām-excessively; putre-for the son; snehaḥ-affection; moha-out of ignorance; samudbhavaḥ-produced; kṛtadyuteḥ-of Kṛtadyuti; sapatnīnām-of the co-wives; prajā-kāma-of a desire to have sons; jvaraḥ-a fever; abhavat-there was.





The mother's attraction and attention to the son, like that of the child's father, excessively increased. The other wives, seeing Kṛtadyuti's son, were very much agitated, as if by high fevers, with a desire to have sons.





TEXT 38



citraketor atiprītir

yathā dāre prajāvati

na tathānyeṣu sañjajñe

bālaṁ lālayato 'nvaham

SYNONYMS



citraketoḥ-of King Citraketu; atiprītiḥ-excessive attraction; yathā-just as; dāre-unto the wife; prajā-vati-who begot a son; na-not; tathā-like that; anyeṣu-unto the others; sañjajñe-arose; bālam-the son; lālayataḥ-taking care of; anvaham-constantly.





As King Citraketu fostered his son very carefully, his affection for Queen Kṛtadyuti increased, but gradually he lost affection for the other wives, who had no sons.





TEXT 39



tāḥ paryatapyann ātmānaṁ

garhayantyo 'bhyasūyayā

ānapatyena duḥkhena

rājñaś cānādareṇa ca

SYNONYMS



tāḥ-they (the queens who did not have sons); paryatapyan-lamented; ātmānam-themselves; garhayantyaḥ-condemning; abhyasūyayā-out of envy; ānapatyena-due to being without sons; duḥkhena-by unhappiness; rājñaḥ-of the King; ca-also; anādareṇa-due to negligence; ca-also.





The other queens were extremely unhappy due to their being sonless. Because of the King's negligence toward them, they condemned themselves in envy and lamented.





TEXT 40



dhig aprajāṁ striyaṁ pāpāṁ

patyuś cāgṛha-sammatām

suprajābhiḥ sapatnībhir

dāsīm iva tiraskṛtām

SYNONYMS



dhik-all condemnation; aprajām-without a son; striyam-upon a woman; pāpām-full of sinful activities; patyuḥ-by the husband; ca-also; a-gṛha-sammatām-who is not honored at home; su-prajābhiḥ-who have sons; sapatnībhiḥ-by co-wives; dāsīm-a maidservant; iva-exactly like; tiraskṛtām-dishonored.





A wife who has no sons is neglected at home by her husband and dishonored by her co-wives exactly like a maidservant. Certainly such a woman is condemned in every respect because of her sinful life.





As stated by Cāṇakya Paṇḍita:



mātā yasya gṛhe nāsti

bhāryā cāpriya-vādinī

araṇyaṁ tena gantavyaṁ

yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham





"A person who has no mother at home and whose wife does not speak sweetly should go to the forest. For such a person, living at home and living in the forest are equal." Similarly, for a woman who has no son, who is not cared for by her husband and whose co-wives neglect her, treating her like a maidservant, to go to the forest is better than to remain at home.





TEXT 41



dāsīnāṁ ko nu santāpaḥ

svāminaḥ paricaryayā

abhīkṣṇaṁ labdha-mānānāṁ

dāsyā dāsīva durbhagāḥ

SYNONYMS



dāsīnām-of the maidservants; kaḥ-what; nu-indeed; santāpaḥ-lamentation; svāminaḥ-unto the husband; paricaryayā-by rendering service; abhīkṣṇam-constantly; labdha-mānānām-honored; dāsyāḥ-of the maidservant; dāsī iva-like a maidservant; durbhagāḥ-most unfortunate.





Even maidservants who are constantly engaged in rendering service to the husband are honored by the husband, and thus they have nothing for which to lament. Our position, however, is that we are maidservants of the maidservant. Therefore we are most unfortunate.





TEXT 42



evaṁ sandahyamānānāṁ

sapatnyāḥ putra-sampadā

rājño 'sammata-vṛttīnāṁ

vidveṣo balavān abhūt

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; sandahyamānānām-of the queens, who were constantly burning in lamentation; sapatnyāḥ-of the co-wife Kṛtadyuti; putra-sampadā-due to the opulence of a son; rājñaḥ-by the King; asammata-vṛttīnām-not being very much favored; vidveṣaḥ-envy; balavān-very strong; abhūt-became.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Being neglected by their husband and seeing Kṛtadyuti's opulence in possessing a son, Kṛtadyuti's co-wives always burned in envy, which became extremely strong.





TEXT 43



vidveṣa-naṣṭa-matayaḥ

striyo dāruṇa-cetasaḥ

garaṁ daduḥ kumārāya

durmarṣā nṛpatiṁ prati

SYNONYMS



vidveṣa-naṣṭa-matayaḥ-whose intelligence was lost in envy; striyaḥ-the women; dāruṇa-cetasaḥ-being very hardhearted; garam-poison; daduḥ-administered; kumārāya-unto the boy; durmarṣāḥ-being intolerant; nṛpatim-the King; prati-upon.





As their envy increased, they lost their intelligence. Being extremely hardhearted and unable to tolerate the King's neglect, they finally administered poison to the son.





TEXT 44



kṛtadyutir ajānantī

sapatnīnām aghaṁ mahat

supta eveti sañcintya

nirīkṣya vyacarad gṛhe

SYNONYMS



kṛtadyutiḥ-Queen Kṛtadyuti; ajānantī-being unaware of; sapatnīnām-of her co-wives; agham-sinful act; mahat-very great; suptaḥ-sleeping; eva-indeed; iti-thus; sañcintya-thinking; nirīkṣya-looking at; vyacarat-was walking; gṛhe-at home.





Unaware of the poison administered by her co-wives, Queen Kṛtadyuti walked within the house, thinking that her son was sleeping deeply. She did not understand that he was dead.





TEXT 45



śayānaṁ suciraṁ bālam

upadhārya manīṣiṇī

putram ānaya me bhadre

iti dhātrīm acodayat

SYNONYMS



śayānam-lying down; su-ciram-for a long time; bālam-the son; upadhārya-thinking; manīṣiṇī-very intelligent; putram-the son; ānaya-bring; me-unto me; bhadre-O gentle friend; iti-thus; dhātrīm-unto the nurse; acodayat-gave the order.





Thinking that her child had been sleeping for a long time, Queen Kṛtadyuti, who was certainly very intelligent, ordered the nurse, "My dear friend, please bring my son here."





TEXT 46



sā śayānam upavrajya

dṛṣṭvā cottāra-locanam

prāṇendriyātmabhis tyaktaṁ

hatāsmīty apatad bhuvi

SYNONYMS



sā-she (the maidservant); śayānam-lying down; upavrajya-going to; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; ca-also; uttāra-locanam-his eyes turned upward (as are those of a dead body); prāṇa-indriya-ātmabhiḥ-by the life force, senses and mind; tyaktam-abandoned; hatā asmi-now I am doomed; iti-thus; apatat-fell down; bhuvi-on the ground.





When the maidservant approached the child, who was lying down, she saw that his eyes were turned upward. There were no signs of life, all his senses having stopped, and she could understand that the child was dead. Seeing this, she immediately cried, "Now I am doomed," and fell to the ground.





TEXT 47



tasyās tadākarṇya bhṛśāturaṁ svaraṁ

ghnantyāḥ karābhyām ura uccakair api

praviśya rājñī tvarayātmajāntikaṁ

dadarśa bālaṁ sahasā mṛtaṁ sutam

SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-of her (the maidservant); tadā-at that time; ākarṇya-hearing; bhṛśa-āturam-highly regretful and agitated; svaram-voice; ghnantyāḥ-striking; karābhyām-with the hands; uraḥ-the chest; uccakaiḥ-loudly; api-also; praviśya-entering; rājñī-the Queen; tvarayā-hastily; ātmaja-antikam-near her son; dadarśa-she saw; bālam-the child; sahasā-suddenly; mṛtam-dead; sutam-son.





In great agitation, the maidservant struck her breast with both hands and cried loudly in regretful words. Hearing her loud voice, the Queen immediately came, and when she approached her son, she saw that he was suddenly dead.





TEXT 48



papāta bhūmau parivṛddhayā śucā

mumoha vibhraṣṭa-śiroruhāmbarā

SYNONYMS



papāta-fell down; bhūmau-on the ground; parivṛddhayā-highly increased; śucā-out of lamentation; mumoha-she became unconscious; vibhraṣṭa-scattered; śiroruha-hair; ambarā-and dress.





In great lamentation, her hair and dress in disarray, the Queen fell to the ground unconscious.





TEXT 49



tato nṛpāntaḥpura-vartino janā

narāś ca nāryaś ca niśamya rodanam

āgatya tulya-vyasanāḥ suduḥkhitās

tāś ca vyalīkaṁ ruruduḥ kṛtāgasaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; nṛpa-O King; antaḥpura-vartinaḥ-the inhabitants of the palace; janāḥ-all the people; narāḥ-the men; ca-and; nāryaḥ-the women; ca-also; niśamya-hearing; rodanam-loud crying; āgatya-coming; tulya-vyasanāḥ-being equally aggrieved; su-duḥkhitāḥ-very greatly lamenting; tāḥ-they; ca-and; vyalīkam-pretentiously; ruruduḥ-cried; kṛta-āgasaḥ-who had committed the offense (by giving the poison).





O King Parīkṣit, hearing the loud crying, all the inhabitants of the palace came, both men and women. Being equally aggrieved, they also began to cry. The queens who had administered the poison also cried pretentiously, knowing full well their offense.





TEXTS 50–51



śrutvā mṛtaṁ putram alakṣitāntakaṁ

vinaṣṭa-dṛṣṭiḥ prapatan skhalan pathi

snehānubandhaidhitayā śucā bhṛśaṁ

vimūrcchito 'nuprakṛtir dvijair vṛtaḥ

papāta bālasya sa pāda-mūle



mṛtasya visrasta-śiroruhāmbaraḥ

dīrghaṁ śvasan bāṣpa-kaloparodhato

niruddha-kaṇṭho na śaśāka bhāṣitum

SYNONYMS



śrutvā-hearing; mṛtam-dead; putram-the son; alakṣita-antakam-the cause of death being unknown; vinaṣṭa-dṛṣṭiḥ-unable to see properly; prapatan-constantly falling down; skhalan-slipping; pathi-on the road; sneha-anubandha-because of affection; edhitayā-increasing; śucā-by lamentation; bhṛśam-greatly; vimūrcchitaḥ-becoming unconscious; anuprakṛtiḥ-followed by ministers and other officers; dvijaiḥ-by learned brāhmaṇas; vṛtaḥ-surrounded; papāta-fell down; bālasya-of the boy; saḥ-he (the King); pāda-mūle-at the feet; mṛtasya-of the dead body; visrasta-scattered; śiroruha-hair; ambaraḥ-and dress; dīrgham-long; śvasan-breathing; bāṣpa-kalā-uparodhataḥ-due to crying with tearful eyes; niruddha-kaṇṭhaḥ-having a choked voice; na-not; śaśāka-was able; bhāṣitum-to speak.





When King Citraketu heard of his son's death from unknown causes, he became almost blind. Because of his great affection for his son, his lamentation grew like a blazing fire, and as he went to see the dead child, he kept slipping and falling on the ground. Surrounded by his ministers and other officers and the learned brāhmaṇas present, the King approached and fell unconscious at the child's feet, his hair and dress scattered. When the King, breathing heavily, regained consciousness, his eyes were tearful, and he could not speak.





TEXT 52



patiṁ nirīkṣyoru-śucārpitaṁ tadā

mṛtaṁ ca bālaṁ sutam eka-santatim

janasya rājñī prakṛteś ca hṛd-rujaṁ

satī dadhānā vilalāpa citradhā

SYNONYMS



patim-the husband; nirīkṣya-by seeing; uru-greatly; śuca-with lamentation; arpitam-pained; tadā-at that time; mṛtam-dead; ca-and; bālam-the child; sutam-the son; eka-santatim-the only son in the family; janasya-of all the other people gathered there; rājñī-the Queen; prakṛteḥ ca-as well as of the officers and ministers; hṛt-rujam-the pains within the core of the heart; satī dadhānā-increasing; vilalāpa-lamented; citradhā-in varieties of ways.





When the Queen saw her husband, King Citraketu, merged in great lamentation and saw the dead child, who was the only son in the family, she lamented in various ways. This increased the pain in the cores of the hearts of all the inhabitants of the palace, the ministers and all the brāhmaṇas.





TEXT 53



stana-dvayaṁ kuṅkuma-paṅka-maṇḍitaṁ

niṣiñcatī sāñjana-bāṣpa-bindubhiḥ

vikīrya keśān vigalat-srajaḥ sutaṁ

śuśoca citraṁ kurarīva susvaram

SYNONYMS



stana-dvayam-her two breasts; kuṅkuma-with kuṅkuma powder (which is generally sprayed on the breasts of women); paṅka-ointment; maṇḍitam-decorated; niṣiñcatī-moistening; sa-añjana-mixed with the eye ointment; bāṣpa-of tears; bindubhiḥ-by drops; vikīrya-scattering; keśān-hair; vigalat-was falling down; srajaḥ-on which the flower garland; sutam-for her son; śuśoca-lamented; citram-variegated; kurarī iva-like a kurarī bird; su-svaram-in a very sweet voice.





The garland of flowers decorating the Queen's head fell, and her hair scattered. Falling tears melted the collyrium on her eyes and moistened her breasts, which were covered with kuṅkuma powder. As she lamented the loss of her son, her loud crying resembled the sweet sound of a kurarī bird.





TEXT 54



aho vidhātas tvam atīva bāliśo

yas tv ātma-sṛṣṭy-apratirūpam īhase

pare nu jīvaty aparasya yā mṛtir

viparyayaś cet tvam asi dhruvaḥ paraḥ

SYNONYMS



aho-alas (in great lamentation); vidhātaḥ-O Providence; tvam-You; atīva-very much; bāliśaḥ-inexperienced; yaḥ-who; tu-indeed; ātma-sṛṣṭi-of Your own creation; apratirūpam-just the opposite; īhase-You are performing and desiring; pare-while the father or the elder; nu-indeed; jīvati-is living; aparasya-of one who was born later; yā-which; mṛtiḥ-death; viparyayaḥ-contradictory; cet-if; tvam-You; asi-are; dhruvaḥ-indeed; paraḥ-an enemy.





Alas, O Providence, O Creator, You are certainly inexperienced in creation, for during the lifetime of a father You have caused the death of his son, thus acting in opposition to Your creative laws. If You are determined to contradict these laws, You are certainly the enemy of living entities and are never merciful.





This is the way a conditioned soul condemns the supreme creator when he meets reverses. Sometimes he accuses the Supreme Personality of Godhead of being crooked because some people are happy and some are not. Here the Queen blames supreme providence for her son's death. Following the creative laws, a father should die first and then his son. If the creative laws are changed according to the whims of providence, then providence certainly should not be considered merciful, but must be considered inimical to the created being. Actually it is not the creator, but the conditioned soul who is inexperienced. He does not know how the subtle laws of fruitive activity work, and without knowledge of these laws of nature, he ignorantly criticizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 55



na hi kramaś ced iha mṛtyu-janmanoḥ

śarīriṇām astu tad ātma-karmabhiḥ

yaḥ sneha-pāśo nija-sarga-vṛddhaye

svayaṁ kṛtas te tam imaṁ vivṛścasi

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; kramaḥ-chronological order; cet-if; iha-in this material world; mṛtyu-of death; janmanoḥ-and of birth; śarīriṇām-of the conditioned souls, who have accepted material bodies; astu-let it be; tat-that; ātma-karmabhiḥ-by the results of one's karma (fruitive activities); yaḥ-that which; sneha-pāśaḥ-bondage of affection; nija-sarga-Your own creation; vṛddhaye-to increase; svayam-personally; kṛtaḥ-made; te-by You; tam-that; imam-this; vivṛścasi-you are cutting.





My Lord, You may say that there is no law that a father must die in the lifetime of his son and that a son must be born in the lifetime of his father, since everyone lives and dies according to his own fruitive activity. However, if fruitive activity is so strong that birth and death depend upon it, there is no need of a controller, or God. Again, if You say that a controller is needed because the material energy does not have the power to act, one may answer that if the bonds of affection You have created are disturbed by fruitive action, no one will raise children with affection; instead, everyone will cruelly neglect his children. Since You have cut the bonds of affection that compel a parent to raise his child, You appear inexperienced and unintelligent.





As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā, karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām: [Bs. 5.54] one who has taken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, devotional service, is not affected by the results of karma. In this verse, karma has been stressed on the basis of karma-mīmāṁsā philosophy, which says that one must act according to his karma and that a supreme controller must give the results of karma. The subtle laws of karma, which are controlled by the Supreme, cannot be understood by ordinary conditioned souls. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that one who can understand Him and how He is acting, controlling everything by subtle laws, immediately becomes freed by His grace. That is the statement of Brahma-saṁhitā (karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām [Bs. 5.54]). One should take to devotional service without reservations and surrender everything to the supreme will of the Lord. That will make one happy in this life and the next.





TEXT 56



tvaṁ tāta nārhasi ca māṁ kṛpaṇām anāthāṁ

tyaktuṁ vicakṣva pitaraṁ tava śoka-taptam

añjas tarema bhavatāpraja-dustaraṁ yad

dhvāntaṁ na yāhy akaruṇena yamena dūram

SYNONYMS



tvam-you; tāta-my dear son; na-not; arhasi-ought; ca-and; mām-me; kṛpaṇām-very poor; anāthām-without a protector; tyaktum-to give up; vicakṣva-look; pitaram-at the father; tava-your; śoka-taptam-affected by so much lamentation; añjaḥ-easily; tarema-we can cross; bhavatā-by you; apraja-dustaram-very difficult to cross for one without a son; yat-which; dhvāntam-the kingdom of darkness; na yāhi-do not go away; akaruṇena-merciless; yamena-with Yamarāja; dūram-any further.





My dear son, I am helpless and very much aggrieved. You should not give up my company. Just look at your lamenting father. We are helpless because without a son we shall have to suffer the distress of going to the darkest hellish regions. You are the only hope by which we can get out of these dark regions. Therefore I request you not to go any further with the merciless Yama.





According to the Vedic injunctions, one must accept a wife just to beget a son who can deliver one from the clutches of Yamarāja. Unless one has a son to offer oblations to the pitās, or forefathers, one must suffer in Yamarāja's kingdom. King Citraketu was very much aggrieved. thinking that because his son was going away with Yamarāja he himself would again suffer. The subtle laws exist for the karmīs; if one becomes a devotee, he has no more obligations to the laws of karma.





TEXT 57



uttiṣṭha tāta ta ime śiśavo vayasyās

tvām āhvayanti nṛpa-nandana saṁvihartum

suptaś ciraṁ hy aśanayā ca bhavān parīto

bhuṅkṣva stanaṁ piba śuco hara naḥ svakānām

SYNONYMS



uttiṣṭha-kindly get up; tāta-my dear son; te-they; ime-all these; śiśavaḥ-children; vayasyāḥ-playmates; tvām-you; āhvayanti-are calling; nṛpa-nandana-O son of the King; saṁvihartum-to play with; suptaḥ-you have slept; ciram-for a long time; hi-indeed; aśanayā-by hunger; ca-also; bhavān-you; parītaḥ-overcome; bhuṅkṣva-please eat; stanam-at the breast (of your mother); piba-drink; śucaḥ-lamentation; hara-just dissipate; naḥ-of us; svakānām-your relatives.





My dear son, you have slept a long time. Now please get up. Your playmates are calling you to play. Since you must be very hungry, please get up and suck my breast and dissipate our lamentation.





TEXT 58



nāhaṁ tanūja dadṛśe hata-maṅgalā te

mugdha-smitaṁ mudita-vīkṣaṇam ānanābjam

kiṁ vā gato 'sy apunar-anvayam anya-lokaṁ

nīto 'ghṛṇena na śṛṇomi kalā giras te

SYNONYMS



na-not; aham-I; tanū-ja-my dear son (born of my body); dadṛśe-saw; hata-maṅgalā-because of my being the most unfortunate; te-your; mugdha-smitam-with charming smiling; mudita-vīkṣaṇam-with closed eyes; ānana-abjam-lotus face; kiṁ vā-whether; gataḥ-gone away; asi-you are; a-punaḥ-anvayam-from which one does not return; anya-lokam-to another planet, or the planet of Yamarāja; nītaḥ-having been taken away; aghṛṇena-by the cruel Yamarāja; na-not; śṛṇomi-I can hear; kalāḥ-very pleasing; giraḥ-utterances; te-your.





My dear son, I am certainly most unfortunate, for I can no longer see your mild smiling. You have closed your eyes forever. I therefore conclude that you have been taken from this planet to another, from which you will not return. My dear son, I can no longer hear your pleasing voice.





TEXT 59



śrī-śuka uvāca

vilapantyā mṛtaṁ putram

iti citra-vilāpanaiḥ

citraketur bhṛśaṁ tapto

mukta-kaṇṭho ruroda ha

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vilapantyā-with the woman who was lamenting; mṛtam-dead; putram-for the son; iti-thus; citra-vilāpanaiḥ-with various lamentations; citraketuḥ-King Citraketu; bhṛśam-very much; taptaḥ-aggrieved; mukta-kaṇṭhaḥ-loudly; ruroda-cried; ha-indeed.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Accompanied by his wife, who was thus lamenting for her dead son, King Citraketu began crying loudly with an open mouth, being greatly aggrieved.





TEXT 60



tayor vilapatoḥ sarve

dampatyos tad-anuvratāḥ

ruruduḥ sma narā nāryaḥ

sarvam āsīd acetanam

SYNONYMS



tayoḥ-while the two of them; vilapatoḥ-were lamenting; sarve-all; dam-patyoḥ-the King, along with his wife; tat-anuvratāḥ-their followers; ruruduḥ-cried loudly; sma-indeed; narāḥ-the male members; nāryaḥ-the female members; sarvam-the whole kingdom; āsīt-became; acetanam-almost unconscious.





As the King and Queen lamented, all their male and female followers joined them in crying. Because of the sudden accident, all the citizens of the kingdom were almost unconscious.





TEXT 61



evaṁ kaśmalam āpannaṁ

naṣṭa-saṁjñam anāyakam

jñātvāṅgirā nāma ṛṣir

ājagāma sanāradaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; kaśmalam-misery; āpannam-having gotten; naṣṭa-lost; saṁjñam-consciousness; anāyakam-without help; jñātvā-knowing; aṅgirāḥ-Aṅgirā; nāma-named; ṛṣiḥ-the saintly person; ājagāma-came; sa-nāradaḥ-with Nārada Muni.





When the great sage Aṅgirā understood that the King was almost dead in an ocean of lamentation, he went there with Nārada Ṛṣi.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Citraketu's Lamentation."



Chapter Fifteen



The Saints Nārada and Aṅgirā Instruct King Citraketu





In this chapter, Aṅgirā Ṛṣi, along with Nārada, consoles Citraketu as far as possible. Aṅgirā and Nārada Ṛṣi came to relieve the King from excessive lamentation by instructing him about the spiritual significance of life.





The great saints Aṅgirā and Nārada explained that the relationship between father and son is not factual; it is simply a representation of the illusory energy. The relationship did not exist before, nor will it stay in the future. By the arrangement of time, the relationship exists only in the present. One should not lament for temporary relationships. The entire cosmic manifestation is temporary; although not unreal, it is not factual. By the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, everything created in the material world is transient. By a temporary arrangement, a father begets a child, or a living entity becomes the child of a so-called father. This temporary arrangement is made by the Supreme Lord. Neither the father nor the son exists independently.





As the King listened to the great sages, he was relieved from his false lamentation, and then he inquired about their identity. The great sages presented who they were and instructed that all sufferings are due to the bodily conception of life. When one understands his spiritual identity and surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme spiritual person, one becomes actually happy. When one searches for happiness in matter, one must certainly lament for bodily relationships. Self-realization means spiritual realization of one's relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Such realization ends one's miserable material life.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

ūcatur mṛtakopānte

patitaṁ mṛtakopamam

śokābhibhūtaṁ rājānaṁ

bodhayantau sad-uktibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ūcatuḥ-they spoke; mṛtaka-the dead body; upānte-near; patitam-fallen; mṛtaka-upamam-exactly like another dead body; śoka-abhibhūtam-very much aggrieved by lamentation; rājānam-to the King; bodhayantau-giving instruction; sat-uktibhiḥ-by instructions that are factual, not temporary.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: While King Citraketu, overcome by lamentation, lay like a dead body at the side of the dead body of his son, the two great sages Nārada and Aṅgirā instructed him about spiritual consciousness as follows.





TEXT 2



ko 'yaṁ syāt tava rājendra

bhavān yam anuśocati

tvaṁ cāsya katamaḥ sṛṣṭau

puredānīm ataḥ param

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-who; ayam-this; syāt-is; tava-to you; rāja-indra-O best of kings; bhavān-Your Lordship; yam-whom; anuśocati-laments over; tvam-you; ca-and; asya-to him (the dead boy); katamaḥ-who; sṛṣṭau-in the birth; purā-previously; idānīm-at this time, at the present; ataḥ param-and hereafter, in the future.





O King, what relationship does the dead body for which you lament have with you, and what relationship do you have with him? You may say that you are now related as father and son, but do you think this relationship existed before? Does it truly exist now? Will it continue in the future?





The instructions given by Nārada and Aṅgirā Muni are the true spiritual instructions for the illusioned conditioned soul. This world is temporary, but because of our previous karma we come here and accept bodies, creating temporary relationships in terms of society, friendship, love, nationality and community, which are all finished at death. These temporary relationships did not exist in the past, nor will they exist in the future. Therefore at the present moment the so-called relationships are illusions.





TEXT 3



yathā prayānti saṁyānti

sroto-vegena bālukāḥ

saṁyujyante viyujyante

tathā kālena dehinaḥ

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; prayānti-move apart; saṁyānti-come together; srotaḥ-vegena-by the force of waves; bālukāḥ-the small particles of sand; saṁyujyante-they are united; viyujyante-they are separated; tathā-similarly; kālena-by time; dehinaḥ-the living entities who have accepted material bodies.





O King, as small particles of sand sometimes come together and are sometimes separated due to the force of the waves, the living entities who have accepted material bodies sometimes come together and are sometimes separated by the force of time.





The misunderstanding of the conditioned soul is the bodily conception of life. The body is material, but within the body is the soul. This is spiritual understanding. Unfortunately, one who is in ignorance, under the spell of material illusion, accepts the body to be the self. He cannot understand that the body is matter. Like small particles of sand, bodies come together and are separated by the force of time, and people falsely lament for unification and separation. Unless one knows this, there is no question of happiness. Therefore in Bhagavad-gītā (2.13) this is the first instruction given by the Lord:



dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati





"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." We are not the body; we are spiritual beings trapped in the body. Our real interest lies in understanding this simple fact. Then we can make further spiritual progress. Otherwise, if we remain in the bodily conception of life, our miserable material existence will continue forever. Political adjustments, social welfare work, medical assistance and the other programs we have manufactured for peace and happiness will never endure. We shall have to undergo the sufferings of material life one after another. Therefore material life is said to be duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]; it is a reservoir of miserable conditions.





TEXT 4



yathā dhānāsu vai dhānā

bhavanti na bhavanti ca

evaṁ bhūtāni bhūteṣu

coditānīśa-māyayā

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; dhānāsu-through seeds of paddy; vai-indeed; dhānāḥ-grains; bhavanti-are generated; na-not; bhavanti-are generated; ca-also; evam-in this way; bhūtāni-the living entities; bhūteṣu-in other living entities; coditāni-impelled; īśa-māyayā-by the potency or power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





When seeds are sown in the ground, they sometimes grow into plants and sometimes do not. Sometimes the ground is not fertile, and the sowing of seeds is unproductive. Similarly, sometimes a prospective father, being impelled by the potency of the Supreme Lord, can beget a child, but sometimes conception does not take place. Therefore one should not lament over the artificial relationship of parenthood, which is ultimately controlled by the Supreme Lord.





Mahārāja Citraketu was actually not destined to get a son. Therefore although he married hundreds and thousands of wives, all of them proved barren, and he could not beget even one child. When Aṅgirā Ṛṣi came to see the King, the King requested the great sage to enable him to have at least one son. Because of the blessing of Aṅgirā Ṛṣi, a child was sent by the grace of māyā, but the child was not to live for long. Therefore in the beginning Aṅgirā Ṛṣi told the King that he would beget a child who would cause jubilation and lamentation.



King Citraketu was not destined to get a child by providence, or the will of the Supreme. Just as sterile grain cannot produce more grain, a sterile person, by the will of the Supreme Lord, cannot beget a child. Sometimes a child is born even to an impotent father and sterile mother, and sometimes a potent father and fertile mother are childless. Indeed, sometimes a child is born despite contraceptive methods, and therefore the parents kill the child in the womb. In the present age, killing children in the womb has become a common practice. Why? When contraceptive methods are taken, why don't they act? Why is a child sometimes produced so that the father and mother have to kill it in the womb? We must conclude that our arrangement of so-called scientific knowledge cannot determine what will take place; what is enacted actually depends on the supreme will. It is by the supreme will that we are situated in certain conditions in terms of family, community and personality. These are all arrangements of the Supreme Lord according to our desires under the spell of māyā, illusion. In devotional life, therefore, one should not desire anything, since everything depends on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11):



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." One should act only to develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For everything else, one should fully depend upon the Supreme Person. We should not create plans that will ultimately make us frustrated.





TEXT 5



vayaṁ ca tvaṁ ca ye ceme

tulya-kālāś carācarāḥ

janma-mṛtyor yathā paścāt

prāṅ naivam adhunāpi bhoḥ

SYNONYMS



vayam-we (the great sages and the ministers and adherents of the King); ca-and; tvam-you; ca-also; ye-who; ca-also; ime-these; tulya-kālāḥ-assembled at the same time; cara-acarāḥ-moving and not moving; janma-birth; mṛtyoḥ-and death; yathā-just as; paścāt-after; prāk-before; na-not; evam-thus; adhunā-at present; api-although; bhoḥ-O King.





O King, both you and us-your advisers, wives and ministers-as well as everything moving and not moving throughout the entire cosmos at this time, are in a temporary situation. Before our birth this situation did not exist, and after our death it will exist no longer. Therefore our situation now is temporary, although it is not false.





The Māyāvādī philosophers say, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: Brahman, the living being, is factual, but his present bodily situation is false. According to the Vaiṣṇava philosophy, however, the present situation is not false but temporary. It is like a dream. A dream does not exist before one falls asleep, nor does it continue after one awakens. The period for dreaming exists only between these two, and therefore it is false in the sense that it is impermanent. Similarly, the entire material creation, including our own creation and those of others, is impermanent. We do not lament for the situation in a dream before the dream takes place or after it is over, and so during the dream, or during a dreamlike situation, one should not accept it as factual and lament about it. This is real knowledge.





TEXT 6



bhūtair bhūtāni bhūteśaḥ

sṛjaty avati hanti ca

ātma-sṛṣṭair asvatantrair

anapekṣo 'pi bālavat

SYNONYMS



bhūtaiḥ-by some living beings; bhūtāni-other living entities; bhūta-īśaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of everything; sṛjati-creates; avati-maintains; hanti-kills; ca-also; ātma-sṛṣṭaiḥ-who are created by Him; asvatantraiḥ-not independent; anapekṣaḥ-not interested (in creation); api-although; bāla-vat-like a boy.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master and proprietor of everything, is certainly not interested in the temporary cosmic manifestation. Nonetheless, just as a boy at the beach creates something in which he is not interested, the Lord, keeping everything under His control, causes creation, maintenance and annihilation. He creates by engaging a father to beget a son, He maintains by engaging a government or king to see to the public's welfare, and He annihilates through agents for killing, such as snakes. The agents for creation, maintenance and annihilation have no independent potency, but because of the spell of the illusory energy, one thinks himself the creator, maintainer and annihilator.





No one can independently create, maintain or annihilate. Bhagavad-gītā (3.27) therefore says:



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by nature." Prakṛti, material nature, as directed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, induces all living entities to create, maintain or annihilate according to the modes of nature. But the living entity, without knowledge of the Supreme Person and His agent the material energy, thinks that he is the doer. In fact, he is not at all the doer. As an agent of the supreme doer, the Supreme Lord, one should abide by the Lord's orders. The present chaotic conditions of the world are due to the ignorance of leaders who forget that they have been appointed to act by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because they have been appointed by the Lord, their duty is to consult the Lord and act accordingly. The book for consultation is Bhagavad-gītā, in which the Supreme Lord gives directions. Therefore those who are engaged in creation, maintenance and annihilation should consult the Supreme Person, who has appointed them, and should act accordingly. Then everyone will be satisfied, and there will be no disturbances.





TEXT 7



dehena dehino rājan

dehād deho 'bhijāyate

bījād eva yathā bījaṁ

dehy artha iva śāśvataḥ

SYNONYMS



dehena-by the body; dehinaḥ-of the father possessing a material body; rājan-O King; dehāt-from the body (of the mother); dehaḥ-another body; abhijāyate-takes birth; bījāt-from one seed; eva-indeed; yathā-just as; bījam-another seed; dehī-a person who has accepted a material body; arthaḥ-the material elements; iva-like; śāśvataḥ-eternal.





As from one seed another seed is generated, O King, so from one body [the body of the father], through another body [the body of the mother], a third body is generated [the body of a son]. As the elements of the material body are eternal, the living entity who appears through these material elements is also eternal.





From Bhagavad-gītā we understand that there are two energies, namely the superior energy and inferior energy. Inferior energy consists of the five gross and three subtle material elements. The living entity. who represents the superior energy, appears in different types of bodies through these elements by the manipulation or supervision of the material energy. Actually both the material and spiritual energies-matter and spirit-exist eternally as potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The potent entity is the Supreme Person. Since the spiritual energy, the living being, who is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, desires to enjoy this material world, the Lord gives him a chance to accept different types of material bodies and enjoy or suffer in different material conditions. Factually, the spiritual energy, the living entity who desires to enjoy material things, is manipulated by the Supreme Lord. The so-called father and mother have nothing to do with the living entity. As a result of his own choice and karma, the living being takes different bodies through the agency of so-called fathers and mothers.





TEXT 8



deha-dehi-vibhāgo 'yam

aviveka-kṛtaḥ purā

jāti-vyakti-vibhāgo 'yaṁ

yathā vastuni kalpitaḥ

SYNONYMS



deha-of this body; dehi-and the proprietor of the body; vibhāgaḥ-the division; ayam-this; aviveka-from ignorance; kṛtaḥ-made; purā-from time immemorial; jāti-of the class or caste; vyakti-and the individual; vibhāgaḥ-division; ayam-this; yathā-just as; vastuni-in the original object; kalpitaḥ-imagined.





Divisions of generalization and specification, such as nationality and individuality, are the imaginations of persons who are not advanced in knowledge.





Actually there are two energies-material and spiritual. Both of them are ever-existing because they are emanations from the eternal truth, the Supreme Lord. Because the individual soul, the individual living entity, has desired to act in forgetfulness of his original identity since time immemorial, he is accepting different positions in material bodies and being designated according to many divisions of nationality, community, society, species and so on.





TEXT 9



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam āśvāsito rājā

citraketur dvijoktibhiḥ

vimṛjya pāṇinā vaktram

ādhi-mlānam abhāṣata

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; āśvāsitaḥ-being enlightened or given hope; rājā-the King; citraketuḥ-Citraketu; dvija-uktibhiḥ-by the instructions of the great brāhmaṇas (Nārada and Aṅgirā Ṛṣi); vimṛjya-wiping off; pāṇinā-by the hand; vaktram-his face; ādhi-mlānam-shriveled due to lamentation; abhāṣata-spoke intelligently.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus enlightened by the instructions of Nārada and Aṅgirā, King Citraketu became hopeful with knowledge. Wiping his shriveled face with his hand, the King began to speak.





TEXT 10



śrī-rājovāca

kau yuvāṁ jñāna-sampannau

mahiṣṭhau ca mahīyasām

avadhūtena veṣeṇa

gūḍhāv iha samāgatau

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Citraketu said; kau-who; yuvām-you two; jñāna-sampannau-fully developed in knowledge; mahiṣṭhau-the greatest; ca-also; mahīyasām-among other great personalities; avadhūtena-of the liberated wandering mendicants; veṣeṇa-by the dress; gūḍhau-disguised; iha-in this place; samāgatau-arrived.





King Citraketu said: You have both come here dressed like avadhūtas, liberated persons, just to cover your identities, but I see that of all men, you are the most elevated in awareness. You know everything as it is. Therefore you are the greatest of all great personalities.





TEXT 11



caranti hy avanau kāmaṁ

brāhmaṇā bhagavat-priyāḥ

mādṛśāṁ grāmya-buddhīnāṁ

bodhāyonmatta-liṅginaḥ

SYNONYMS



caranti-wander; hi-indeed; avanau-on the surface of the world; kāmam-according to desire; brāhmaṇāḥ-the brāhmaṇas; bhagavat-priyāḥ-who are also Vaiṣṇavas, very dear to the Personality of Godhead; mā-dṛśām-of those like me; grāmya-buddhīnām-who are obsessed with temporary material consciousness; bodhāya-for the awakening; unmatta-liṅginaḥ-who dress as if madmen.





Brāhmaṇas who are exalted to the position of Vaiṣṇavas, the most dear servants of Kṛṣṇa, sometimes dress like madmen. Just to benefit materialists like us, who are always attached to sense gratification, and just to dissipate our ignorance, these Vaiṣṇavas wander on the surface of the globe according to their desire.





TEXTS 12–15



kumāro nārada ṛbhur

aṅgirā devalo 'sitaḥ

apāntaratamā vyāso

mārkaṇḍeyo 'tha gautamaḥ

vasiṣṭho bhagavān rāmaḥ



kapilo bādarāyaṇiḥ

durvāsā yājñavalkyaś ca

jātukarṇas tathāruṇiḥ

romaśaś cyavano datta



āsuriḥ sapatañjaliḥ

ṛṣir veda-śirā dhaumyo

muniḥ pañcaśikhas tathā

hiraṇyanābhaḥ kauśalyaḥ



śrutadeva ṛtadhvajaḥ

ete pare ca siddheśāś

caranti jñāna-hetavaḥ

SYNONYMS



kumāraḥ-Sanat-kumāra; nāradaḥ-Nārada Muni; ṛbhuḥ-Ṛbhu; aṅgirāḥ-Aṅgirā; devalaḥ-Devala; asitaḥ-Asita; apāntaratamāḥ-Vyāsa's previous name, Apāntaratamā; vyāsaḥ-Vyāsa; mārkaṇḍeyaḥ-Mārkaṇḍeya; atha-and; gautamaḥ-Gautama; vasiṣṭhaḥ-Vasiṣṭha; bhagavān rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; kapilaḥ-Kapila; bādarāyaṇiḥ-Śukadeva Gosvāmī; durvāsāḥ-Durvāsā; yājñavalkyaḥ-Yājñavalkya; ca-also; jātukarṇaḥ-Jātukarṇa; tathā-as well as; aruṇiḥ-Aruṇi; romaśaḥ-Romaśa; cyavanaḥ-Cyavana; dattaḥ-Dattātreya; āsuriḥ-Āsuri; sa-patañjaliḥ-with Patañjali Ṛṣi; ṛṣiḥ-the sage; veda-śirāḥ-the head of the Vedas; dhaumyaḥ-Dhaumya; muniḥ-the sage; pañcaśikhaḥ-Pañcaśikha; tathā-so also; hiraṇyanābhaḥ-Hiraṇyanābha; kauśalyaḥ-Kauśalya; śrutadevaḥ-Śrutadeva; ṛtadhvajaḥ-Ṛtadhvaja; ete-all of these; pare-others; ca-and; siddha-īśāḥ-the masters of mystic power; caranti-wander; jñāna-hetavaḥ-very learned persons who preach all over the world.





O great souls, I have heard that among the great and perfect persons wandering the surface of the earth to instruct knowledge to people covered by ignorance are Sanat-kumāra, Nārada, Ṛbhu, Aṅgirā, Devala, Asita, Apāntaratamā [Vyāsadeva], Mārkaṇḍeya, Gautama, Vasiṣṭha, Bhagavān Paraśurāma, Kapila, Śukadeva, Durvāsā, Yājñavalkya, Jātukarṇa and Aruṇi. Others are Romaśa, Cyavana, Dattātreya, Āsuri, Patañjali, the great sage Dhaumya who is like the head of the Vedas, the sage Pañcaśikha, Hiraṇyanābha, Kauśalya, Śrutadeva and Ṛtadhvaja. You must certainly be among them.





The word jñāna-hetavaḥ is very significant because great personalities like those listed in these verses wander on the surface of the globe not to mislead the populace, but to distribute real knowledge. Without this knowledge, human life is wasted. The human form of life is meant for realization of one's relationship with Kṛṣṇa, or God. One who lacks this knowledge is categorized among the animals. The Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.15):



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta-jñānā

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ





"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me."



Ignorance is the bodily conception of life (yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke. ...sa eva go-kharaḥ [SB 10.84.13]). Practically everyone throughout the universe, especially on this planet, Bhūrloka, thinks that there is no separate existence of the body and soul and therefore no need of self-realization. But that is not a fact. Therefore all the brāhmaṇas listed here, being devotees, travel all over the world to awaken Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the hearts of such foolish materialists.



The ācāryas mentioned in these verses are described in the Mahābhārata. The word pañcaśikha is also important. One who is liberated from the conceptions of annamaya, prāṇamaya, manomaya, vijñānamaya and ānandamaya and who is perfectly aware of the subtle coverings of the soul is called pañcaśikha. According to the statements of the Mahābhārata (Sānti-parva, Chapters 218–219), an ācārya named Pañcaśikha took birth in the family of Mahārāja Janaka, the ruler of Mithila. The Sāṅkhya philosophers accept Pañcaśikhācārya as one of them. Real knowledge pertains to the living entity dwelling within the body. Unfortunately, because of ignorance, the living entity identifies himself with the body and therefore feels pleasure and pain.





TEXT 16



tasmād yuvāṁ grāmya-paśor

mama mūḍha-dhiyaḥ prabhū

andhe tamasi magnasya

jñāna-dīpa udīryatām

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; yuvām-both of you; grāmya-paśoḥ-of an animal like a hog, pig or dog; mama-me; mūḍha-dhiyaḥ-who am very foolish (due to having no spiritual knowledge); prabhū-O my two lords; andhe-in blind; tamasi-darkness; magnasya-of one who is absorbed; jñāna-dīpaḥ-the torchlight of knowledge; udīryatām-let it be ignited.





Because you are great personalities, you can give me real knowledge. I am as foolish as a village animal like a pig or dog because I am merged in the darkness of ignorance. Therefore, please ignite the torch of knowledge to save me.





This is the way to receive knowledge. One must submit oneself at the lotus feet of great personalities who can actually deliver transcendental knowledge. It is therefore said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam: [SB 11.3.21] "One who is inquisitive to understand the highest goal and benefit of life must approach a bona fide spiritual master and surrender unto him." Only one who is actually eager to receive knowledge to eradicate the darkness of ignorance is eligible to approach a guru, or spiritual master. The guru should not be approached for material benefits. One should not approach a guru just to cure some disease or receive some miraculous benefit. This is not the way to approach the guru. Tad-vijñānārtham: one should approach the guru to understand the transcendental science of spiritual life. Unfortunately, in this age of Kali there are many bogus gurus who display magic to their disciples, and many foolish disciples want to see such magic for material benefits. These disciples are not interested in pursuing spiritual life to save themselves from the darkness of ignorance. It is said:



oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ





"I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him." This gives the definition of the guru. Everyone is in the darkness of ignorance. Therefore everyone needs to be enlightened with transcendental knowledge. One who enlightens his disciple and saves him from rotting in the darkness of ignorance in this material world is a true guru.





TEXT 17



śrī-aṅgirā uvāca

ahaṁ te putra-kāmasya

putrado 'smy aṅgirā nṛpa

eṣa brahma-sutaḥ sākṣān

nārado bhagavān ṛṣiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-aṅgirāḥ uvāca-the great sage Aṅgirā said; aham-I; te-of you; putra-kāmasya-desiring to have a son; putra-daḥ-the giver of the son; asmi-am; aṅgirāḥ-Aṅgirā Ṛṣi; nṛpa-O King; eṣaḥ-this; brahma-sutaḥ-the son of Lord Brahmā; sākṣāt-directly; nāradaḥ-Nārada Muni; bhagavān-the most powerful; ṛṣiḥ-sage.





Aṅgirā said: My dear King, when you desired to have a son, I approached you. Indeed, I am the same Aṅgirā Ṛṣi who gave you this son. As for this ṛṣi, he is the great sage Nārada, the direct son of Lord Brahmā





TEXTS 18–19



itthaṁ tvāṁ putra-śokena

magnaṁ tamasi dustare

atad-arham anusmṛtya

mahāpuruṣa-gocaram

anugrahāya bhavataḥ



prāptāv āvām iha prabho

brahmaṇyo bhagavad-bhakto

nāvāsāditum arhasi

SYNONYMS



ittham-in this way; tvām-you; putra-śokena-because of grief at the death of your son; magnam-merged; tamasi-in darkness; dustare-insurmountable; a-tat-arham-unsuitable for a person like you; anusmṛtya-remembering; mahā-puruṣa-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gocaram-who are advanced in understanding; anugrahāya-just to show favor; bhavataḥ-toward you; prāptau-arrived; āvām-we two; iha-in this place; prabho-O King; brahmaṇyaḥ-one who is situated in the Supreme Absolute Truth; bhagavat-bhaktaḥ-an advanced devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na-not; avāsāditum-to lament; arhasi-you deserve.





My dear King, you are an advanced devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To be absorbed in lamentation for the loss of something material is unsuitable for a person like you. Therefore we have both come to relieve you from this false lamentation, which is due to your being merged in the darkness of ignorance. For those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge to be affected by material loss and gain is not at all desirable.





Several words in this verse are very important. The word mahā-puruṣa refers to advanced devotees and also to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mahā means "the supreme," and puruṣa means "person." One who always engages in the service of the Supreme Lord is called mahā-pauruṣika. Śukadeva Gosvāmī and Mahārāja Parīkṣit are sometimes addressed as mahā-pauruṣika. A devotee should always aspire to engage in the service of advanced devotees. As Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung:



tāṅdera caraṇa sevi bhakta-sane vāsa

janame janame haya, ei abhilāṣa





A devotee should always aspire to live in the association of advanced devotees and engage in the service of the Lord through the paramparā system. One should serve the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu through the instructions of the great Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana. This is called tāṅdera caraṇa sevi. While serving the lotus feet of the Gosvāmīs, one should live in the association of devotees (bhakta-sane vāsa). This is the business of a devotee. A devotee should not aspire for material profit or lament for material loss. When Aṅgirā Ṛṣi and Nārada saw that Mahārāja Citraketu, an advanced devotee, had fallen in the darkness of ignorance and was lamenting for the material body of his son, by their causeless mercy they came to advise him so that he could be saved from this ignorance.



Another significant word is brahmaṇya. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is sometimes addressed by the prayer namo brahmaṇya-devāya, which offers obeisances unto the Lord because He is served by the devotees. Therefore this verse states, brahmaṇyo bhagavad-bhakto nāvāsāditum arhasi. This is the symptom of an advanced devotee. Brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā [Bg. 18.54]. For a devotee-an advanced, self-realized soul-there is no cause for material jubilation or lamentation. He is always transcendental to conditional life.





TEXT 20



tadaiva te paraṁ jñānaṁ

dadāmi gṛham āgataḥ

jñātvānyābhiniveśaṁ te

putram eva dadāmy aham

SYNONYMS



tadā-then; eva-indeed; te-unto you; param-transcendental; jñānam-knowledge; dadāmi-I would have delivered; gṛham-to your home; āgataḥ-came; jñātvā-knowing; anya-abhiniveśam-absorption in something else (in material things); te-your; putram-a son; eva-only; dadāmi-gave; aham-I.





When I first came to your home, I could have given you the supreme transcendental knowledge, but when I saw that your mind was absorbed in material things, I gave you only a son, who caused you jubilation and lamentation.





TEXTS 21–23



adhunā putriṇāṁ tāpo

bhavataivānubhūyate

evaṁ dārā gṛhā rāyo

vividhaiśvarya-sampadaḥ

śabdādayaś ca viṣayāś



calā rājya-vibhūtayaḥ

mahī rājyaṁ balaṁ koṣo

bhṛtyāmātya-suhṛj-janāḥ

sarve 'pi śūraseneme



śoka-moha-bhayārtidāḥ

gandharva-nagara-prakhyāḥ

svapna-māyā-manorathāḥ

SYNONYMS



adhunā-at the present moment; putriṇām-of persons who have children; tāpaḥ-the tribulation; bhavatā-by you; eva-indeed; anubhūyate-is experienced; evam-in this way; dārāḥ-good wife; gṛhāḥ-residence; rāyaḥ-riches; vividha-various; aiśvarya-opulences; sampadaḥ-prosperities; śabda-ādayaḥ-sound and so on; ca-and; viṣayāḥ-the objects of sense gratification; calāḥ-temporary; rājya-of the kingdom; vibhūtayaḥ-opulences; mahī-land; rājyam-kingdom; balam-strength; koṣaḥ-treasury; bhṛtya-servants; amātya-ministers; suhṛt-janāḥ-allies; sarve-all; api-indeed; śūrasena-O King of Śūrasena; ime-these; śoka-of lamentation; moha-of illusion; bhaya-of fear; arti-and distress; dāḥ-givers; gandharva-nagara-prakhyāḥ-headed by the illusory sight of a gandharva-nagara, a big palace within the forest; svapna-dreams; māyā-illusions; manorathāḥ-and concoctions of the mind.





My dear King, now you are actually experiencing the misery of a person who has sons and daughters. O King, owner of the state of Śūrasena, one's wife, his house, the opulence of his kingdom, and his various other opulences and objects of sense perception are all the same in that they are temporary. One's kingdom, military power, treasury, servants, ministers, friends and relatives are all causes of fear, illusion, lamentation and distress. They are like a gandharva-nagara, a nonexistent palace that one imagines to exist in the forest. Because they are impermanent, they are no better than illusions, dreams and mental concoctions.





This verse describes the entanglement of material existence. In material existence, the living entity possesses many things-the material body, children, wife and so on (dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣu). One may think that these will give him protection, but that is impossible. In spite of all these possessions, the spirit soul has to give up his present situation and accept another. The next situation may be unfavorable, but even if it is favorable, one must give it up and again accept another body. In this way, one's tribulation in material existence continues. A sane man should he perfectly aware that these things will never be able to give him happiness. One must be situated in his spiritual identity and eternally serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead as a devotee. Aṅgirā Ṛṣi and Nārada Muni gave this instruction to Mahārāja Citraketu.





TEXT 24



dṛśyamānā vinārthena

na dṛśyante manobhavāḥ

karmabhir dhyāyato nānā-

karmāṇi manaso 'bhavan

SYNONYMS



dṛśyamānāḥ-being perceived; vinā-without; arthena-substance or reality; na-not; dṛśyante-are seen; manobhavāḥ-creations of mental concoction; karmabhiḥ-by fruitive activities; dhyāyataḥ-meditating upon; nānā-various; karmāṇi-fruitive activities; manasaḥ-from the mind; abhavan-appear.





These visible objects like wife, children and property are like dreams and mental concoctions. Actually what we see has no permanent existence. It is sometimes seen and sometimes not. Only because of our past actions do we create such mental concoctions, and because of these concoctions, we perform further activities.





Everything material is a mental concoction because it is sometimes visible and sometimes not. At night when we dream of tigers and snakes, they are not actually present, but we are afraid because we are affected by what we envision in our dreams. Everything material is like a dream because it actually has no permanent existence.



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes as follows in his commentary: arthena vyāghra-sarpādinā vinaiva dṛśyamānāḥ svapnādi-bhaṅge sati na dṛśyante tad evaṁ dārādayo 'vāstava-vastu-bhūtāḥ svapnādayo 'vastu-bhūtāś ca sarve manobhavāḥ mano-vāsanā janyatvān manobhavāḥ. At night one dreams of tigers and snakes, and while dreaming he actually sees them, but as soon as the dream is broken they no longer exist. Similarly, the material world is a creation of our mental concoctions. We have come to this material world to enjoy material resources, and by mental concoction we discover many, many objects of enjoyment because our minds are absorbed in material things. This is why we receive various bodies. According to our mental concoctions we work in various ways, desiring various achievements, and by nature and the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (karmaṇā-daiva-netreṇa) we get the advantages we desire. Thus we become more and more involved with material concoctions. This is the reason for our suffering in the material world. By one kind of activity we create another, and they are all products of our mental concoctions.





TEXT 25



ayaṁ hi dehino deho

dravya-jñāna-kriyātmakaḥ

dehino vividha-kleśa-

santāpa-kṛd udāhṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



ayam-this; hi-certainly; dehinaḥ-of the living entity; dehaḥ-body; dravya-jñāna-kriyā-ātmakaḥ-consisting of the material elements, the senses for acquiring knowledge, and the acting senses; dehinaḥ-of the living entity; vividha-various; kleśa-sufferings; santāpa-and of pains; kṛt-the cause; udāhṛtaḥ-is declared.





The living entity in the bodily conception of life is absorbed in the body, which is a combination of the physical elements, the five senses for gathering knowledge, and the five senses of action, along with the mind. Through the mind the living entity suffers three kinds of tribulations-adhibhautika, adhidaivika and adhyātmika. Therefore this body is a source of all miseries.





In the Fifth Canto (5.5.4), while instructing his sons, Ṛṣabhadeva said, asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ: the body, although temporary, is the cause of all the miseries of material existence. As already discussed in the previous verse, the entire material creation is based on mental concoction. The mind sometimes induces us to think that if we purchase an automobile we can enjoy the physical elements, such as earth, water, air and fire, combined in forms of iron, plastic, petrol and so on. Working with the five material elements (pañca-bhūtas), as well as with our five knowledge-gathering senses like the eyes, ears and tongue and our five active senses like the hands and legs, we become involved in the material condition. Thus we are subjected to the tribulations known as adhyātmika, adhidaivika and adhibhautika. The mind is the center because the mind creates all these things. As soon as the material object is struck, however, the mind is affected, and we suffer. For example, with the material elements, the working senses and the knowledge-gathering senses we create a very nice car, and when the car is accidentally smashed in a collision, the mind suffers, and through the mind the living entity suffers.



The fact is that the living entity, while concocting with the mind, creates the material condition. Because matter is destructible, through the material condition the living entity suffers. Otherwise, the living entity is detached from all material conditions. When one comes to the Brahman platform, the platform of spiritual life, fully understanding that he is a spiritual soul (), he is no longer affected by lamentation or hankering. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.54):

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati





"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything." Elsewhere in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7) the Lord says:



mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati





"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind." The living entity is actually part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unaffected by material conditions, but because the mind (manaḥ) is affected, the senses are affected, and the living entity struggles for existence within this material world.





TEXT 26



tasmāt svasthena manasā

vimṛśya gatim ātmanaḥ

dvaite dhruvārtha-viśrambhaṁ

tyajopaśamam āviśa

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; svasthena-with a careful; manasā-mind; vimṛśya-considering; gatim-real position; ātmanaḥ-of yourself; dvaite-in the duality; dhruva-as permanent; artha-object; viśrambham-belief; tyaja-give up; upaśamam-a peaceful condition; āviśa-take to.





Therefore, O King Citraketu, carefully consider the position of the ātmā. In other words, try to understand who you are-whether body, mind or soul. Consider where you have come from, where you are going after giving up this body, and why you are under the control of material lamentation. Try to understand your real position in this way, and then you will be able to give up your unnecessary attachment. You will also be able to give up the belief that this material world, or anything not directly in touch with service to Kṛṣṇa, is eternal. Thus you will obtain peace.





The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is factually endeavoring to bring human society to a sober condition. Because of a misdirected civilization, people are jumping in materialistic life like cats and dogs, performing all sorts of abominable, sinful actions and becoming increasingly entangled. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement includes self-realization because one is first directed by Lord Kṛṣṇa to understand that one is not the body but the owner of the body. When one understands this simple fact, he can direct himself toward the goal of life. Because people are not educated in terms of the goal of life, they are working like madmen and becoming more and more attached to the material atmosphere. The misguided man accepts the material condition as everlasting. One must give up his faith in material things and give up attachment for them. Then one will be sober and peaceful.





TEXT 27



śrī-nārada uvāca

etāṁ mantropaniṣadaṁ

pratīccha prayato mama

yāṁ dhārayan sapta-rātrād

draṣṭā saṅkarṣaṇaṁ vibhum

SYNONYMS



śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca-Śrī Nārada Muni said; etām-this; mantra-upaniṣadam-Upaniṣad in the form of a mantra by which one can achieve the highest goal of life; pratīccha-accept; prayataḥ-with great attention (after finishing the funeral ceremony of your dead son); mama-from me; yām-which; dhārayan-accepting; sapta-rātrāt-after seven nights; draṣṭā-you will see; saṅkarṣaṇam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Saṅkarṣaṇa; vibhum-the Lord.





The great sage Nārada continued: My dear King, attentively receive from me a mantra, which is most auspicious. After accepting it from me, in seven nights you will be able to see the Lord face to face.





TEXT 28



yat-pāda-mūlam upasṛtya narendra pūrve

śarvādayo bhramam imaṁ dvitayaṁ visṛjya

sadyas tadīyam atulānadhikaṁ mahitvaṁ

prāpur bhavān api paraṁ na cirād upaiti

SYNONYMS



yat-pāda-mūlam-the lotus feet of whom (Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa); upasṛtya-obtaining shelter at; nara-indra-O King; pūrve-formerly; śarva-ādayaḥ-great demigods like Lord Mahādeva; bhramam-illusion; imam-this; dvitayam-consisting of duality; visṛjya-giving up; sadyaḥ-immediately; tadīyam-His; atula-unequaled; anadhikam-unsurpassed; mahitvam-glories; prāpuḥ-achieved; bhavān-yourself; api-also; param-the supreme abode; na-not; cirāt-after a long time; upaiti-will obtain.





My dear King, in former days Lord Śiva and other demigods took shelter of the lotus feet of Saṅkarṣaṇa. Thus they immediately got free from the illusion of duality and achieved unequaled and unsurpassed glories in spiritual life. You will very soon attain that very same position.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Sixth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Saints Nārada and Aṅgirā Instruct King Citraketu."



Chapter Sixteen



King Citraketu Meets the Supreme Lord





As related in this chapter, Citraketu was able to talk with his dead son and hear from him the truth of life. When Citraketu was appeased, the great sage Nārada gave him a mantra, and by chanting this mantra Citraketu found shelter at the lotus feet of Saṅkarṣaṇa.





The living entity is eternal. Thus he has neither birth nor death (na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre [Bg. 2.20]). According to the reactions of one's fruitive activities, one takes birth in various species of life among the birds, beasts, trees, human beings, demigods and so on, thus rotating through various bodies. For a certain period of time, one receives a particular type of body as a son or father in a false relationship. All our relationships in this material world with friends, relatives or enemies consist of duality, in which one feels happy and distressed on the basis of illusion. The living entity is actually a spiritual soul who is part and parcel of God and has nothing to do with relationships in the world of duality. Therefore Nārada Muni advised Citraketu not to lament for his so-called dead son.





After hearing instructions from their dead child, Citraketu and his wife could understand that all relationships in this material world are causes of misery. The queens who had administered poison to the son of Kṛtadyuti were very much ashamed. They atoned for the sinful act of killing a child and gave up their aspiration to have sons. Thereafter. Nārada Muni chanted prayers to Nārāyaṇa, who exists as catur-vyūha, and instructed Citraketu about the Supreme Lord, who creates, maintains and annihilates everything and who is the master of the material nature. After instructing King Citraketu in this way, he returned to Brahmaloka. These instructions about the Absolute Truth are called the mahā-vidyā. After being initiated by Nārada Muni, King Citraketu chanted the mahā-vidyā, and after one week he attained the presence of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, who was surrounded by the four Kumāras. The Lord was nicely dressed in bluish garments, with a helmet and ornaments of gold. His face appeared very happy. In the presence of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, Citraketu offered his obeisances and began to offer prayers.





In his prayers, Citraketu said that millions of universes rest in the pores of Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is limitless, having no beginning and end. The Lord is well known to the devotees for His eternity. The difference between worshiping the Lord and worshiping the demigods is that the worshiper of the Lord also becomes eternal, whereas whatever benedictions one can get from the demigods are impermanent. Unless one becomes a devotee, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





After Citraketu finished his prayers, the unlimited Supreme Lord explained knowledge of Himself to Citraketu.





TEXT 1



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

atha deva-ṛṣī rājan

samparetaṁ nṛpātmajam

darśayitveti hovāca

jñātīnām anuśocatām

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha-thus; deva-ṛṣiḥ-the great sage Nārada; rājan-O King; samparetam-dead; nṛpa-ātmajam-the son of the King; darśayitvā-making visible; iti-thus; ha-indeed; uvāca-explained; jñātīnām-to all the relatives; anuśocatām-who were lamenting.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King Parīkṣit, by his mystic power the great sage Nārada brought the dead son into the vision of all the lamenting relatives and then spoke as follows.





TEXT 2



śrī-nārada uvāca

jīvātman paśya bhadraṁ te

mātaraṁ pitaraṁ ca te

suhṛdo bāndhavās taptāḥ

śucā tvat-kṛtayā bhṛśam

SYNONYMS



śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca-Śrī Nārada Muni said; jīva-ātman-O living entity; paśya-just see; bhadram-good fortune; te-unto you; mātaram-the mother; pitaram-the father; ca-and; te-of you; suhṛdaḥ-friends; bāndhavāḥ-relatives; taptāḥ-aggrieved; śucā-by lamentation; tvat-kṛtayā-because of you; bhṛśam-very greatly.





Śrī Nārada Muni said: O living entity, all good fortune unto you. Just see your father and mother. All your friends and relatives are overwhelmed with grief because of your passing away.





TEXT 3



kalevaraṁ svam āviśya

śeṣam āyuḥ suhṛd-vṛtaḥ

bhuṅkṣva bhogān pitṛ-prattān

adhitiṣṭha nṛpāsanam

SYNONYMS



kalevaram-body; svam-your own; āviśya-entering; śeṣam-the balance; āyuḥ-duration of life; suhṛt-vṛtaḥ-surrounded by your friends and relatives; bhuṅkṣva-just enjoy; bhogān-all enjoyable opulences; pitṛ-by your father; prattān-awarded; adhitiṣṭha-accept; nṛpa-āsanam-the throne of the king.





Because you died untimely, the balance of your lifetime still remains. Therefore you may reenter your body and enjoy the remainder of your life, surrounded by your friends and relatives. Accept the royal throne and all the opulences given by your father.





TEXT 4



jīva uvāca

kasmiñ janmany amī mahyaṁ

pitaro mātaro 'bhavan

karmabhir bhrāmyamāṇasya

deva-tiryaṅ-nṛ-yoniṣu

SYNONYMS



jīvaḥ uvāca-the living entity said; kasmin-in which; janmani-birth; amī-all those; mahyam-to me; pitaraḥ-fathers; mātaraḥ-mothers; abhavan-were; karmabhiḥ-by the results of fruitive action; bhrāmyamāṇasya-who am wandering; deva-tiryak-of the demigods and the lower animals; nṛ-and of the human species; yoniṣu-in the wombs.





By the mystic power of Nārada Muni, the living entity reentered his dead body for a short time and spoke in reply to Nārada Muni's request. He said: According to the results of my fruitive activities, I, the living being, transmigrate from one body to another, sometimes going to the species of the demigods, sometimes to the species of lower animals, sometimes among the vegetables, and sometimes to the human species. Therefore, in which birth were these my mother and father? No one is actually my mother and father. How can I accept these two people as my parents?





Here it is made clear that the living being enters a material body that is like a machine created by the five gross elements of material nature (earth, water, fire, air and sky) and the three subtle elements (mind, intelligence and ego). As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā, there are two separate identities, called the inferior and superior natures, which both belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to the results of a living entity's fruitive actions, he is forced to enter the material elements in different types of bodies.



This time the living entity was supposed to have been the son of Mahārāja Citraketu and Queen Kṛtadyuti because according to the laws of nature he had entered a body made by the King and Queen. Actually, however, he was not their son. The living entity is the son of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and because he wants to enjoy this material world, the Supreme Lord gives him a chance to enter various bodies. The living entity has no true relationship with the material body he gets from his material father and mother. He is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, but he is allowed to go through different bodies. The body created by the so-called father and mother actually has nothing to do with its so-called creators. Therefore the living entity flatly denied that Mahārāja Citraketu and his wife were his father and mother.





TEXT 5



bandhu-jñāty-ari-madhyastha-

mitrodāsīna-vidviṣaḥ

sarva eva hi sarveṣāṁ

bhavanti kramaśo mithaḥ

SYNONYMS



bandhu-friends; jñāti-family members; ari-enemies; madhyastha-neutrals; mitra-well-wishers; udāsīna-indifferent; vidviṣaḥ-or envious persons; sarve-all; eva-indeed; hi-certainly; sarveṣām-of all; bhavanti-become; kramaśaḥ-gradually; mithaḥ-of one another.





In this material world, which advances like a river that carries away the living entity, all people become friends, relatives and enemies in due course of time. They also act neutrally, they mediate, they despise one another, and they act in many other relationships. Nonetheless, despite these various transactions, no one is permanently related.





It is our practical experience in this material world that the same person who is one's friend today becomes one's enemy tomorrow. Our relationships as friends or enemies, family men or outsiders, are actually the results of our different dealings. Citraketu Mahārāja was lamenting for his son, who was now dead, but he could have considered the situation otherwise. "This living entity," he could have thought, "was my enemy in my last life, and now, having appeared as my son, he is prematurely leaving just to give me pain and agony." Why should he not consider his dead son his former enemy and instead of lamenting be jubilant because of an enemy's death? As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.27), prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ: factually everything is happening because of our association with the modes of material nature. Therefore one who is my friend today in association with the mode of goodness may be my enemy tomorrow in association with the modes of passion and ignorance. As the modes of material nature work, in illusion we accept others as friends, enemies, sons or fathers in terms of the reactions of different dealings under different conditions.





TEXT 6



yathā vastūni paṇyāni

hemādīni tatas tataḥ

paryaṭanti nareṣv evaṁ

jīvo yoniṣu kartṛṣu

SYNONYMS



yathā-just as; vastūni-commodities; paṇyāni-meant for trading; hema-ādīni-such as gold; tataḥ tataḥ-from here to there; paryaṭanti-move about; nareṣu-among men; evam-in this way; jīvaḥ-the living entity; yoniṣu-in different species of life; kartṛṣu-in different material fathers.





Just as gold and other commodities are continually transferred from one place to another in due course of purchase and sale, so the living entity, as a result of his fruitive activities, wanders throughout the entire universe, being injected into various bodies in different species of life by one kind of father after another.





It has already been explained that Citraketu's son was his enemy in a past life and had now appeared as his son just to give him more severe pain. Indeed, the untimely death of the son caused severe lamentation for the father. One may put forward the argument, "If the King's son was his enemy, how could the King have so much affection for him?" In answer, the example is given that when someone's wealth falls into the bands of his enemy, the money becomes the enemy's friend. Then the enemy can use it for his own purposes. Indeed, he can even use it to harm its previous owner. Therefore the money belongs neither to the one party nor to the other. The money is always money, but in different situations it can be used as an enemy or a friend.



As explained in Bhagavad-gītā, it is not by any father or mother that the living entity is given his birth. The living entity is a completely separate identity from the so-called father and mother. By the laws of nature, the living entity is forced to enter the semen of a father and be injected into the womb of the mother. He is not in control of selecting what kind of father he will accept. prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni: the laws of nature force him to go to different fathers and mothers, just like a consumer commodity that is purchased and sold. Therefore the so-called relationship of father and son is an arrangement of prakṛti, or nature. It has no meaning, and therefore it is called illusion.



The same living entity sometimes takes shelter of an animal father and mother and sometimes a human father and mother. Sometimes he accepts a father and mother among the birds, and sometimes he accepts a demigod father and mother. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore says:



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja





Harassed life after life by the laws of nature, the living entity wanders throughout the entire universe in different planets and different species of life. Somehow or other, if he is fortunate enough, he comes in touch with a devotee who reforms his entire life. Then the living entity goes back home, back to Godhead. Therefore it is said:



janame janame sabe pitā mātā pāya

kṛṣṇa guru nahi mile baja hari ei





In the transmigration of the soul through different bodies, everyone, in every form of life-be it human, animal, tree or demigod-gets a father and mother. This is not very difficult. The difficulty is to obtain a bona fide spiritual master and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the duty of a human being is to capture the opportunity to come in touch with Kṛṣṇa's representative, the bona fide spiritual master. Under the guidance of the spiritual master, the spiritual father, one can return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 7



nityasyārthasya sambandho

hy anityo dṛśyate nṛṣu

yāvad yasya hi sambandho

mamatvaṁ tāvad eva hi

SYNONYMS



nityasya-of the eternal; arthasya-thing; sambandhaḥ-relationship; hi-indeed; anityaḥ-temporary; dṛśyate-is seen; nṛṣu-in human society; yāvat-as long as; yasya-of whom; hi-indeed; sambandhaḥ-relationship; mamatvam-ownership; tāvat-that long; eva-indeed; hi-certainly.





A few living entities are born in the human species, and others are born as animals. Although both are living entities, their relationships are impermanent. An animal may remain in the custody of a human being for some time, and then the same animal may be transferred to the possession of other human beings. As soon as the animal goes away, the former proprietor no longer has a sense of ownership. As long as the animal is in his possession he certainly has an affinity for it, but as soon as the animal is sold, the affinity is lost.





Aside from the fact that the soul transmigrates from one body to another, even in this life the relationships between living entities are impermanent, as exemplified in this verse. The son of Citraketu was named Harṣaśoka, or "jubilation and lamentation." The living entity is certainly eternal, but because he is covered by a temporary dress, the body, his eternity is not observed. Dehino 'smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā: [Bg. 2.13] "The embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age." Thus the bodily dress is impermanent. The living entity, however, is permanent. As an animal is transferred from one owner to another, the living entity who was the son of Citraketu lived as his son for some time, but as soon as he was transferred to another body, the affectionate relationship was broken. As stated in the example given in the previous verse, when one has a commodity in his hands he considers it his, but as soon as it is transferred it becomes someone else's commodity. Then one no longer has a relationship with it; he has no affection for it, nor does he lament for it.





TEXT 8



evaṁ yoni-gato jīvaḥ

sa nityo nirahaṅkṛtaḥ

yāvad yatropalabhyeta

tāvat svatvaṁ hi tasya tat

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; yoni-gataḥ-being within a specific species of life; jīvaḥ-the living entity; saḥ-he; nityaḥ-eternal; nirahaṅkṛtaḥ-without identification with the body; yāvat-as long as; yatra-where; upalabhyeta-he may be found; tāvat-that long; svatvam-the concept of self; hi-indeed; tasya-of him; tat-that.





Even though one living entity becomes connected with another because of a relationship based on bodies that are perishable, the living entity is eternal. Actually it is the body that is born or lost, not the living entity. One should not accept that the living entity takes birth or dies. The living being actually has no relationship with so-called fathers and mothers. As long as he appears as the son of a certain father and mother as a result of his past fruitive activities, he has a connection with the body given by that father and mother. Thus he falsely accepts himself as their son and acts affectionately. After he dies, however, the relationship is finished. Under these circumstances, one should not be falsely involved with jubilation and lamentation.





When the living entity lives within the material body, he falsely thinks that he is the body, although actually he is not. His relationship with his body and his so-called father and mother are false, illusory conceptions. These illusions continue as long as one is not enlightened about the situation of the living entity.





TEXT 9



eṣa nityo 'vyayaḥ sūkṣma

eṣa sarvāśrayaḥ svadṛk

ātmamāyā-guṇair viśvam

ātmānaṁ sṛjate prabhuḥ

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this living entity; nityaḥ-eternal; avyayaḥ-imperishable; sūkṣmaḥ-very, very fine (not seen by the material eyes); eṣaḥ-this living entity; sarva-āśrayaḥ-the cause of different types of bodies; sva-dṛk-self-effulgent; ātma-māyā-guṇaiḥ-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead's modes of material nature; viśvam-this material world; ātmānam-himself; sṛjate-appears; prabhuḥ-the master.





The living entity is eternal and imperishable because he actually has no beginning and no end. He never takes birth or dies. He is the basic principle of all types of bodies, yet he does not belong to the bodily category. The living being is so sublime that he is equal in quality to the Supreme Lord. Nonetheless, because he is extremely small, he is prone to be illusioned by the external energy, and thus he creates various bodies for himself according to his different desires.





In this verse the philosophy of acintya-bhedābheda-simultaneous oneness and difference-is described. The living entity is eternal (nitya) like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the difference is that the Supreme Lord is the greatest, no one being equal to or greater than Him, whereas the living entity is sūkṣma, or extremely small. The śāstra describes that the magnitude of the living entity is one ten-thousandth the size of the tip of a hair. The Supreme Lord is all-pervading (aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham). Relatively, if the living entity is accepted as the smallest, there should naturally be inquiry about the greatest. The greatest is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the smallest is the living entity.



Another peculiar characteristic of the jīva is that he becomes covered by māyā. Ātmamāyā-guṇaiḥ: he is prone to being covered by the Supreme Lord's illusory energy. The living entity is responsible for his conditional life in the material world, and therefore he is described as prabhu ("the master"). If he likes he can come to this material world, and if he likes he can return home, back to Godhead. Because he wanted to enjoy this material world, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gave him a material body through the agency of the material energy. As the Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61):



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā





"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy." The Supreme Lord gives the living entity a chance to enjoy in this material world as he desires, but He openly expresses His own desire that the living entity give up all material aspirations, fully surrender unto Him and return home, back to Godhead.



The living entity is the smallest (sūkṣma). Jīva Gosvāmī says in this connection that the living entity within the body is extremely difficult for materialistic scientists to find, although we understand from authorities that the living entity is within the body. The body is different from the living entity.





TEXT 10



na hy asyāsti priyaḥ kaścin

nāpriyaḥ svaḥ paro 'pi vā

ekaḥ sarva-dhiyāṁ draṣṭā

kartṝṇāṁ guṇa-doṣayoḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; asya-to the living entity; asti-there is; priyaḥ-dear; kaścit-someone; na-not; apriyaḥ-not dear; svaḥ-own; paraḥ-other; api-also; vā-or; ekaḥ-the one; sarva-dhiyām-of the varieties of intelligence; draṣṭā-the seer; kartṝṇām-of the performers; guṇa-doṣayoḥ-of right and wrong activities.





For this living entity, no one is dear, nor is anyone unfavorable. He makes no distinction between that which is his own and that which belongs to anyone else. He is one without a second; in other words, he is not affected by friends and enemies, well-wishers or mischief-mongers. He is only an observer, a witness, of the different qualities of men.





As explained in the previous verse, the living entity has the same qualities as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but he has them in minute quantities because he is a small particle (sūkṣma) whereas the Supreme Lord is all-pervading and great. For the Supreme Lord there are no friends, enemies or relatives, for He is completely free from all the disqualifications of ignorance that characterize the conditioned souls. On the other hand, He is extremely kind and favorable to His devotees, and He is not at all satisfied with persons who are envious of His devotees. As the Lord Himself confirms in Bhagavad-gītā (9.29):



samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham





"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him." The Supreme Lord has no enemy or friend, but He is inclined toward a devotee who always engages in His devotional service. Similarly, elsewhere in the Gītā (16.19) the Lord says:



tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān

saṁsāreṣu narādhamān

kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān

āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu





"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life." The Lord is extremely antagonistic toward those who are envious of His devotees. To protect His devotees, the Lord sometimes has to kill their enemies. For example, to protect Prahlāda Mahārāja, the Lord had to kill his enemy Hiraṇyakaśipu, although Hiraṇyakaśipu attained salvation because of being killed by the Lord. Since the Lord is the witness of everyone's activities, He witnesses the actions of the enemies of His devotees, and He is inclined to punish them. In other cases, however, He simply witnesses what the living entities do and gives the results of one's sinful or pious actions.





TEXT 11



nādatta ātmā hi guṇaṁ

na doṣaṁ na kriyā-phalam

udāsīnavad āsīnaḥ

parāvara-dṛg īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; ādatte-accepts; ātmā-the Supreme Lord; hi-indeed; guṇam-happiness; na-not; doṣam-unhappiness; na-nor; kriyā-phalam-the result of any fruitive activity; udāsīna-vat-exactly like a neutral man; āsīnaḥ-sitting (in the core of the heart); para-avara-dṛk-seeing the cause and effect; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Lord.





The Supreme Lord [ātmā], the creator of cause and effect, does not accept the happiness and distress that result from fruitive actions. He is completely independent of having to accept a material body, and because He has no material body, He is always neutral. The living entities, being part and parcel of the Lord, possess His qualities in a minute quantity. Therefore one should not be affected by lamentation.





The conditioned soul has friends and enemies. He is affected by the good qualities and the faults of his position. The Supreme Lord, however, is always transcendental. Because He is the īśvara, the supreme controller, He is not affected by duality. It may therefore be said that He sits in the core of everyone's heart as the neutral witness of the causes and effects of one's activities, good and bad. We should also understand that udāsīna, neutral, does not mean that He takes no action. Rather, it means that He is not personally affected. For example, a court judge is neutral when two opposing parties appear before him, but he still takes action as the case warrants. To become completely neutral, indifferent, to material activities, we should simply seek shelter at the lotus feet of the supreme neutral person.



Mahārāja Citraketu was advised that remaining neutral in such trying circumstances as the death of one's son is impossible. Nevertheless, since the Lord knows how to adjust everything, the best course is to depend upon Him and do one's duty in devotional service to the Lord. In all circumstances, one should be undisturbed by duality. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (2.47):



karmaṇy evādhikāras te

mā phaleṣu kadācana

mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr

mā te saṅgo 'stv akarmaṇi





"You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty." One should execute one's devotional duty, and for the results of one's actions one should depend upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 12



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

ity udīrya gato jīvo

jñātayas tasya te tadā

vismitā mumucuḥ śokaṁ

chittvātma-sneha-śṛṅkhalām

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-in this way; udīrya-speaking; gataḥ-went; jīvaḥ-the living entity (who had appeared as the son of Mahārāja Citraketu); jñātayaḥ-the relatives and family members; tasya-of him; te-they; tadā-at that time; vismitāḥ-being astonished; mumucuḥ-gave up; śokam-lamentation; chittvā-cutting off; ātma-sneha-of affection due to a relationship; śṛṅkhalām-the iron shackles.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the conditioned soul [jīva] in the form of Mahārāja Citraketu's son had spoken in this way and then left, Citraketu and the other relatives of the dead son were all astonished. Thus they cut off the shackles of their affection, which was due to their relationship with him, and gave up their lamentation.





TEXT 13



nirhṛtya jñātayo jñāter

dehaṁ kṛtvocitāḥ kriyāḥ

tatyajur dustyajaṁ snehaṁ

śoka-moha-bhayārtidam

SYNONYMS



nirhṛtya-removing; jñātayaḥ-King Citraketu and all the other relatives; jñāteḥ-of the son; deham-the body; kṛtvā-performing; ucitāḥ-suitable; kriyāḥ-activities; tatyajuḥ-gave up; dustyajam-very difficult to give up; sneham-affection; śoka-lamentation; moha-illusion; bhaya-fear; arti-and distress; dam-giving.





After the relatives had discharged their duties by performing the proper funeral ceremonies and burning the dead child's body, they gave up the affection that leads to illusion, lamentation, fear and pain. Such affection is undoubtedly difficult to give up, but they gave it up very easily.
