#+title: Sb6




%%% parte 6


TEXT 16



tato ratho mātalinā

haribhir daśa-śatair vṛtaḥ

ānīto dvipam utsṛjya

ratham āruruhe vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; rathaḥ-chariot; mātalinā-by his chariot driver named Mātali; haribhiḥ-with horses; daśa-śataiḥ-by ten times one hundred (one thousand); vṛtaḥ-yoked; ānītaḥ-being brought in; dvipam-the elephant; utsṛjya-keeping aside; ratham-the chariot; āruruhe-got up; vibhuḥ-the great Indra.





Thereafter, Mātali, Indra's chariot driver, brought Indra's chariot, which was drawn by one thousand horses. Indra then left his elephant and got onto the chariot.





TEXT 17



tasya tat pūjayan karma

yantur dānava-sattamaḥ

śūlena jvalatā taṁ tu

smayamāno 'hanan mṛdhe

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Mātali; tat-that service (bringing the chariot before Indra); pūjayan-appreciating; karma-such service to the master; yantuḥ-of the chariot driver; dānava-sat-tamaḥ-the best of the demons, namely Jambhāsura; śūlena-by his trident; jvalatā-which was blazing fire; tam-Mātali; tu-indeed; smayamānaḥ-smiling; ahanat-struck; mṛdhe-in the battle.





Appreciating Mātali's service, Jambhāsura, the best of the demons, smiled. Nonetheless, he struck Mātali in the battle with a trident of blazing fire.





TEXT 18



sehe rujaṁ sudurmarṣāṁ

sattvam ālambya mātaliḥ

indro jambhasya saṅkruddho

vajreṇāpāharac chiraḥ

SYNONYMS



sehe-tolerated; rujam-the pain; su-durmarṣām-intolerable; sattvam-patience; ālambya-taking shelter of; mātaliḥ-the charioteer Mātali; indraḥ-King Indra; jambhasya-of the great demon Jambha; saṅkruddhaḥ-being very angry at him; vajreṇa-with his thunderbolt; apāharat-separated; śiraḥ-the head.





Although the pain was extremely severe, Mātali tolerated it with great patience. Indra, however, became extremely angry at Jambhāsura. He struck Jambhāsura with his thunderbolt and thus severed his head from his body.





TEXT 19



jambhaṁ śrutvā hataṁ tasya

jñātayo nāradād ṛṣeḥ

namuciś ca balaḥ pākas

tatrāpetus tvarānvitāḥ

SYNONYMS



jambham-Jambhāsura; śrutvā-after hearing; hatam-had been killed; tasya-his; jñātayaḥ-friends and relatives; nāradāt-from the source Nārada; ṛṣeḥ-from the great saint; namuciḥ-the demon Namuci; ca-also; balaḥ-the demon Bala; pākaḥ-the demon Pāka; tatra-there; āpetuḥ-immediately arrived; tvarā-anvitāḥ-with great haste.





When Nārada Ṛṣi informed Jambhāsura's friends and relatives that Jambhāsura had been killed, the three demons named Namuci, Bala and Pāka arrived on the battlefield in great haste.





TEXT 20



vacobhiḥ paruṣair indram

ardayanto 'sya marmasu

śarair avākiran meghā

dhārābhir iva parvatam

SYNONYMS



vacobhiḥ-with harsh words; paruṣaiḥ-very rough and cruel; indram-King Indra; ardayantaḥ-chastising, piercing; asya-of Indra; marmasu-in the heart, etc.; śaraiḥ-with arrows; avākiran-covered all around; meghāḥ-clouds; dhārābhiḥ-with showers of rain; iva-just as; parvatam-a mountain.





Rebuking Indra with harsh, cruel words that were piercing to the heart, these demons showered him with arrows, just as torrents of rain wash a great mountain.





TEXT 21



harīn daśa-śatāny ājau

haryaśvasya balaḥ śaraiḥ

tāvadbhir ardayām āsa

yugapal laghu-hastavān

SYNONYMS



harīn-horses; daśa-śatāni-ten times one hundred (one thousand); ājau-on the battlefield; haryaśvasya-of King Indra; balaḥ-the demon Bala; śaraiḥ-with arrows; tāvadbhiḥ-with so many; ardayām āsa-put into tribulation; yugapat-simultaneously; laghu-hastavān-with quick handling.





Quickly handling the situation on the battlefield, the demon Bala put all of Indra's one thousand horses into tribulation by simultaneously piercing them all with an equal number of arrows.





TEXT 22



śatābhyāṁ mātaliṁ pāko

rathaṁ sāvayavaṁ pṛthak

sakṛt sandhāna-mokṣeṇa

tad adbhutam abhūd raṇe

SYNONYMS



śatābhyām-with two hundred arrows; mātalim-unto the chariot driver Mātali; pākaḥ-the demon named Pāka; ratham-the chariot; sa-avayavam-with all paraphernalia; pṛthak-separately; sakṛt-once, at one time; sandhāna-by yoking the arrows to the bow; mokṣeṇa-and releasing; tat-such an action; adbhutam-wonderful; abhūt-so became; raṇe-on the battlefield.





Pāka, another demon, attacked both the chariot, with all its paraphernalia, and the chariot driver, Mātali, by fitting two hundred arrows to his bow and releasing them all simultaneously. This was indeed a wonderful act on the battlefield.





TEXT 23



namuciḥ pañca-daśabhiḥ

svarṇa-puṅkhair maheṣubhiḥ

āhatya vyanadat saṅkhye

satoya iva toyadaḥ

SYNONYMS



namuciḥ-the demon named Namuci; pañca-daśabhiḥ-with fifteen; svarṇa-puṅkhaiḥ-with golden feathers attached; mahā-iṣubhiḥ-very powerful arrows; āhatya-piercing; vyanadat-resounded; saṅkhye-on the battlefield; sa-toyaḥ-bearing water; iva-like; toya-daḥ-a cloud that delivers rain.





Then Namuci, another demon, attacked Indra and injured him with fifteen very powerful golden-feathered arrows, which roared like a cloud full of water.





TEXT 24



sarvataḥ śara-kūṭena

śakraṁ saratha-sārathim

chādayām āsur asurāḥ

prāvṛṭ-sūryam ivāmbudāḥ

SYNONYMS



sarvataḥ-all around; śara-kūṭena-by a dense shower of arrows; śakram-Indra; sa-ratha-with his chariot; sārathim-and with his chariot driver; chādayām āsuḥ-covered; asurāḥ-all the demons; prāvṛṭ-in the rainy season; sūryam-the sun; iva-like; ambu-dāḥ-clouds.





Other demons covered Indra, along with his chariot and chariot driver, with incessant showers of arrows, just as clouds cover the sun in the rainy season.





TEXT 25



alakṣayantas tam atīva vihvalā

vicukruśur deva-gaṇāḥ sahānugāḥ

anāyakāḥ śatru-balena nirjitā

vaṇik-pathā bhinna-navo yathārṇave

SYNONYMS



alakṣayantaḥ-being unable to see; tam-King Indra; atīva-fiercely; vihvalāḥ-bewildered; vicukruśuḥ-began to lament; deva-gaṇāḥ-all the demigods; saha-anugāḥ-with their followers; anāyakāḥ-without any captain or leader; śatru-balena-by the superior power of their enemies; nirjitāḥ-oppressed severely; vaṇik-pathāḥ-traders; bhinna-navaḥ-whose ship is wrecked; yathā arṇave-as in the middle of the ocean.





The demigods, being severely oppressed by their enemies and being unable to see Indra on the battlefield, were very anxious. Having no captain or leader, they began lamenting like traders in a wrecked vessel in the midst of the ocean.





From this statement it appears that in the upper planetary system there is shipping and that traders there engage in navigation as their occupational duty. Sometimes, as on this planet, these traders are shipwrecked in the middle of the ocean. It appears that even in the upper planetary system, such calamities occasionally take place. The upper planetary system in the creation of the Lord is certainly not vacant or devoid of living entities. From Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we understand that every planet is full of living entities, just as earth is. There is no reason to accept that on other planetary systems there are no living beings.





TEXT 26



tatas turāṣāḍ iṣu-baddha-pañjarād

vinirgataḥ sāśva-ratha-dhvajāgraṇīḥ

babhau diśaḥ khaṁ pṛthivīṁ ca rocayan

sva-tejasā sūrya iva kṣapātyaye

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; turāṣāṭ-another name of Indra; iṣu-baddha-pañjarāt-from the cage of the network of arrows; vinirgataḥ-being released; sa-with; aśva-horses; ratha-chariot; dhvaja-flag; agraṇīḥ-and chariot driver; babhau-became; diśaḥ-all directions; kham-the sky; pṛthivīm-the earth; ca-and; rocayan-pleasing everywhere; sva-tejasā-by his personal effulgence; sūryaḥ-the sun; iva-like; kṣapā-atyaye-at the end of night.





Thereafter, Indra released himself from the cage of the network of arrows. Appearing with his chariot, flag, horses and chariot driver and thus pleasing the sky, the earth and all directions, he shone effulgently like the sun at the end of night. Indra was bright and beautiful in the vision of everyone.





TEXT 27



nirīkṣya pṛtanāṁ devaḥ

parair abhyarditāṁ raṇe

udayacchad ripuṁ hantuṁ

vajraṁ vajra-dharo ruṣā

SYNONYMS



nirīkṣya-after observing; pṛtanām-his own soldiers; devaḥ-the demigod Indra; paraiḥ-by the enemies; abhyarditām-put into great difficulties or oppressed; raṇe-in the battlefield; udayacchat-took up; ripum-the enemies; hantum-to kill; vajram-the thunderbolt; vajra-dharaḥ-the carrier of the thunderbolt; ruṣā-in great anger.





When Indra, who is known as Vajra-dhara, the carrier of the thunderbolt, saw his own soldiers so oppressed by the enemies on the battlefield, he became very angry. Thus he took up his thunderbolt to kill the enemies.





TEXT 28



sa tenaivāṣṭa-dhāreṇa

śirasī bala-pākayoḥ

jñātīnāṁ paśyatāṁ rājañ

jahāra janayan bhayam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Indra); tena-by that; eva-indeed; aṣṭa-dhāreṇa-by the thunderbolt; śirasī-the two heads; bala-pākayoḥ-of the two demons known as Bala and Pāka; jñātīnām paśyatām-while their relatives and soldiers were watching; rājan-O King; jahāra-(Indra) cut off; janayan-creating; bhayam-fear (among them).





O King Parīkṣit, King Indra used his thunderbolt to cut off the heads of both Bala and Pāka in the presence of all their relatives and followers. In this way he created a very fearful atmosphere on the battlefield.





TEXT 29



namucis tad-vadhaṁ dṛṣṭvā

śokāmarṣa-ruṣānvitaḥ

jighāṁsur indraṁ nṛpate

cakāra paramodyamam

SYNONYMS



namuciḥ-the demon Namuci; tat-of those two demons; vadham-the massacre; dṛṣṭvā-after seeing; śoka-amarṣa-lamentation and grief; ruṣā-anvitaḥ-being very angry at this; jighāṁsuḥ-wanted to kill; indram-King Indra; nṛ-pate-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; cakāra-made; parama-a great; udyamam-endeavor.





O King, when Namuci, another demon, saw the killing of both Bala and Pāka, he was full of grief and lamentation. Thus he angrily made a great attempt to kill Indra.





TEXT 30



aśmasāramayaṁ śūlaṁ

ghaṇṭāvad dhema-bhūṣaṇam

pragṛhyābhyadravat kruddho

hato 'sīti vitarjayan

prāhiṇod deva-rājāya

ninadan mṛga-rāḍ iva

SYNONYMS



aśmasāra-mayam-made of steel; śūlam-a spear; ghaṇṭā-vat-bound with bells; hema-bhūṣaṇam-decorated with ornaments of gold; pragṛhya-taking in his hand; abhyadravat-forcefully went; kruddhaḥ-in an angry mood; hataḥ asi iti-now you are killed; vitarjayan-roaring like that; prāhiṇot-struck; deva-rājāya-unto King Indra; ninadan-resounding; mṛga-rāṭ-a lion; iva-like.





Being angry and roaring like a lion, the demon Namuci took up a steel spear, which was bound with bells and decorated with ornaments of gold. He loudly cried, "Now you are killed!" Thus coming before Indra to kill him, Namuci released his weapon.





TEXT 31



tadāpatad gagana-tale mahā-javaṁ

vicicchide harir iṣubhiḥ sahasradhā

tam āhanan nṛpa kuliśena kandhare

ruṣānvitas tridaśa-patiḥ śiro haran

SYNONYMS



tadā-at that time; apatat-falling like a meteor; gagana-tale-beneath the sky or on the ground; mahā-javam-extremely powerful; vicicchide-cut to pieces; hariḥ-Indra; iṣubhiḥ-by his arrows; sahasradhā-into thousands of pieces; tam-that Namuci; āhanat-struck; nṛpa-O King; kuliśena-with his thunderbolt; kandhare-on the shoulder; ruṣā-anvitaḥ-being very angry; tridaśa-patiḥ-Indra, the King of the demigods; śiraḥ-the head; haran-to separate.





O King, when Indra, King of heaven, saw this very powerful spear falling toward the ground like a blazing meteor, he immediately cut it to pieces with his arrows. Then, being very angry, he struck Namuci's shoulder with his thunderbolt to cut off Namuci's head.





TEXT 32



na tasya hi tvacam api vajra ūrjito

bibheda yaḥ sura-patinaujaseritaḥ

tad adbhutaṁ param ativīrya-vṛtra-bhit

tiraskṛto namuci-śirodhara-tvacā

SYNONYMS



na-not; tasya-of him (Namuci); hi-indeed; tvacam api-even the skin; vajraḥ-the thunderbolt; ūrjitaḥ-very powerful; bibheda-could pierce; yaḥ-the weapon which; sura-patinā-by the king of the demigods; ojasā-very forcefully; īritaḥ-had been released; tat-therefore; adbhutam param-it was extraordinarily wonderful; ativīrya-vṛtra-bhit-so powerful that it could pierce the body of the very powerful Vṛtrāsura; tiraskṛtaḥ-(now in the future) which had been repelled; namuci-śirodhara-tvacā-by the skin of Namuci's neck.





Although King Indra hurled his thunderbolt at Namuci with great force, it could not even pierce his skin. It is very wonderful that the famed thunderbolt that had pierced the body of Vṛtrāsura could not even slightly injure the skin of Namuci's neck.





TEXT 33



tasmād indro 'bibhec chatror

vajraḥ pratihato yataḥ

kim idaṁ daiva-yogena

bhūtaṁ loka-vimohanam

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; indraḥ-the King of heaven; abibhet-became very fearful; śatroḥ-from the enemy (Namuci); vajraḥ-the thunderbolt; pratihataḥ-was unable to hit and returned; yataḥ-because; kim idam-what is this; daiva-yogena-by some superior force; bhūtam-it has happened; loka-vimohanam-so wonderful to the people in general.





When Indra saw the thunderbolt return from the enemy, he was very much afraid. He began to wonder whether this had happened because of some miraculous superior power.





Indra's thunderbolt is invincible, and therefore when Indra saw that it had returned without doing any injury to Namuci, he was certainly very much afraid.





TEXT 34



yena me pūrvam adrīṇāṁ

pakṣa-cchedaḥ prajātyaye

kṛto niviśatāṁ bhāraiḥ

patattraiḥ patatāṁ bhuvi

SYNONYMS



yena-by the same thunderbolt; me-by me; pūrvam-formerly; adrīṇām-of the mountains; pakṣa-cchedaḥ-the cutting of the wings; prajā-atyaye-when there was killing of the people in general; kṛtaḥ-was done; niviśatām-of those mountains which entered; bhāraiḥ-by the great weight; patattraiḥ-by wings; patatām-falling; bhuvi-on the ground.





Indra thought: Formerly, when many mountains flying in the sky with wings would fall to the ground and kill people, I cut their wings with this same thunderbolt.





TEXT 35



tapaḥ-sāramayaṁ tvāṣṭraṁ

vṛtro yena vipāṭitaḥ

anye cāpi balopetāḥ

sarvāstrair akṣata-tvacaḥ

SYNONYMS



tapaḥ-austerities; sāra-mayam-greatly powerful; tvāṣṭram-performed by Tvaṣṭā; vṛtraḥ-Vṛtrāsura; yena-by which; vipāṭitaḥ-was killed; anye-others; ca-also; api-indeed; bala-upetāḥ-very powerful persons; sarva-all kinds; astraiḥ-by weapons; akṣata-without being injured; tvacaḥ-their skin.





Vṛtrāsura was the essence of the austerities undergone by Tvaṣṭā, yet the thunderbolt killed him. Indeed, not only he but also many other stalwart heroes, whose very skin could not be injured even by all kinds of weapons, were killed by the same thunderbolt.





TEXT 36



so 'yaṁ pratihato vajro

mayā mukto 'sure 'lpake

nāhaṁ tad ādade daṇḍaṁ

brahma-tejo 'py akāraṇam

SYNONYMS



saḥ ayam-therefore, this thunderbolt; pratihataḥ-repelled; vajraḥ-thunderbolt; mayā-by me; muktaḥ-released; asure-unto that demon; alpake-less important; na-not; aham-I; tat-that; ādade-hold; daṇḍam-it is now just like a rod; brahma-tejaḥ-as powerful as a brahmāstra; api-although; akāraṇam-now it is useless.





But now, although the same thunderbolt has been released against a less important demon, it has been ineffectual. Therefore, although it was as good as a brahmāstra, it has now become useless like an ordinary rod. I shall therefore hold it no longer.





TEXT 37



iti śakraṁ viṣīdantam

āha vāg aśarīriṇī

nāyaṁ śuṣkair atho nārdrair

vadham arhati dānavaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-in this way; śakram-unto Indra; viṣīdantam-lamenting; āha-spoke; vāk-a voice; aśarīriṇī-without any body, or from the sky; na-not; ayam-this; śuṣkaiḥ-by anything dry; atho-also; na-nor; ārdraiḥ-by anything moist; vadham-annihilation; arhati-is befitting; dānavaḥ-this demon (Namuci).





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: While the morose Indra was lamenting in this way, an ominous, unembodied voice said from the sky, "This demon Namuci is not to be annihilated by anything dry or moist."





TEXT 38



mayāsmai yad varo datto

mṛtyur naivārdra-śuṣkayoḥ

ato 'nyaś cintanīyas te

upāyo maghavan ripoḥ

SYNONYMS



mayā-by me; asmai-unto him; yat-because; varaḥ-a benediction; dattaḥ-has been granted; mṛtyuḥ-death; na-not; eva-indeed; ārdra-by either a moist; śuṣkayoḥ-or by a dry medium; ataḥ-therefore; anyaḥ-something else, another; cintanīyaḥ-has to be thought of; te-by you; upāyaḥ-means; maghavan-O Indra; ripoḥ-of your enemy.





The voice also said, "O Indra, because I have given this demon the benediction that he will never be killed by any weapon that is dry or moist, you have to think of another way to kill him."





TEXT 39



tāṁ daivīṁ giram ākarṇya

maghavān susamāhitaḥ

dhyāyan phenam athāpaśyad

upāyam ubhayātmakam

SYNONYMS



tām-that; daivīm-ominous; giram-voice; ākarṇya-after hearing; maghavān-Lord Indra; su-samāhitaḥ-becoming very careful; dhyāyan-meditating; phenam-appearance of foam; atha-thereafter; apaśyat-he saw; upāyam-the means; ubhaya-ātmakam-simultaneously dry and moist.





After hearing the ominous voice, Indra, with great attention, began to meditate on how to kill the demon. He then saw that foam would be the means, for it is neither moist nor dry.





TEXT 40



na śuṣkeṇa na cārdreṇa

jahāra namuceḥ śiraḥ

taṁ tuṣṭuvur muni-gaṇā

mālyaiś cāvākiran vibhum

SYNONYMS



na-neither; śuṣkeṇa-by dry means; na-nor; ca-also; ārdreṇa-by a moist weapon; jahāra-he separated; namuceḥ-of Namuci; śiraḥ-the head; tam-him (Indra); tuṣṭuvuḥ-satisfied; muni-gaṇāḥ-all the sages; mālyaiḥ-with flower garlands; ca-also; avākiran-covered; vibhum-that great personality.





Thus Indra, King of heaven, severed Namuci's head with a weapon of foam, which was neither dry nor moist. Then all the sages satisfied Indra, the exalted personality, by showering flowers and garlands upon him, almost covering him.





In this regard, the śruti-mantras say, apāṁ phenena namuceḥ śira indro 'dārayat: Indra killed Namuci with watery foam, which is neither moist nor dry.





TEXT 41



gandharva-mukhyau jagatur

viśvāvasu-parāvasū

deva-dundubhayo nedur

nartakyo nanṛtur mudā

SYNONYMS



gandharva-mukhyau-the two chiefs of the Gandharvas; jagatuḥ-began to sing nice songs; viśvāvasu-named Viśvāvasu; parāvasū-named Parāvasu; deva-dundubhayaḥ-the kettledrums beaten by the demigods; neduḥ-made their sound; nartakyaḥ-the dancers known as Apsarās; nanṛtuḥ-began to dance; mudā-in great happiness.





Viśvāvasu and Parāvasu, the two chiefs of the Gandharvas, sang in great happiness. The kettledrums of the demigods sounded, and the Apsarās danced in jubilation.





TEXT 42



anye 'py evaṁ pratidvandvān

vāyv-agni-varuṇādayaḥ

sūdayām āsur asurān

mṛgān kesariṇo yathā

SYNONYMS



anye-others; api-also; evam-in this way; pratidvandvān-the opposing party of belligerants; vāyu-the demigod known as Vāyu; agni-the demigod known as Agni; varuṇa-ādayaḥ-the demigod known as Varuṇa and others; sūdayām āsuḥ-began to kill vigorously; asurān-all the demons; mṛgān-deer; kesariṇaḥ-lions; yathā-just as.





Vāyu, Agni, Varuṇa and other demigods began killing the demons who opposed them, just as lions kill deer in a forest.





TEXT 43



brahmaṇā preṣito devān

devarṣir nārado nṛpa

vārayām āsa vibudhān

dṛṣṭvā dānava-saṅkṣayam

SYNONYMS



brahmaṇā-by Lord Brahmā; preṣitaḥ-sent; devān-unto the demigods; deva-ṛṣiḥ-the great sage of the heavenly planets; nāradaḥ-Nārada Muni; nṛpa-O King; vārayām āsa-forbade; vibudhān-all the demigods; dṛṣṭvā-after seeing; dānava-saṅkṣayam-the total annihilation of the demons.





O King, when Lord Brahmā saw the imminent total annihilation of the demons, he sent a message with Nārada, who went before the demigods to make them stop fighting.





TEXT 44



śrī-nārada uvāca

bhavadbhir amṛtaṁ prāptaṁ

nārāyaṇa-bhujāśrayaiḥ

śriyā samedhitāḥ sarva

upāramata vigrahāt

SYNONYMS



śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca-Nārada Muni prayed to the demigods; bhavadbhiḥ-by all of you; amṛtam-nectar; prāptam-has been obtained; nārāyaṇa-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuja-āśrayaiḥ-being protected by the arms; śriyā-by all fortune; samedhitāḥ-have flourished; sarve-all of you; upāramata-now cease; vigrahāt-from this fighting.





The great sage Nārada said: All of you demigods are protected by the arms of Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by His grace you have gotten the nectar. By the grace of the goddess of fortune, you are glorious in every way. Therefore, please stop this fighting.





TEXT 45



śrī-śuka uvāca

saṁyamya manyu-saṁrambhaṁ

mānayanto muner vacaḥ

upagīyamānānucarair

yayuḥ sarve triviṣṭapam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saṁyamya-controlling; manyu-of anger; saṁrambham-the aggravation; mānayantaḥ-accepting; muneḥ vacaḥ-the words of Nārada Muni; upagīyamāna-being praised; anucaraiḥ-by their followers; yayuḥ-returned; sarve-all of the demigods; triviṣṭapam-to the heavenly planets.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Accepting the words of Nārada, the demigods gave up their anger and stopped fighting. Being praised by their followers, they returned to their heavenly planets.





TEXT 46



ye 'vaśiṣṭā raṇe tasmin

nāradānumatena te

baliṁ vipannam ādāya

astaṁ girim upāgaman

SYNONYMS



ye-some of the demons who; avaśiṣṭāḥ-remained; raṇe-in the fight; tasmin-in that; nārada-anumatena-by the order of Nārada; te-all of them; balim-Mahārāja Bali; vipannam-in reverses; ādāya-taking; astam-named Asta; girim-to the mountain; upāgaman-went.





Following the order of Nārada Muni, whatever demons remained on the battlefield took Bali Mahārāja, who was in a precarious condition, to the hill known as Astagiri.





TEXT 47



tatrāvinaṣṭāvayavān

vidyamāna-śirodharān

uśanā jīvayām āsa

saṁjīvanyā sva-vidyayā

SYNONYMS



tatra-on that hill; avinaṣṭa-avayavān-the demons who had been killed but whose bodily parts had not been lost; vidyamāna-śirodharān-whose heads were still existing on their bodies; uśanāḥ-Śukrācārya; jīvayām āsa-brought to life; saṁjīvanyā-by the Saṁjīvanī mantra; sva-vidyayā-by his own achievement.





There, on that hill, Śukrācārya brought to life all the dead demoniac soldiers who had not lost their heads, trunks and limbs. He achieved this by his own mantra, known as Saṁjīvanī.





TEXT 48



baliś cośanasā spṛṣṭaḥ

pratyāpannendriya-smṛtiḥ

parājito 'pi nākhidyal

loka-tattva-vicakṣaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



baliḥ-Mahārāja Bali; ca-also; uśanasā-by Śukrācārya; spṛṣṭaḥ-being touched; pratyāpanna-was brought back; indriya-smṛtiḥ-realization of the actions of the senses and memory; parājitaḥ-he was defeated; api-although; na akhidyat-he did not lament; loka-tattva-vicakṣaṇaḥ-because he was very experienced in universal affairs.





Bali Mahārāja was very experienced in universal affairs. When he regained his senses and memory by the grace of Śukrācārya, he could understand everything that had happened. Therefore, although he had been defeated, he did not lament.





It is significant that Bali Mahārāja is here said to be very experienced. Although defeated, he was not at all sorry, for he knew that nothing can take place without the sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Since he was a devotee, he accepted his defeat without lamentation. As stated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Bhagavad-gītā (2.47), karmaṇy evādhikāras te mā phaleṣu kadācana. Everyone in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should execute his duty, without regard for victory or defeat. One must execute his duty as ordered by Kṛṣṇa or His representative, the spiritual master. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā. In first-class devotional service, one always abides by the orders and will of Kṛṣṇa.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Indra Annihilates the Demons."



Chapter Twelve



The Mohinī-mūrti Incarnation Bewilders Lord Śiva





This chapter describes how Lord Śiva was bewildered upon seeing the beautiful Mohinī-mūrti incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and how he later came to his senses. When Lord Śiva heard about the pastimes performed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in the form of an attractive woman, he mounted his bull and went to see the Lord. Accompanied by his wife, Umā, and his servants, the bhūta-gaṇa, or ghosts, he approached the lotus feet of the Lord. Lord Śiva offered obeisances to the Supreme Lord as the all-pervading Lord, the universal form, the supreme controller of creation, the Supersoul, the resting place for everyone, and the completely independent cause of all causes. Thus he offered prayers giving truthful descriptions of the Lord. Then he expressed his desire. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is very kind to His devotees. Therefore, to fulfill the desire of His devotee Lord Śiva, He expanded His energy and manifested Himself in the form of a very beautiful and attractive woman. Upon seeing this form, even Lord Śiva was captivated. Later, by the grace of the Lord, he controlled himself. This demonstrates that by the power of the Lord's external energy, everyone is captivated by the form of woman in this material world. Again, however, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can overcome the influence of māyā. This was evinced by Lord Śiva, the topmost devotee of the Lord. First he was captivated, but later, by the grace of the Lord, he restrained himself. It is declared in this connection that only a pure devotee can restrain himself from the attractive feature of māyā. Otherwise, once a living entity is trapped by the external feature of māyā, he cannot overcome it. After Lord Śiva was graced by the Supreme Lord, he circumambulated the Lord along with his wife, Bhavānī, and his companions, the ghosts. Then he left for his own abode. Śukadeva Gosvāmī concludes this chapter by describing the transcendental qualities of Uttamaśloka, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by declaring that one can glorify the Lord by nine kinds of devotional service, beginning with śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ





TEXTS 1–2



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

vṛṣa-dhvajo niśamyedaṁ

yoṣid-rūpeṇa dānavān

mohayitvā sura-gaṇān

hariḥ somam apāyayat

vṛṣam āruhya giriśaḥ



sarva-bhūta-gaṇair vṛtaḥ

saha devyā yayau draṣṭuṁ

yatrāste madhusūdanaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vṛṣa-dhvajaḥ-Lord Śiva, who is carried by a bull; niśamya-hearing; idam-this (news); yoṣit-rūpeṇa-by assuming the form of a woman; dānavān-the demons; mohayitvā-enchanting; sura-gaṇān-unto the demigods; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; somam-nectar; apāyayat-caused to drink; vṛṣam-the bull; āruhya-mounting; giriśaḥ-Lord Śiva; sarva-all; bhūta-gaṇaiḥ-by the ghosts; vṛtaḥ-surrounded; saha devyā-with Umā; yayau-went; draṣṭum-to see; yatra-where; āste-stays; madhusūdanaḥ-Lord Viṣṇu.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in the form of a woman, captivated the demons and enabled the demigods to drink the nectar. After hearing of these pastimes, Lord Śiva, who is carried by a bull, went to the place where Madhusūdana, the Lord, resides. Accompanied by his wife, Umā, and surrounded by his companions, the ghosts, Lord Śiva went there to see the Lord's form as a woman.





TEXT 3



sabhājito bhagavatā

sādaraṁ somayā bhavaḥ

sūpaviṣṭa uvācedaṁ

pratipūjya smayan harim

SYNONYMS



sabhājitaḥ-well received; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; sa-ādaram-with great respect (as befitting Lord Śiva); sa-umayā-with Umā; bhavaḥ-Lord Śambhu (Lord Śiva); su-upaviṣṭaḥ-being comfortably situated; uvāca-said; idam-this; pratipūjya-offering respect; smayan-smiling; harim-unto the Lord.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead welcomed Lord Śiva and Umā with great respect, and after being seated comfortably, Lord Śiva duly worshiped the Lord and smilingly spoke as follows.





TEXT 4



śrī-mahādeva uvāca

deva-deva jagad-vyāpiñ

jagad-īśa jagan-maya

sarveṣām api bhāvānāṁ

tvam ātmā hetur īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-mahādevaḥ uvāca-Lord Śiva (Mahādeva) said; deva-deva-O best demigod among the demigods; jagat-vyāpin-O all-pervading Lord; jagat-īśa-O master of the universe; jagat-maya-O my Lord, who are transformed by Your energy into this creation; sarveṣām api-all kinds of; bhāvānām-situations; tvam-You; ātmā-the moving force; hetuḥ-because of this; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Lord, Parameśvara.





Lord Mahādeva said: O chief demigod among the demigods, O all-pervading Lord, master of the universe, by Your energy You are transformed into the creation. You are the root and efficient cause of everything. You are not material. Indeed, You are the Supersoul or supreme living force of everything. Therefore, You are Parameśvara, the supreme controller of all controllers.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, resides within the material world as the sattva-guṇa-avatāra. Lord Śiva is the tamo-guṇa-avatāra, and Lord Brahmā is the rajo-guṇa-avatāra, but although Lord Viṣṇu is among them, He is not in the same category. Lord Viṣṇu is deva-deva, the chief of all the demigods. Since Lord Śiva is in this material world, the energy of the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, includes Lord Śiva. Lord Viṣṇu is therefore called jagad-vyāpī, "the all-pervading Lord." Lord Śiva is sometimes called Maheśvara, and so people think that Lord Śiva is everything. But here Lord Śiva addresses Lord Viṣṇu as Jagad-īśa, "the master of the universe." Lord Śiva is sometimes called Viśveśvara, but here he addresses Lord Viṣṇu as Jagan-maya, indicating that even Viśveśvara is under Lord Viṣṇu's control. Lord Viṣṇu is the master of the spiritual world, yet He controls the material world also, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacarācaram [Bg. 9.10]). Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva are also sometimes called īśvara, but the supreme īśvara is Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Kṛṣṇa. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā, īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ: [Bs. 5.1] the Supreme Lord is Kṛṣṇa, Lord Viṣṇu. Everything in existence works in proper order because of Lord Viṣṇu. Aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham. Even paramāṇu, the small atoms, work because of Lord Viṣṇu's presence within them.





TEXT 5



ādy-antāv asya yan madhyam

idam anyad ahaṁ bahiḥ

yato 'vyayasya naitāni

tat satyaṁ brahma cid bhavān

SYNONYMS



ādi-the beginning; antau-and the end; asya-of this manifested cosmos or of anything material or visible; yat-that which; madhyam-between the beginning and the end, the sustenance; idam-this cosmic manifestation; anyat-anything other than You; aham-the wrong mental conception; bahiḥ-outside of You; yataḥ-because of; avyayasya-the inexhaustible; na-not; etāni-all these differences; tat-that; satyam-the Absolute Truth; brahma-the Supreme; cit-spiritual; bhavān-Your Lordship.





The manifest, the unmanifest, false ego and the beginning, maintenance and annihilation of this cosmic manifestation all come from You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But because You are the Absolute Truth, the supreme absolute spirit soul, the Supreme Brahman, such changes as birth, death and sustenance do not exist in You.





According to the Vedic mantras, yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante: everything is an emanation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (7.4):



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā





"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego-all together these eight comprise My separated material energies." In other words, the ingredients of the cosmic manifestation also consist of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This does not mean, however, that because the ingredients come from Him, He is no longer complete. pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate: "Because He is the complete whole, even though so many complete units emanate from Him, He remains the complete balance." Thus the Lord is called avyaya, inexhaustible. Unless we accept the Absolute Truth as acintya-bhedābheda, simultaneously one and different, we cannot have a clear conception of the Absolute Truth. The Lord is the root of everything. Aham ādir hi devānām: He is the original cause of all the devas, or demigods. Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ: everything emanates from Him. In all cases-nominative, objective, positive, negative and so on-whatever we may conceive of in this entire cosmic manifestation is in fact the Supreme Lord. For Him there are no such distinctions as "this is mine, and this belongs to someone else," because He is everything. He is therefore called avyaya-changeless and inexhaustible. Because the Supreme Lord is avyaya, He is the Absolute Truth, the fully spiritual Supreme Brahman.





TEXT 6



tavaiva caraṇāmbhojaṁ

śreyas-kāmā nirāśiṣaḥ

visṛjyobhayataḥ saṅgaṁ

munayaḥ samupāsate

SYNONYMS



tava-Your; eva-indeed; caraṇa-ambhojam-lotus feet; śreyaḥ-kāmāḥ-persons desiring the ultimate auspiciousness, the ultimate goal of life; nirāśiṣaḥ-without material desire; visṛjya-giving up; ubhayataḥ-in this life and the next; saṅgam-attachment; munayaḥ-great sages; samupāsate-worship.





Pure devotees or great saintly persons who desire to achieve the highest goal in life and who are completely free from all material desires for sense gratification engage constantly in the transcendental service of Your lotus feet.





One is in the material world when he thinks, "I am this body, and everything with reference to my body is mine." Ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. This is the symptom of material life. In the materialistic conception of life, one thinks, "This is my house, this is my land, this is my family, this is my state," and so on. But those who are munayaḥ, saintly persons following in the footsteps of Nārada Muni, simply engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without any personal desire for sense gratification. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.111.1.11]. Either in this life or in the next, the only concern of such saintly devotees is to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus they are also absolute because they have no other desires. Being freed from the dualities of material desire, they are called śreyas-kāmāḥ. In other words, they are not concerned with dharma (religiosity), artha (economic development), or kāma (sense gratification). The only concern of such devotees is mokṣa, liberation. This mokṣa does not refer to becoming one with the Supreme like the Māyāvādī philosophers. Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained that real mokṣa means taking shelter of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead. The Lord clearly explained this fact while instructing Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya wanted to correct the word mukti-pade in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu informed him that there is no need to correct any word in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He explained that mukti-pade refers to the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who offers mukti and is therefore called Mukunda. A pure devotee is not concerned with material things. He is not concerned with religiosity, economic development or sense gratification. He is interested only in serving the lotus feet of the Lord.





TEXT 7



tvaṁ brahma pūrṇam amṛtaṁ viguṇaṁ viśokam

ānanda-mātram avikāram ananyad anyat

viśvasya hetur udaya-sthiti-saṁyamānām

ātmeśvaraś ca tad-apekṣatayānapekṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



tvam-Your Lordship; brahma-the all-pervading Absolute Truth; pūrṇam-fully complete; amṛtam-never to be vanquished; viguṇam-spiritually situated, free from the material modes of nature; viśokam-without lamentation; ānanda-mātram-always in transcendental bliss; avikāram-changeless; ananyat-separated from everything; anyat-yet You are everything; viśvasya-of the cosmic manifestation; hetuḥ-the cause; udaya-of the beginning; sthiti-maintenance; saṁyamānām-and of all the directors controlling the various departments of the cosmic manifestation; ātma-īśvaraḥ-the Supersoul giving direction to everyone; ca-also; tat-apekṣatayā-everyone depends upon You; anapekṣaḥ-always fully independent.





My Lord, You are the Supreme Brahman, complete in everything. Being completely spiritual, You are eternal, free from the material modes of nature, and full of transcendental bliss. Indeed, for You there is no question of lamentation. Since You are the supreme cause, the cause of all causes, nothing can exist without You. Yet we are different from You in a relationship of cause and effect, for in one sense the cause and effect are different. You are the original cause of creation, manifestation and annihilation, and You bestow benedictions upon all living entities. Everyone depends upon You for the results of his activities, but You are always independent.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.4):



mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ

jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ





"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them." This explains the philosophy of simultaneous oneness and difference, known as acintya-bhedābheda. Everything is the Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, yet the Supreme Person is differently situated from everything. Indeed, because the Lord is differently situated from everything material, He is the Supreme Brahman, the supreme cause, the supreme controller. Īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ [Bs. 5.1]. The Lord is the supreme cause, and His form has nothing to do with the material modes of nature. The devotee prays: "As Your devotee is completely free from all desires, Your Lordship is also completely free from desires. You are fully independent. Although all living entities engage in Your service, You do not depend on the service of anyone. Although this material world is created complete by You, everything depends on Your sanction. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: [Bg. 15.15] remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness come from You. Nothing can be done independently, yet You act independently of the service rendered by Your servants. The living entities depend on Your mercy for liberation, but when You want to give them liberation, You do not depend on anyone else. Indeed, by Your causeless mercy, You can give liberation to anyone. Those who receive Your mercy are called kṛpā-siddha. To reach the platform of perfection takes many, many lives (bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]). Nonetheless, even without undergoing severe austerities, one can attain perfection by Your mercy. Devotional service should be unmotivated and free from impediments (ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati). This is the position of nirāśiṣaḥ, or freedom from expectations for results. A pure devotee continuously offers transcendental loving service to You, but You may nonetheless offer mercy to anyone, without depending on his service."





TEXT 8



ekas tvam eva sad asad dvayam advayaṁ ca

svarṇaṁ kṛtākṛtam iveha na vastu-bhedaḥ

ajñānatas tvayi janair vihito vikalpo

yasmād guṇa-vyatikaro nirupādhikasya

SYNONYMS



ekaḥ-the only one; tvam-Your Lordship; eva-indeed; sat-which is existing, as the effect; asat-which is nonexistent, as the cause; dvayam-both of them; advayam-without duality; ca-and; svarṇam-gold; kṛta-manufactured into different forms; ākṛtam-the original source of gold (the gold mine); iva-like; iha-in this world; na-not; vastu-bhedaḥ-difference in the substance; ajñānataḥ-only because of ignorance; tvayi-unto You; janaiḥ-by the general mass of people; vihitaḥ-it should be done; vikalpaḥ-differentiation; yasmāt-because of; guṇa-vyatikaraḥ-free from the differences created by the material modes of nature; nirupādhikasya-without any material designation.





My dear Lord, Your Lordship alone is the cause and the effect. Therefore, although You appear to be two, You are the absolute one. As there is no difference between the gold of a golden ornament and the gold in a mine, there is no difference between cause and effect; both of them are the same. Only because of ignorance do people concoct differences and dualities. You are free from material contamination, and since the entire cosmos is caused by You and cannot exist without You, it is an effect of Your transcendental qualities. Thus the conception that Brahman is true and the world false cannot be maintained.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that the living entities are representations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's marginal potency whereas the various bodies accepted by the living entities are products of the material energy. Thus the body is considered material, and the soul is considered spiritual. The origin of them both, however, is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord explains in Bhagavad-gītā (7.4–5):



bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ

khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me

bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā





apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat





"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego-all together these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine, which consists of all living entities who are struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe." Thus both matter and the living entities are manifestations of energy of the Supreme Lord. Since the energy and the energetic are not different and since the material and marginal energies are both energies of the supreme energetic, the Supreme Lord, ultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead is everything. In this regard, the example may be given of gold that has not been molded and gold that has been molded into various ornaments. A gold earring and the gold in a mine are different only as cause and effect; otherwise they are the same. The Vedānta-sūtra describes that Brahman is the cause of everything. Janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]. Everything is born of the Supreme Brahman, from which everything emanates as different energies. None of these energies, therefore, should be considered false. The Māyāvādīs' differentiation between Brahman and māyā is only due to ignorance.



Śrīmad Vīrarāghava Ācārya, in his Bhāgavata-candra-candrikā, describes the Vaiṣṇava philosophy as follows. The cosmic manifestation is described as sat and asat, as cit and acit. Matter is acit, and the living force is cit, but their origin is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in whom there is no difference between matter and spirit. According to this conception, the cosmic manifestation, consisting of both matter and spirit, is not different from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān ivetaraḥ: "This cosmic manifestation is also the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although it appears different from Him." In Bhagavad-gītā (9.4) the Lord says:



mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ

jagad avyakta-mūrtinā

mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni

na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ





"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them." Thus although someone may say that the Supreme Person is different from the cosmic manifestation, actually He is not. The Lord says, mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam: "In My impersonal feature I am spread throughout the world." Therefore, this world is not different from Him. The difference is a difference in names. For example, whether we speak of gold earrings, gold bangles or gold necklaces, ultimately they are all gold. In a similar way, all the different manifestations of matter and spirit are ultimately one in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. ekam evādvitīyaṁ brahma. This is the Vedic version (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1). There is oneness because everything emanates from the Supreme Brahman. The example already given is that there is no difference between a golden earring and the gold mine as it is. The Vaiśeṣika philosophers, however, because of their Māyāvāda conception, create differences. They say, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "The Absolute Truth is real, and the cosmic manifestation is false." But why should the jagat be considered mithyā? The jagat is an emanation from Brahman. Therefore the jagat is also truth.



Vaiṣṇavas, therefore, do not consider the jagat to be mithyā; rather, they regard everything as reality in connection with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



anāsaktasya viṣayān

yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe

yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate





prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate





"Things should be accepted for the Lord's service and not for one's personal sense gratification. If one accepts something without attachment and accepts it because it is related to Kṛṣṇa, one's renunciation is called yuktaṁ vairāgyam. Whatever is favorable for the rendering of service to the Lord should be accepted and should not be rejected as a material thing." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.255–256) The jagat should not be rejected as mithyā. It is truth, and the truth is realized when everything is engaged in the service of the Lord. A flower accepted for one's sense gratification is material, but when the same flower is offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a devotee, it is spiritual. Food taken and cooked for oneself is material, but food cooked for the Supreme Lord is spiritual prasāda. This is a question of realization. Actually, everything is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore everything is spiritual, but those who are not advanced in proper knowledge make distinctions because of the interactions of the three modes of material nature. In this regard, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that although the sun is the only light, the sunshine, which is exhibited in seven colors, and darkness, which is the absence of sunshine, are not different from the sun, for without the existence of the sun such differentiations cannot exist. There may be varied nomenclature because of different conditions, but they are all the sun. The purāṇas therefore say:



eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner

jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis

tathedam akhilaṁ jagat





"Just as the illumination of a fire, which is situated in one place, is spread all over, the energies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman, are spread all over this universe." (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.22.53) Materially, we can directly perceive the sunshine spreading itself according to different names and activities, but ultimately the sun is one. Similarly, sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma: everything is an expansion of the Supreme Brahman. Therefore, the Supreme Lord is everything, and He is one without differentiation. There is no existence separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 9



tvāṁ brahma kecid avayanty uta dharmam eke

eke paraṁ sad-asatoḥ puruṣaṁ pareśam

anye 'vayanti nava-śakti-yutaṁ paraṁ tvāṁ

kecin mahā-puruṣam avyayam ātma-tantram

SYNONYMS



tvām-You; brahma-the supreme truth, the Absolute Truth, Brahman; kecit-some people, namely the group of Māyāvādīs known as the Vedāntists; avayanti-consider; uta-certainly; dharmam-religion; eke-some others; eke-some others; param-transcendental; sat-asatoḥ-to both cause and effect; puruṣam-the Supreme person; pareśam-the supreme controller; anye-others; avayanti-describe; nava-śakti-yutam-endowed with nine potencies; param-transcendental; tvām-unto You; kecit-some; mahā-puruṣam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; avyayam-without loss of energy; ātma-tantram-supremely independent.





Those who are known as the impersonalist Vedāntists regard You as the impersonal Brahman. Others, known as the Mīmāṁsaka philosophers, regard You as religion. The Sāṅkhya philosophers regard You as the transcendental person who is beyond prakṛti and puruṣa and who is the controller of even the demigods. The followers of the codes of devotional service known as the Pañcarātras regard You as being endowed with nine different potencies. And the Patañjala philosophers, the followers of Patañjali Muni, regard You as the supreme independent Personality of Godhead, who has no equal or superior.





TEXT 10



nāhaṁ parāyur ṛṣayo na marīci-mukhyā

jānanti yad-viracitaṁ khalu sattva-sargāḥ

yan-māyayā muṣita-cetasa īśa daitya-

martyādayaḥ kim uta śaśvad-abhadra-vṛttāḥ

SYNONYMS



na-neither; aham-I; para-āyuḥ-that personality who lives for millions and millions of years (Lord Brahmā); ṛṣayaḥ-the seven ṛṣis of the seven planets; na-nor; marīci-mukhyāḥ-headed by Marīci Ṛṣi; jānanti-know; yat-by whom (the Supreme Lord); viracitam-this universe, which has been created; khalu-indeed; sattva-sargāḥ-although born in the mode of material goodness; yat-māyayā-by the influence of whose energy; muṣita-cetasaḥ-their hearts are bewildered; īśa-O my Lord; daitya-the demons; martya-ādayaḥ-the human beings and others; kim uta-what to speak of; śaśvat-always; abhadra-vṛttāḥ-influenced by the base qualities of material nature.





O my Lord, I, who am considered to be the best of the demigods, and Lord Brahmā and the great ṛṣis, headed by Marīci, are born of the mode of goodness. Nonetheless, we are bewildered by Your illusory energy and cannot understand what this creation is. Aside from us, what is to be said of others, like the demons and human beings, who are in the base modes of material nature [rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa]? How will they know You?





Factually speaking, even those who are situated in the material mode of goodness cannot understand the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What then is to be said of those who are situated in rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, the base qualities of material nature? How can we even imagine the Supreme Personality of Godhead? There are so many philosophers trying to understand the Absolute Truth, but since they are situated in the base qualities of material nature and are addicted to so many bad habits, like drinking, meat-eating, illicit sex and gambling, how can they conceive of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? For them it is impossible. For the present day, the pāñcarātrikī-vidhi as enunciated by Nārada Muni is the only hope. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, therefore, has quoted the following verse from the Brahma-yāmala:



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate

[BRS śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate





"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.1011.2.101]



"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.101) Those who are very advanced in knowledge and are situated in the mode of goodness follow the Vedic instructions of the śruti and smṛti and other religious scriptures, including the pāñcarātrikī-vidhi. Without understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this way, one only creates a disturbance. In this age of Kali, so many gurus have sprung up, and because they do not refer to the śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātrika-vidhi [BRS śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate





"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic literatures like the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and Nārada-pañcarātra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.1011.2.101], they are creating a great disturbance in the world in regard to understanding the Absolute Truth. However, those who follow the pāñcarātrikī-vidhi under the guidance of a proper spiritual master can understand the Absolute Truth. It is said, pañcarātrasya kṛtsnasya vaktā tu bhagavān svayam: the pañcarātra system is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just like Bhagavad-gītā. Vāsudeva-śaraṇā vidur añjasaiva: the truth can be understood only by one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Vāsudeva.



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ





"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare." (Bg. 7.19) Only those who have surrendered to the lotus feet of Vāsudeva can understand the Absolute Truth.



vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam





"By rendering devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one immediately acquires causeless knowledge and detachment from the world." (Bhāg. 1.2.7) Therefore, Vāsudeva, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, personally teaches in Bhagavad-gītā:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja





"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." (Bg. 18.66)



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ





"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service." (Bg. 18.55) The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not properly understood even by Lord Śiva or Lord Brahmā, what to speak of others, but He can be understood by the process of bhakti-yoga.



mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha

yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ

asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ

yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu





(Bg. 7.1)



If one practices bhakti-yoga by taking shelter of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, simply by hearing Vāsudeva speak about Himself, one can understand everything about Him. Indeed, one can understand Him completely (samagram).





TEXT 11



sa tvaṁ samīhitam adaḥ sthiti-janma-nāśaṁ

bhūtehitaṁ ca jagato bhava-bandha-mokṣau

vāyur yathā viśati khaṁ ca carācarākhyaṁ

sarvaṁ tad-ātmakatayāvagamo 'varuntse

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Your Lordship; tvam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samīhitam-which has been created (by You); adaḥ-of this material cosmic manifestation; sthiti-janma-nāśam-creation, maintenance and annihilation; bhūta-of the living entities; īhitam ca-and the different activities or endeavors; jagataḥ-of the whole world; bhava-bandha-mokṣau-in being implicated and being liberated from material complications; vāyuḥ-the air; yathā-as; viśati-enters; kham-in the vast sky; ca-and; cara-acara-ākhyam-and everything, moving and nonmoving; sarvam-everything; tat-that; ātmakatayā-because of Your presence; avagamaḥ-everything is known to You; avaruntse-You are all-pervading and therefore know everything.





My Lord, You are the supreme knowledge personified. You know everything about this creation and its beginning, maintenance and annihilation, and You know all the endeavors made by the living entities, by which they are either implicated in this material world or liberated from it. As the air enters the vast sky and also enters the bodies of all moving and nonmoving entities, You are present everywhere, and therefore You are the knower of all.





As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā:



eko 'py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-sthaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who by one of His plenary portions enters the existence of every universe and every atomic particle and thus manifests His infinite energy unlimitedly throughout the material creation." (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.35)



ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who resides in His own realm, Goloka, with Rādhā, who resembles His own spiritual figure and who embodies the ecstatic potency [hlādinī]. Their companions are Her confidantes, who embody extensions of Her bodily form and who are imbued and permeated with ever-blissful spiritual rasa." (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.37)



Although Govinda is always present in His abode (goloka eva nivasati), He is simultaneously present everywhere. Nothing is unknown to Him, and nothing can be hidden from Him. The example given here compares the Lord to the air, which is within the vast sky and within every body but still is different from everything.





TEXT 12



avatārā mayā dṛṣṭā

ramamāṇasya te guṇaiḥ

so 'haṁ tad draṣṭum icchāmi

yat te yoṣid-vapur dhṛtam

SYNONYMS



avatārāḥ-incarnations; mayā-by me; dṛṣṭāḥ-have been seen; ramamāṇasya-while You demonstrate Your various pastimes; te-of You; guṇaiḥ-by the manifestations of transcendental qualities; saḥ-Lord Śiva; aham-I; tat-that incarnation; draṣṭum icchāmi-wish to see; yat-which; te-of You; yoṣit-vapuḥ-the body of a woman; dhṛtam-was accepted.





My Lord, I have seen all kinds of incarnations You have exhibited by Your transcendental qualities, and now that You have appeared as a beautiful young woman, I wish to see that form of Your Lordship.





When Lord Śiva approached Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu inquired about the purpose for Lord Śiva's coming there. Now Lord Śiva discloses his desire. He wanted to see the recent incarnation of Mohinī-mūrti, which Lord Viṣṇu had assumed to distribute the nectar generated from the churning of the ocean of milk.





TEXT 13



yena sammohitā daityāḥ

pāyitāś cāmṛtaṁ surāḥ

tad didṛkṣava āyātāḥ

paraṁ kautūhalaṁ hi naḥ

SYNONYMS



yena-by such an incarnation; sammohitāḥ-were captivated; daityāḥ-the demons; pāyitāḥ-were fed; ca-also; amṛtam-nectar; surāḥ-the demigods; tat-that form; didṛkṣavaḥ-desiring to see; āyātāḥ-we have come here; param-very much; kautūhalam-great eagerness; hi-indeed; naḥ-of ourselves.





My Lord, we have come here desiring to see that form of Your Lordship which You showed to the demons to captivate them completely and in this way enable the demigods to drink nectar. I am very eager to see that form.





TEXT 14



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam abhyarthito viṣṇur

bhagavān śūla-pāṇinā

prahasya bhāva-gambhīraṁ

giriśaṁ pratyabhāṣata

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; abhyarthitaḥ-being requested; viṣṇuḥ bhagavān-Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śūla-pāṇinā-by Lord Śiva, who carries a trident in his hand; prahasya-laughing; bhāva-gambhīram-with serious gravity; giriśam-unto Lord Śiva; pratyabhāṣata-replied.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Lord Viṣṇu was thus requested by Lord Śiva, who carries a trident in his hand, He smiled with gravity and replied to Lord Śiva as follows.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is known as Yogeśvara. Yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. Mystic yogīs want to acquire some power by practicing the yoga system, but Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is known as the Supreme Lord of all mystic power. Lord Śiva wanted to see the Mohinī-mūrti, which was captivating the entire world, and Lord Viṣṇu was gravely thinking of how to captivate Lord Śiva also. Therefore the word bhāva-gambhīram is used here. The illusory, material energy is represented by Durgādevī, who is the wife of Girīśa, or Lord Śiva. Durgādevī could not captivate Lord Śiva's mind, but now that Lord Śiva wanted to see Lord Viṣṇu's feminine form, Lord Viṣṇu, by His mystic power, would assume a form that would captivate even Lord Śiva. Therefore Lord Viṣṇu was grave and at the same time was smiling.





TEXT 15



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

kautūhalāya daityānāṁ

yoṣid-veṣo mayā dhṛtaḥ

paśyatā sura-kāryāṇi

gate pīyūṣa-bhājane

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kautūhalāya-for the bewildering; daityānām-of the demons; yoṣit-veṣaḥ-the form of a beautiful woman; mayā-by Me; dhṛtaḥ-assumed; paśyatā-seeing that it is necessary for Me; sura-kāryāṇi-for executing the interests of the demigods; gate-having been taken away; pīyūṣa-bhājane-the jug of nectar.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: When the demons took away the jug of nectar, I assumed the form of a beautiful woman to bewilder them by directly cheating them and thus to act in the interest of the demigods.





When the Supreme Personality of Godhead assumed the form of the beautiful woman Mohinī-mūrti, the demons were certainly captivated, but the demigods present were not. In other words, those who maintain a demoniac mentality are bewildered by the beauty of a woman, but those who are advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, or even those on the platform of goodness, are not bewildered. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knew that because Lord Śiva is not an ordinary person, he cannot be bewildered even by the most beautiful woman. Cupid himself tried to invoke Lord Śiva's lusty desires in the presence of Pārvatī, but Lord Śiva was never agitated. Rather, the blazing fire from Lord Śiva's eyes turned Cupid to ashes. Therefore, Lord Viṣṇu had to think twice about what kind of beautiful form would bewilder even Lord Śiva. Consequently He was smiling gravely, as stated in the previous verse (prahasya bhāva-gambhīram). A beautiful woman generally cannot induce Lord Śiva to be lusty, but Lord Viṣṇu was considering whether there was any form of woman who could enchant him.





TEXT 16



tat te 'haṁ darśayiṣyāmi

didṛkṣoḥ sura-sattama

kāmināṁ bahu mantavyaṁ

saṅkalpa-prabhavodayam

SYNONYMS



tat-that; te-unto you; aham-I; darśayiṣyāmi-shall show; didṛkṣoḥ-desirous of seeing; sura-sattama-O best of the demigods; kāminām-of persons who are very lusty; bahu-very much; mantavyam-an object of adoration; saṅkalpa-lusty desires; prabhava-udayam-causing to be strongly aroused.





O best of the demigods, I shall now show you My form that is very much appreciated by those who are lusty. Since you want to see that form, I shall reveal it in your presence.





Lord Śiva's desiring to see Lord Viṣṇu reveal the most attractive and beautiful form of a woman was certainly a joking affair. Lord Śiva knew that he could not be agitated by any so-called beautiful woman. "The Daityas may have been bewildered," he thought, "but since even the demigods could not be agitated, what to speak of me, who am the best of all the demigods?" However, because Lord Śiva wanted to see Lord Viṣṇu's form as a woman, Lord Viṣṇu decided to impersonate a woman and show him a form that would immediately put him in an ocean of lusty desires. In effect, therefore, Lord Viṣṇu told Lord Śiva, "I will show you My form as a woman, and if you become agitated by lusty desires, do not blame Me." The attractive features of a woman are appreciated by those who are affected by lusty desires, but those who are above such desires, who are on the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, are very difficult to bewilder. Nonetheless, by the supreme desire of the Personality of Godhead, everything can be done. This was to be a test of whether Lord Śiva could remain unagitated.





TEXT 17



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti bruvāṇo bhagavāṁs

tatraivāntaradhīyata

sarvataś cārayaṁś cakṣur

bhava āste sahomayā

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; bruvāṇaḥ-while speaking; bhagavān-Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tatra-there; eva-immediately; antaradhīyata-disappeared from the vision of Lord Śiva and his associates; sarvataḥ-everywhere; cārayan-moving; cakṣuḥ-the eyes; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; āste-remained; saha-umayā-with his wife, Umā.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After speaking in this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, immediately disappeared, and Lord Śiva remained there with Umā, looking for Him all around with moving eyes.





TEXT 18



tato dadarśopavane vara-striyaṁ

vicitra-puṣpāruṇa-pallava-drume

vikrīḍatīṁ kanduka-līlayā lasad-

dukūla-paryasta-nitamba-mekhalām

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; dadarśa-Lord Śiva saw; upavane-in a nice forest; vara-striyam-a very beautiful woman; vicitra-of many varieties; puṣpa-flowers; aruṇa-pink; pallava-leaves; drume-in the midst of the trees; vikrīḍatīm-engaged in playing; kanduka-with a ball; līlayā-by pastimes of playing; lasat-shining; dukūla-by a sari; paryasta-covered; nitamba-on her hips; mekhalām-dressed with a belt.





Thereafter, in a nice forest nearby, full of trees with reddish-pink leaves and varieties of flowers, Lord Śiva saw a beautiful woman playing with a ball. Her hips were covered with a shining sari and ornamented with a belt.





TEXT 19



āvartanodvartana-kampita-stana-

prakṛṣṭa-hāroru-bharaiḥ pade pade

prabhajyamānām iva madhyataś calat-

pada-pravālaṁ nayatīṁ tatas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



āvartana-by the falling down; udvartana-and springing up; kampita-trembling; stana-of the two breasts; prakṛṣṭa-beautiful; hāra-and of garlands; uru-bharaiḥ-because of the heavy load; pade pade-at every step; prabhajyamānām iva-as if breaking; madhyataḥ-in the middle portion of the body; calat-moving like that; pada-pravālam-feet reddish like coral; nayatīm-moving; tataḥ tataḥ-here and there.





Because the ball was falling down and bouncing up, as She played with it Her breasts trembled, and because of the weight of those breasts and Her heavy flower garlands, Her waist appeared to be all but breaking at every step, as Her two soft feet, which were reddish like coral, moved here and there.





TEXT 20



dikṣu bhramat-kanduka-cāpalair bhṛśaṁ

prodvigna-tārāyata-lola-locanām

sva-karṇa-vibhrājita-kuṇḍalollasat-

kapola-nīlālaka-maṇḍitānanām

SYNONYMS



dikṣu-in all directions; bhramat-moving; kanduka-of the ball; cāpalaiḥ-restlessness; bhṛśam-now and then; prodvigna-full of anxieties; tāra-eyes; āyata-broad; lola-restless; locanām-with such eyes; sva-karṇa-on Her own two ears; vibhrājita-illuminating; kuṇḍala-earrings; ullasat-shining; kapola-cheeks; nīla-bluish; alaka-with hair; maṇḍita-was decorated; ānanām-face.





The woman's face was decorated by broad, beautiful, restless eyes, which moved as the ball bounced here and there from Her hand. The two brilliant earrings on Her ears decorated Her shining cheeks like bluish reflections, and the hair scattered on Her face made Her even more beautiful to see.





TEXT 21



ślathad dukūlaṁ kabarīṁ ca vicyutāṁ

sannahyatīṁ vāma-kareṇa valgunā

vinighnatīm anya-kareṇa kandukaṁ

vimohayantīṁ jagad-ātma-māyayā

SYNONYMS



ślathat-slipping or slackening; dukūlam-the sari; kabarīm ca-and the hair on the head; vicyutām-being slackened and scattered; sannahyatīm-trying to bind; vāma-kareṇa-with the left hand; valgunā-very beautifully attractive; vinighnatīm-striking; anya-kareṇa-with the right hand; kandukam-the ball; vimohayantīm-in this way captivating everyone; jagat-the whole world; ātma-māyayā-by the spiritual potency, the internal energy.





As She played with the ball, the sari covering Her body became loose, and Her hair scattered. She tried to bind Her hair with Her beautiful left hand, and at the same time She played with the ball by striking it with Her right hand. This was so attractive that the Supreme Lord, by His internal potency, in this way captivated everyone.





In Bhagavad-gītā (7.14) it is said, daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā: the external potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is extremely strong. Indeed, everyone is fully captivated by her activities. Lord Śambhu (Śiva) was not to be captivated by the external potency, but because Lord Viṣṇu wanted to captivate Him also, He exhibited His internal potency to act the way that His external potency acts to captivate ordinary living entities. Lord Viṣṇu can captivate anyone, even such a strong personality as Lord Śambhu.





TEXT 22



tāṁ vīkṣya deva iti kanduka-līlayeṣad-

vrīḍāsphuṭa-smita-visṛṣṭa-kaṭākṣa-muṣṭaḥ

strī-prekṣaṇa-pratisamīkṣaṇa-vihvalātmā

nātmānam antika umāṁ sva-gaṇāṁś ca veda

SYNONYMS



tām-Her; vīkṣya-after observing; devaḥ-Lord Śambhu; iti-in this way; kanduka-līlayā-by playing with the ball; īṣat-slight; vrīḍā-by bashfulness; asphuṭa-not very distinct; smita-with smiling; visṛṣṭa-sent; kaṭākṣa-muṣṭaḥ-defeated by the glances; strī-prekṣaṇa-by glancing at that beautiful woman; pratisamīkṣaṇa-and by constantly being watched by Her; vihvala-ātmā-whose mind was agitated; na-not; ātmānam-himself; antike-(situated) nearby; umām-his wife, mother Umā; sva-gaṇān ca-and his associates; veda-Lord Śiva could understand.





While Lord Śiva observed the beautiful woman playing with the ball, She sometimes glanced at him and slightly smiled in bashfulness. As he looked at the beautiful woman and She watched him, he forgot both himself and Umā, his most beautiful wife, as well as his associates nearby.





The material bondage of this world is that a beautiful woman can captivate a handsome man and that a handsome man can captivate a beautiful woman. Such are the affairs that began when Lord Śiva observed the beautiful girl playing with the ball. In such activities, the influence of Cupid is very prominent. As both parties move their eyebrows and glance at one another, their lusty desires increase more and more. Such reciprocations of lusty desire took place between Lord Śiva and the beautiful woman, even though Umā and Lord Śiva's associates were by Lord Śiva's side. Such is the attraction between man and woman in the material world. Lord Śiva was supposed to be above all this attraction, but he was victimized by the captivating power of Lord Viṣṇu. Ṛṣabhadeva thus explains the nature of lusty attraction:



puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti





"The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of material existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together the hearts of the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body, home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and thinks in terms of 'I and mine.' " (Bhāg. 5.5.8) When a man and woman exchange feelings of lust, both of them are victimized, and thus they are bound to this material world in various ways.





TEXT 23



tasyāḥ karāgrāt sa tu kanduko yadā

gato vidūraṁ tam anuvrajat-striyāḥ

vāsaḥ sasūtraṁ laghu māruto 'harad

bhavasya devasya kilānupaśyataḥ

SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-of the beautiful woman; kara-agrāt-from the hand; saḥ-that; tu-but; kandukaḥ-the ball; yadā-when; gataḥ-had gone; vidūram-far off; tam-that ball; anuvrajat-began to follow; striyāḥ-of that woman; vāsaḥ-the covering dress; sa-sūtram-with the belt; laghu-because of being very fine; mārutaḥ-the breeze; aharat-blew away; bhavasya-while Lord Śiva; devasya-the chief demigod; kila-indeed; anupaśyataḥ-was always looking.





When the ball leaped from Her hand and fell at a distance, the woman began to follow it, but as Lord Śiva observed these activities, a breeze suddenly blew away the fine dress and belt that covered her.





TEXT 24



evaṁ tāṁ rucirāpāṅgīṁ

darśanīyāṁ manoramām

dṛṣṭvā tasyāṁ manaś cakre

viṣajjantyāṁ bhavaḥ kila

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; tām-Her; rucira-apāṅgīm-possessing all attractive features; darśanīyām-pleasing to see; manoramām-beautifully formed; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; tasyām-upon Her; manaḥ cakre-thought; viṣajjantyām-to be attracted by him; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; kila-indeed.





Thus Lord Śiva saw the woman, every part of whose body was beautifully formed, and the beautiful woman also looked at him. Therefore, thinking that She was attracted to him, Lord Śiva became very much attracted to Her.





Lord Śiva was observing every part of the woman's body, and She was also glancing at him with restless eyes. Thus Śiva thought that She was also attracted to him, and now he wanted to touch Her.





TEXT 25



tayāpahṛta-vijñānas

tat-kṛta-smara-vihvalaḥ

bhavānyā api paśyantyā

gata-hrīs tat-padaṁ yayau

SYNONYMS



tayā-by Her; apahṛta-taken away; vijñānaḥ-good sense; tat-kṛta-done by Her; smara-by the smiling; vihvalaḥ-having become mad for Her; bhavānyāḥ-while Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva; api-although; paśyantyāḥ-was seeing all these incidents; gata-hrīḥ-bereft of all shame; tat-padam-to the place where She was situated; yayau-went.





Lord Śiva, his good sense taken away by the woman because of lusty desires to enjoy with Her, became so mad for Her that even in the presence of Bhavānī he did not hesitate to approach Her.





TEXT 26



sā tam āyāntam ālokya

vivastrā vrīḍitā bhṛśam

nilīyamānā vṛkṣeṣu

hasantī nānvatiṣṭhata

SYNONYMS



sā-that woman; tam-Lord Śiva; āyāntam-who was coming near; ālokya-seeing; vivastrā-She was naked; vrīḍitā-very bashful; bhṛśam-so much; nilīyamānā-was hiding; vṛkṣeṣu-among the trees; hasantī-smiling; na-not; anvatiṣṭhata-stood in one place.





The beautiful woman was already naked, and when She saw Lord Śiva coming toward Her, She became extremely bashful. Thus She kept smiling, but She hid Herself among the trees and did not stand in one place.





TEXT 27



tām anvagacchad bhagavān

bhavaḥ pramuṣitendriyaḥ

kāmasya ca vaśaṁ nītaḥ

kareṇum iva yūthapaḥ

SYNONYMS



tām-Her; anvagacchat-followed; bhagavān-Lord Śiva; bhavaḥ-known as Bhava; pramuṣita-indriyaḥ-whose senses were agitated; kāmasya-of lusty desires; ca-and; vaśam-victimized; nītaḥ-having become; kareṇum-a female elephant; iva-just as; yūthapaḥ-a male elephant.





His senses being agitated, Lord Śiva, victimized by lusty desires, began to follow Her, just as a lusty elephant follows a she-elephant.





TEXT 28



so 'nuvrajyātivegena

gṛhītvānicchatīṁ striyam

keśa-bandha upānīya

bāhubhyāṁ pariṣasvaje

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Lord Śiva; anuvrajya-following Her; ati-vegena-with great speed; gṛhītvā-catching; anicchatīm-although She was not willing to be caught; striyam-the woman; keśa-bandhe-on the cluster of hair; upānīya-dragging Her near; bāhubhyām-with his arms; pariṣasvaje-embraced Her.





After following Her with great speed, Lord Śiva caught Her by the braid of Her hair and dragged Her near him. Although She was unwilling, he embraced Her with his arms.





TEXTS 29–30



sopagūḍhā bhagavatā

kariṇā kariṇī yathā

itas tataḥ prasarpantī

viprakīrṇa-śiroruhā

ātmānaṁ mocayitvāṅga



surarṣabha-bhujāntarāt

prādravat sā pṛthu-śroṇī

māyā deva-vinirmitā

SYNONYMS



sā-the woman; upagūḍhā-being captured and embraced; bhagavatā-by Lord Śiva; kariṇā-by a male elephant; kariṇī-a she-elephant; yathā-as; itaḥ tataḥ-here and there; prasarpantī-swirling like a snake; viprakīrṇa-scattered; śiroruhā-all the hair on Her head; ātmānam-Herself; mocayitvā-releasing; aṅga-O King; sura-ṛṣabha-of the best of the demigods (Lord Śiva); bhuja-antarāt-from the entanglement in the midst of the arms; prādravat-began to run very fast; sā-She; pṛthu-śroṇī-bearing very large hips; māyā-internal potency; deva-vinirmitā-exhibited by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Being embraced by Lord Śiva like a female elephant embraced by a male, the woman, whose hair was scattered, swirled like a snake. O King, this woman, who had large, high hips, was a woman of yogamāyā presented by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. She released Herself somehow or other from the fond embrace of Lord Śiva's arms and ran away.





TEXT 31



tasyāsau padavīṁ rudro

viṣṇor adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ

pratyapadyata kāmena

vairiṇeva vinirjitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of He who is the Supreme Lord; asau-Lord Śiva; padavīm-the place; rudraḥ-Lord Śiva; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ-of He who acts very wonderfully; pratyapadyata-began to follow; kāmena-by lusty desire; vairiṇā iva-as if by an enemy; vinirjitaḥ-being harassed.





As if harassed by an enemy in the form of lusty desires, Lord Śiva followed the path of Lord Viṣṇu, who acts very wonderfully and who had taken the form of Mohinī.





Lord Śiva cannot be victimized by māyā. Therefore it is to be understood that Lord Śiva was being thus harassed by Lord Viṣṇu's internal potency. Lord Viṣṇu can perform many wonderful activities through His various potencies.



parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca





(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8)



The Supreme Lord has various potencies, by which He can act very efficiently. To do anything expertly, He doesn't even need to contemplate. Since Lord Śiva was being harassed by the woman, it is to be understood that this was being done not by a woman but by Lord Viṣṇu Himself.





TEXT 32



tasyānudhāvato retaś

caskandāmogha-retasaḥ

śuṣmiṇo yūthapasyeva

vāsitām anudhāvataḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Lord Śiva); anudhāvataḥ-who was following; retaḥ-the semen; caskanda-discharged; amogha-retasaḥ-of that person whose discharge of semen never goes in vain; śuṣmiṇaḥ-mad; yūthapasya-of a male elephant; iva-just like; vāsitām-to a female elephant able to conceive pregnancy; anudhāvataḥ-following.





Just as a maddened bull elephant follows a female elephant who is able to conceive pregnancy, Lord Śiva followed the beautiful woman and discharged semen, even though his discharge of semen never goes in vain.





TEXT 33



yatra yatrāpatan mahyāṁ

retas tasya mahātmanaḥ

tāni rūpyasya hemnaś ca

kṣetrāṇy āsan mahī-pate

SYNONYMS



yatra-wherever; yatra-and wherever; apatat-fell; mahyām-on the surface of the world; retaḥ-the semen; tasya-of him; mahā-ātmanaḥ-of the great personality (Lord Śiva); tāni-all those places; rūpyasya-of silver; hemnaḥ-of gold; ca-and; kṣetrāṇi-mines; āsan-became; mahī-pate-O King.





O King, wheresoever on the surface of the globe fell the semen of the great personality of Lord Śiva, mines of gold and silver later appeared.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that those who seek gold and silver can worship Lord Śiva for material opulences. Lord Śiva lives under a bael tree and does not even construct a house in which to dwell, but although he is apparently poverty-stricken, his devotees are sometimes opulently endowed with large quantities of silver and gold. Parīkṣit Mahārāja later asks about this, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī replies.





TEXT 34



sarit-saraḥsu śaileṣu

vaneṣūpavaneṣu ca

yatra kva cāsann ṛṣayas

tatra sannihito haraḥ

SYNONYMS



sarit-near the shores of the rivers; saraḥsu-and near the lakes; śaileṣu-near the mountains; vaneṣu-in the forests; upavaneṣu-in the gardens or small forests; ca-also; yatra-wherever; kva-anywhere; ca-also; āsan-were exiting; ṛṣayaḥ-great sages; tatra-there; sannihitaḥ-was present; haraḥ-Lord Śiva.





Following Mohinī, Lord Śiva went everywhere-near the shores of the rivers and lakes, near the mountains, near the forests, near the gardens, and wherever there lived great sages.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that Mohinī-mūrti dragged Lord Śiva to so many places, especially to where the great sages lived, to instruct the sages that their Lord Śiva had become mad for a beautiful woman. Thus although they were all great sages and saintly persons, they should not think themselves free, but should remain extremely cautious about beautiful women. No one should think himself liberated in the presence of a beautiful woman. The śāstras enjoin:



mātrā svasrā duhitrā vā

nāviviktāsano bhavet

balavān indriya-grāmo

vidvāṁsam api karṣati





"One should not stay in a solitary place with a woman, even if she be his mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are so uncontrollably powerful that in the presence of a woman one may become agitated, even if he is very learned and advanced." (Bhāg. 9.19.17)





TEXT 35



skanne retasi so 'paśyad

ātmānaṁ deva-māyayā

jaḍīkṛtaṁ nṛpa-śreṣṭha

sannyavartata kaśmalāt

SYNONYMS



skanne-when fully discharged; retasi-the semen; saḥ-Lord Śiva; apaśyat-saw; ātmānam-his own self; deva-māyayā-by the māyā of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jaḍīkṛtam-had become victimized as a fool; nṛpa-śreṣṭha-O best of kings (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); sannyavartata-restrained himself further; kaśmalāt-from illusion.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of kings, when Lord Śiva had fully discharged semen, he could see how he himself had been victimized by the illusion created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he restrained himself from any further māyā.





Once one is agitated by lusty desires upon seeing a woman, those desires increase more and more, but when semen is discharged in the act of sex, the lusty desires diminish. The same principle acted upon Lord Śiva. He was allured by the beautiful woman Mohinī-mūrti, but when his semen had been fully discharged, he came to his senses and realized how he had been victimized as soon as he saw the woman in the forest. If one is trained to protect his semen by observing celibacy, naturally he is not attracted by the beauty of a woman. If one can remain a brahmacārī, he saves himself so much trouble in material existence. Material existence means enjoying the pleasure of sexual intercourse (yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukham [SB 7.9.45]). If one is educated about sex life and is trained to protect his semen, he is saved from the danger of material existence.





TEXT 36



athāvagata-māhātmya

ātmano jagad-ātmanaḥ

aparijñeya-vīryasya

na mene tad u hādbhutam

SYNONYMS



atha-thus; avagata-being fully convinced about; māhātmyaḥ-the greatness; ātmanaḥ-of himself; jagat-ātmanaḥ-and of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aparijñeya-vīryasya-who has unlimited potency; na-not; mene-did consider; tat-the miraculous activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in bewildering him; u ha-certainly; adbhutam-as wonderful.





Thus Lord Śiva could understand his position and that of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited potencies. Having reached this understanding, he was not at all surprised by the wonderful way Lord Viṣṇu had acted upon him.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as all-powerful because no one can excel Him in any activity. In Bhagavad-gītā (7.7) the Lord says, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: "O conqueror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me." No one can equal the Lord or be greater than Him, for He is the master of everyone. As stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 5.142), ekale īśvara kṛṣṇa, āra saba bhṛtya. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is the only master of everyone, including even Lord Śiva, what to speak of others. Lord Śiva was already aware of the supreme power of Lord Viṣṇu, but when he was actually put into bewilderment, he felt proud to have such an exalted master.





TEXT 37



tam aviklavam avrīḍam

ālakṣya madhusūdanaḥ

uvāca parama-prīto

bibhrat svāṁ pauruṣīṁ tanum

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Lord Śiva); aviklavam-without being agitated by the incident that had taken place; avrīḍam-without being ashamed; ālakṣya-seeing; madhu-sūdanaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Madhusūdana, the killer of the demon Madhu; uvāca-said; parama-prītaḥ-being very pleased; bibhrat-assuming; svām-His own; pauruṣīm-original; tanum-form.





Seeing Lord Śiva unagitated and unashamed, Lord Viṣṇu [Madhusūdana] was very pleased. Thus He resumed His original form and spoke as follows.





Although Lord Śiva was aghast at the potency of Lord Viṣṇu, he did not feel ashamed. Rather, he was proud to be defeated by Lord Viṣṇu. Nothing is hidden from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is in everyone's heart. Indeed, the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Whatever happened had taken place under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore there was no cause to be sorry or ashamed. Although Lord Śiva is never defeated by anyone, when defeated by Lord Viṣṇu he felt proud that he had such an exalted and powerful master.





TEXT 38



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

diṣṭyā tvaṁ vibudha-śreṣṭha

svāṁ niṣṭhām ātmanā sthitaḥ

yan me strī-rūpayā svairaṁ

mohito 'py aṅga māyayā

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; diṣṭyā-all auspiciousness; tvam-unto you; vibudha-śreṣṭha-O best of all the demigods; svām-in your own; niṣṭhām-fixed situation; ātmanā-of your own self; sthitaḥ-you are situated; yat-as; me-Mine; strī-rūpayā-appearance like a woman; svairam-sufficiently; mohitaḥ-enchanted; api-in spite of; aṅga-O Lord Śiva; māyayā-by My potency.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best of the demigods, although you have been amply harassed because of My potency in assuming the form of a woman, you are established in your position. Therefore, may all good fortune be upon you.





Since Lord Śiva is the best of the demigods, he is the best of all devotees (vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ). His exemplary character was therefore praised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gave His benediction by saying, "May all good fortune be upon you." When a devotee becomes a little proud, the Supreme Lord sometimes exhibits His supreme power to dissipate the devotee's misunderstanding. After being amply harassed by Lord Viṣṇu's potency, Lord Śiva resumed his normal, unagitated condition. This is the position of a devotee. A devotee should not be agitated under any circumstances, even in the worst reverses. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (6.22), yasmin sthito na duḥkhena guruṇāpi vicālyate: because of his full faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a devotee is never agitated, even in the greatest trials. This pridelessness is possible only for the first-class devotees, of whom Lord Śambhu is one.





TEXT 39



ko nu me 'titaren māyāṁ

viṣaktas tvad-ṛte pumān

tāṁs tān visṛjatīṁ bhāvān

dustarām akṛtātmabhiḥ

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-what; nu-indeed; me-My; atitaret-can surpass; māyām-illusory energy; viṣaktaḥ-attached to material sense enjoyment; tvat-ṛte-except for you; pumān-person; tān-such conditions; tān-unto the materially attached persons; visṛjatīm-in surpassing; bhāvān-reactions of material activities; dustarām-very difficult to surmount; akṛta-ātmabhiḥ-by persons unable to control their senses.





My dear Lord Śambhu, who within this material world but you can surpass My illusory energy? People are generally attached to sense enjoyment and conquered by its influence. Indeed, the influence of material nature is very difficult for them to surmount.





Of the three chief demigods-Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara-all but Viṣṇu are under the influence of māyā. In Caitanya-caritāmṛta, they are described as māyī, which means "under māyā's influence." But even though Lord Śiva associates with māyā, he is not influenced. The living entities are affected by māyā, but although Lord Śiva apparently associates with māyā, he is not affected. In other words, all living entities within this material world except for Lord Śiva are swayed by māyā. Lord Śiva is therefore neither viṣṇu-tattva nor jīva-tattva. He is between the two.





TEXT 40



seyaṁ guṇa-mayī māyā

na tvām abhibhaviṣyati

mayā sametā kālena

kāla-rūpeṇa bhāgaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



sā-that insurmountable; iyam-this; guṇa-mayī-consisting of the three modes of material nature; māyā-illusory energy; na-not; tvām-you; abhibhaviṣyati-will be able to bewilder in the future; mayā-with Me; sametā-joined; kālena-eternal time; kāla-rūpeṇa-in the form of time; bhāgaśaḥ-with her different parts.





The material, external energy [māyā], who cooperates with Me in creation and who is manifested in the three modes of nature, will not be able to bewilder you any longer.





When Lord Śiva was present, his wife, Durgā, was also there. Durgā works in cooperation with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in creating the cosmic manifestation. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10), mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacarācaram: "The material energy [prakṛti] works under My direction, O son of Kuntī, and is producing all moving and unmoving beings." Prakṛti is Durgā.



sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

[Bs. 5.44]





The entire cosmos is created by Durgā in cooperation with Lord Viṣṇu in the form of kāla, time. Sa īkṣata lokān nu sṛjā. Sa imāḹ lokān asṛjata. This is the version of the Vedas (Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.1.1–2). Māyā happens to be the wife of Lord Śiva, and thus Lord Śiva is in association with māyā, but Lord Viṣṇu here assures Lord Śiva that this māyā will no longer be able to captivate him.





TEXT 41



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ bhagavatā rājan

śrīvatsāṅkena sat-kṛtaḥ

āmantrya taṁ parikramya

sagaṇaḥ svālayaṁ yayau

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājan-O King; śrīvatsa-aṅkena-who always carries the mark of Śrīvatsa on His breast; sat-kṛtaḥ-being very much applauded; āmantrya-taking permission from; tam-Him; parikramya-circumambulating; sa-gaṇaḥ-with his associates; sva-ālayam-to his own abode; yayau-went back.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, having thus been praised by the Supreme Personality, who bears the mark of Śrīvatsa on His chest, Lord Śiva circumambulated Him. Then, after taking permission from Him, Lord Śiva returned to his abode, Kailāsa, along with his associates.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that when Lord Śiva was offering obeisances unto Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Viṣṇu arose and embraced him. Therefore the word śrīvatsāṅkena is used here. The mark of Śrīvatsa adorns the chest of Lord Viṣṇu, and therefore when Lord Viṣṇu embraced Lord Śiva while being circumambulated, the Śrīvatsa mark touched Lord Śiva's bosom.





TEXT 42



ātmāṁśa-bhūtāṁ tāṁ māyāṁ

bhavānīṁ bhagavān bhavaḥ

sammatām ṛṣi-mukhyānāṁ

prītyācaṣṭātha bhārata

SYNONYMS



ātma-aṁśa-bhūtām-a potency of the Supreme Soul; tām-unto her; māyām-the illusory energy; bhavānīm-who is the wife of Lord Śiva; bhagavān-the powerful; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; sammatām-accepted; ṛṣi-mukhyānām-by the great sages; prītyā-in jubilation; ācaṣṭa-began to address; atha-then; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Bharata.





O descendant of Bharata Mahārāja, Lord Śiva, in jubilation, then addressed his wife, Bhavānī, who is accepted by all authorities as the potency of Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 43



ayi vyapaśyas tvam ajasya māyāṁ

parasya puṁsaḥ para-devatāyāḥ

ahaṁ kalānām ṛṣabho 'pi muhye

yayāvaśo 'nye kim utāsvatantrāḥ

SYNONYMS



ayi-oh; vyapaśyaḥ-have seen; tvam-you; ajasya-of the unborn; māyām-the illusory energy; parasya puṁsaḥ-of the Supreme Person; para-devatāyāḥ-the Absolute Truth; aham-myself; kalānām-of plenary portions; ṛṣabhaḥ-the chief; api-although; muhye-became bewildered; yayā-by her; avaśaḥ-imperceptibly; anye-others; kim uta-what to speak of; asvatantrāḥ-fully dependent on māyā.





Lord Śiva said: O Goddess, you have now seen the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the unborn master of everyone. Although I am one of the principal expansions of His Lordship, even I was illusioned by His energy. What then is to be said of others, who are fully dependent on māyā?





TEXT 44



yaṁ mām apṛcchas tvam upetya yogāt

samā-sahasrānta upārataṁ vai

sa eṣa sākṣāt puruṣaḥ purāṇo

na yatra kālo viśate na vedaḥ

SYNONYMS



yam-about whom; mām-from me; apṛcchaḥ-inquired; tvam-you; upetya-coming near me; yogāt-from performing mystic yoga; samā-years; sahasra-ante-at the end of one thousand; upāratam-ceasing; vai-indeed; saḥ-He; eṣaḥ-here is; sākṣāt-directly; puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Person; purāṇaḥ-the original; na-not; yatra-where; kālaḥ-eternal time; viśate-can enter; na-nor; vedaḥ-the Vedas.





When I finished performing mystic yoga for one thousand years, you asked me upon whom I was meditating. Now, here is that Supreme Person to whom time has no entrance and who the Vedas cannot understand.





Eternal time enters anywhere and everywhere, but it cannot enter the kingdom of god. Nor can the Vedas understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is an indication of the Lord's being omnipotent, omnipresent and omniscient.





TEXT 45



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti te 'bhihitas tāta

vikramaḥ śārṅga-dhanvanaḥ

sindhor nirmathane yena

dhṛtaḥ pṛṣṭhe mahācalaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; te-unto you; abhihitaḥ-explained; tāta-my dear King; vikramaḥ-prowess; śārṅga-dhanvanaḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries the Śārṅga bow; sindhoḥ-of the ocean of milk; nirmathane-in the churning; yena-by whom; dhṛtaḥ-was held; pṛṣṭhe-on the back; mahā-acalaḥ-the great mountain.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, the person who bore the great mountain on His back for the churning of the ocean of milk is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Śārṅga-dhanvā. I have now described to you His prowess.





TEXT 46



etan muhuḥ kīrtayato 'nuśṛṇvato

na riṣyate jātu samudyamaḥ kvacit

yad uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanaṁ

samasta-saṁsāra-pariśramāpaham

SYNONYMS



etat-this narration; muhuḥ-constantly; kīrtayataḥ-of one who chants; anuśṛṇvataḥ-and also hears; na-not; riṣyate-annihilated; jātu-at any time; samudyamaḥ-the endeavor; kvacit-at any time; yat-because; uttamaśloka-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-anuvarṇanam-describing the transcendental qualities; samasta-all; saṁsāra-of material existence; pariśrama-misery; apaham-finishing.





The endeavor of one who constantly hears or describes this narration of the churning of the ocean of milk will never be fruitless. Indeed, chanting the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only means to annihilate all sufferings in this material world.





TEXT 47



asad-aviṣayam aṅghriṁ bhāva-gamyaṁ prapannān

amṛtam amara-varyān āśayat sindhu-mathyam

kapaṭa-yuvati-veṣo mohayan yaḥ surārīṁs

tam aham upasṛtānāṁ kāma-pūraṁ nato 'smi

SYNONYMS



asat-aviṣayam-not understood by the atheists; aṅghrim-unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhāva-gamyam-understood by devotees; prapannān-fully surrendered; amṛtam-the nectar; amara-varyān-only unto the demigods; āśayat-gave to drink; sindhu-mathyam-produced from the ocean of milk; kapaṭa-yuvati-veṣaḥ-appearing as a false young girl; mohayan-captivating; yaḥ-He who; sura-arīn-the enemies of the demigods; tam-unto Him; aham-I; upasṛtānām-of the devotees; kāma-pūram-who fulfills all desires; nataḥ asmi-I offer my respectful obeisances.





Assuming the form of a young woman and thus bewildering the demons, the Supreme Personality of Godhead distributed to His devotees, the demigods, the nectar produced from the churning of the ocean of milk. Unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who always fulfills the desires of His devotees, I offer my respectful obeisances.





The instruction of this narration concerning the churning of the milk ocean is clearly manifested by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although He is equal to everyone, because of natural affection He favors His devotees. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.29):



samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham





"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him." This partiality of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is natural. A person cares for his children not because of partiality but in a reciprocation of love. The children depend on the father's affection, and the father affectionately maintains the children. Similarly, because devotees do not know anything but the lotus feet of the Lord, the Lord is always prepared to give protection to His devotees and fulfill their desires. He therefore says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: "O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes."



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Mohinī-mūrti Incarnation Bewilders Lord Śiva."



Chapter Thirteen



Description of Future Manus





Of the fourteen Manus, six Manus have already been described. Now, this chapter will consecutively describe each Manu from the seventh to the fourteenth.





The seventh Manu, who is the son of Vivasvān, is known as Śrāddhadeva. He has ten sons, named Ikṣvāku, Nabhaga, Dhṛṣṭa, Śaryāti, Nariṣyanta, Nābhāga, Diṣṭa, Tarūṣa, Pṛṣadhra and Vasumān. In this manvantara, or reign of Manu, among the demigods are the Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Viśvedevas, Maruts, Aśvinī-kumāras and Ṛbhus. The king of heaven, Indra, is known as Purandara, and the seven sages are known as Kaśyapa, Atri, Vasiṣṭha, Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadvāja. During this period of Manu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu appears from the womb of Aditi in His incarnation as the son of Kaśyapa.





In the period of the eighth Manu, the Manu is Sāvarṇi. His sons are headed by Nirmoka, and among the demigods are the Sutapās. Bali, the son of Virocana, is Indra, and Gālava and Paraśurāma are among the seven sages. In this age of Manu, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as Sārvabhauma, the son of Devaguhya and Sarasvatī.





In the period of the ninth Manu, the Manu is Dakṣa-sāvarṇi. His sons are headed by Bhūtaketu, and among the demigods are the Marīcigarbhas. Adbhuta is Indra, and among the seven sages is Dyutimān. In this period of Manu, the incarnation Ṛṣabha is born of Āyuṣmān and Ambudhārā.





In the period of the tenth Manu, the Manu is Brahma-sāvarṇi. Among his sons is Bhūriṣeṇa, and the seven sages are Haviṣmān and others. Among the demigods are the Suvāsanas, and Śambhu is Indra. The incarnation in this period of Manu is Viṣvaksena, who is a friend of Śambhu and who is born from the womb of Viṣūcī in the house of a brāhmaṇa named Viśvasraṣṭā.





In the period of the eleventh Manu, the Manu is Dharma-sāvarṇi, who has ten sons, headed by Satyadharma. Among the demigods are the Vihaṅgamas, Indra is known as Vaidhṛta, and the seven sages are Aruṇa and others. In this manvantara, the incarnation is Dharmasetu, who is born of Vaidhṛtā and Āryaka.





In the period of the twelfth Manu, the Manu is Rudra-sāvarṇi, whose sons are headed by Devavān. The demigods are the Haritas and others, Indra is Ṛtadhāmā, and the seven sages are Tapomūrti and others. The incarnation in this manvantara is Sudhāmā, or Svadhāmā, who is born from the womb of Sunṛtā. His father's name is Satyasahā.





In the period of the thirteenth Manu, the Manu is Deva-sāvarṇi. Among his sons is Citrasena, the demigods are the Sukarmās and others, Indra is Divaspati, and Nirmoka is among the sages. The manvantara-avatāra is Yogeśvara, who is born of Devahotra and Bṛhatī.



In the period of the fourteenth Manu, the Manu is Indra-sāvarṇi. Among his sons are Uru and Gambhīra, the demigods are the Pavitras and others, Indra is Śuci, and among the sages are Agni and Bāhu. The incarnation of this manvantara is known as Bṛhadbhānu. He is born of Satrāyaṇa from the womb of Vitānā.



The total duration of the periods ruled by these Manus is calculated to be one thousand catur-yugas, or 4,300,000 times 1,000 years.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

manur vivasvataḥ putraḥ

śrāddhadeva iti śrutaḥ

saptamo vartamāno yas

tad-apatyāni me śṛṇu

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; manuḥ-Manu; vivasvataḥ-of the sun-god; putraḥ-son; śrāddhadevaḥ-as Śrāddhadeva; iti-thus; śrutaḥ-known, celebrated; saptamaḥ-seventh; vartamānaḥ-at the present moment; yaḥ-he who; tat-his; apatyāni-children; me-from me; śṛṇu-just hear.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The present Manu, who is named Śrāddhadeva, is the son of Vivasvān, the predominating deity on the sun planet. Śrāddhadeva is the seventh Manu. Now please hear from me as I describe his sons.





TEXTS 2–3



ikṣvākur nabhagaś caiva

dhṛṣṭaḥ śaryātir eva ca

nariṣyanto 'tha nābhāgaḥ

saptamo diṣṭa ucyate

tarūṣaś ca pṛṣadhraś ca



daśamo vasumān smṛtaḥ

manor vaivasvatasyaite

daśa-putrāḥ parantapa

SYNONYMS



ikṣvākuḥ-Ikṣvāku; nabhagaḥ-Nabhaga; ca-also; eva-indeed; dhṛṣṭaḥ-Dhṛṣṭa; śaryātiḥ-Śaryāti; eva-certainly; ca-also; nariṣyantaḥ-Nariṣyanta; atha-as well as; nābhāgaḥ-Nābhāga; saptamaḥ-the seventh one; diṣṭaḥ-Diṣṭa; ucyate-is so celebrated; tarūṣaḥ ca-and Tarūṣa; pṛṣadhraḥ ca-and Pṛṣadhra; daśamaḥ-the tenth one; vasumān-Vasumān; smṛtaḥ-known; manoḥ-of Manu; vaivasvatasya-of Vaivasvata; ete-all these; daśa-putrāḥ-ten sons; parantapa-O King.





O King Parīkṣit, among the ten sons of Manu are Ikṣvāku, Nabhaga, Dhṛṣṭa, Śaryāti, Nariṣyanta and Nābhāga. The seventh son is known as Diṣṭa. Then come Tarūṣa and Pṛṣadhra, and the tenth son is known as Vasumān.





TEXT 4



ādityā vasavo rudrā

viśvedevā marud-gaṇāḥ

aśvināv ṛbhavo rājann

indras teṣāṁ purandaraḥ

SYNONYMS



ādityāḥ-the Ādityas; vasavaḥ-the Vasus; rudrāḥ-the Rudras; viśvedevāḥ-the Viśvedevas; marut-gaṇāḥ-and the Maruts; aśvinau-the two Aśvinī brothers; ṛbhavaḥ-the Ṛbhus; rājan-O King; indraḥ-the king of heaven; teṣām-of them; purandaraḥ-Purandara.





In this manvantara, O King, the Ādityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Viśvedevas, the Maruts, the two Aśvinī-kumāra brothers and the Ṛbhus are the demigods. Their head king [Indra] is Purandara.





TEXT 5



kaśyapo 'trir vasiṣṭhaś ca

viśvāmitro 'tha gautamaḥ

jamadagnir bharadvāja

iti saptarṣayaḥ smṛtāḥ

SYNONYMS



kaśyapaḥ-Kaśyapa; atriḥ-Atri; vasiṣṭhaḥ-Vasiṣṭha; ca-and; viśvāmitraḥ-Viśvāmitra; atha-as well as; gautamaḥ-Gautama; jamadagniḥ-Jamadagni; bharadvājaḥ-Bharadvāja; iti-thus; sapta-ṛṣayaḥ-the seven sages; smṛtāḥ-celebrated.





Kaśyapa, Atri, Vasiṣṭha, Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadvāja are known as the seven sages.





TEXT 6



atrāpi bhagavaj-janma

kaśyapād aditer abhūt

ādityānām avarajo

viṣṇur vāmana-rūpa-dhṛk

SYNONYMS



atra-in this Manu's reign; api-certainly; bhagavat-janma-appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaśyapāt-by Kaśyapa Muni; aditeḥ-of mother Aditi; abhūt-became possible; ādityānām-of the Ādityas; avara-jaḥ-the youngest; viṣṇuḥ-Lord Viṣṇu Himself; vāmana-rūpa-dhṛk-appearing as Lord Vāmana.





In this manvantara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as the youngest of all the Ādityas, known as Vāmana, the dwarf. His father was Kaśyapa and His mother Aditi.





TEXT 7



saṅkṣepato mayoktāni

sapta-manvantarāṇi te

bhaviṣyāṇy atha vakṣyāmi

viṣṇoḥ śaktyānvitāni ca

SYNONYMS



saṅkṣepataḥ-in brief; mayā-by me; uktāni-explained; sapta-seven; manu-antarāṇi-changes of Manu; te-unto you; bhaviṣyāṇi-the future Manus; atha-also; vakṣyāmi-I shall speak; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; śaktyā anvitāni-empowered by the energy; ca-also.





I have briefly explained to you the position of the seven Manus. Now I shall describe the future Manus, along with the incarnations of Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 8



vivasvataś ca dve jāye

viśvakarma-sute ubhe

saṁjñā chāyā ca rājendra

ye prāg abhihite tava

SYNONYMS



vivasvataḥ-of Vivasvān; ca-also; dve-two; jāye-wives; viśvakarma-sute-the two daughters of Viśvakarmā; ubhe-both of them; saṁjñā-Saṁjñā; chāyā-Chāyā; ca-and; rāja-indra-O King; ye-both of whom; prāk-before; abhihite-described; tava-unto you.





O King, I have previously described [in the Sixth Canto] the two daughters of Viśvakarmā, named Saṁjñā and Chāyā, who were the first two wives of Vivasvān.





TEXT 9



tṛtīyāṁ vaḍavām eke

tāsāṁ saṁjñā-sutās trayaḥ

yamo yamī śrāddhadevaś

chāyāyāś ca sutāñ chṛṇu

SYNONYMS



tṛtīyām-the third wife; vaḍavām-Vaḍavā; eke-some people; tāsām-of all three wives; saṁjñā-sutāḥ trayaḥ-three issues of Saṁjñā; yamaḥ-one son named Yama; yamī-Yamī, a daughter; śrāddhadevaḥ-Śrāddhadeva, another son; chāyāyāḥ-of Chāyā; ca-and; sutān-the sons; śṛṇu-just hear about.





It is said that the sun-god had a third wife, named Vaḍavā. Of the three wives, the wife named Saṁjñā had three children-Yama, Yamī and Śrāddhadeva. Now let me describe the children of Chāyā.





TEXT 10



sāvarṇis tapatī kanyā

bhāryā saṁvaraṇasya yā

śanaiścaras tṛtīyo 'bhūd

aśvinau vaḍavātmajau

SYNONYMS



sāvarṇiḥ-Sāvarṇi; tapatī-Tapatī; kanyā-the daughter; bhāryā-the wife; saṁvaraṇasya-of King Saṁvaraṇa; yā-she who; śanaiścaraḥ-Śanaiścara; tṛtīyaḥ-the third issue; abhūt-took birth; aśvinau-the two Aśvinī-kumāras; vaḍavā-ātma-jau-the sons of the wife known as Vaḍavā.





Chāyā had a son named Sāvarṇi and a daughter named Tapatī, who later became the wife of King Saṁvaraṇa. Chāyā's third child is known as Śanaiścara [Saturn]. Vaḍavā gave birth to two sons, namely the Aśvinī brothers.





TEXT 11



aṣṭame 'ntara āyāte

sāvarṇir bhavitā manuḥ

nirmoka-virajaskādyāḥ

sāvarṇi-tanayā nṛpa

SYNONYMS



aṣṭame-the eighth; antare-Manu's period; āyāte-when arrived; sāvarṇiḥ-Sāvarṇi; bhavitā-will become; manuḥ-the eighth Manu; nirmoka-Nirmoka; virajaska-ādyāḥ-Virajaska and others; sāvarṇi-of Sāvarṇi; tanayāḥ-the sons; nṛpa-O King.





O King, when the period of the eighth Manu arrives, Sāvarṇi will become the Manu. Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among his sons.





The present reign is that of Vaivasvata Manu. According to astronomical calculations, we are now in the twenty-eighth yuga of Vaivasvata Manu. Each Manu lives for seventy-one yugas, and fourteen such Manus rule in one day of Lord Brahmā. We are now in the period of Vaivasvata Manu, the seventh Manu, and the eighth Manu will come into existence after many millions of years. But Śukadeva Gosvāmī, having heard from authorities, foretells that the eighth Manu will be Sāvarṇi and that Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among his sons. Śāstra can foretell what will happen millions and millions of years in the future.





TEXT 12



tatra devāḥ sutapaso

virajā amṛtaprabhāḥ

teṣāṁ virocana-suto

balir indro bhaviṣyati

SYNONYMS



tatra-in that period of Manu; devāḥ-the demigods; sutapasaḥ-the Sutapās; virajāḥ-the Virajas; amṛtaprabhāḥ-the Amṛtaprabhas; teṣām-of them; virocana-sutaḥ-the son of Virocana; baliḥ-Mahārāja Bali; indraḥ-the king of heaven; bhaviṣyati-will become.





In the period of the eighth Manu, among the demigods will be the Sutapās, the Virajas and the Amṛtaprabhas. The king of the demigods, Indra, will be Bali Mahārāja, the son of Virocana.





TEXT 13



dattvemāṁ yācamānāya

viṣṇave yaḥ pada-trayam

rāddham indra-padaṁ hitvā

tataḥ siddhim avāpsyati

SYNONYMS



dattvā-giving in charity; imām-this entire universe; yācamānāya-who was begging from him; viṣṇave-unto Lord Viṣṇu; yaḥ-Bali Mahārāja; pada-trayam-three paces of land; rāddham-achieved; indra-padam-the post of Indra; hitvā-giving up; tataḥ-thereafter; siddhim-perfection; avāpsyati-will achieve.





Bali Mahārāja gave a gift of three paces of land to Lord Viṣṇu, and because of this charity he lost all the three worlds. Later, however, when Lord Viṣṇu is pleased because of Bali's giving everything to Him, Bali Mahārāja will achieve the perfection of life.





In Bhagavad-gītā (7.3) it is stated, manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścid yatati siddhaye: out of many millions of people, one may attempt to achieve success in life. This success is explained here. Rāddham indra-padaṁ hitvā tataḥ siddhim avāpsyati. Siddhi consists of achieving the favor of Lord Viṣṇu, not the yoga-siddhis. The yoga-siddhis-aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, prāpti, prākāmya, īśitva, vaśitva and kāmāvasāyitā-are temporary. The ultimate siddhi is to achieve the favor of Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 14



yo 'sau bhagavatā baddhaḥ

prītena sutale punaḥ

niveśito 'dhike svargād

adhunāste sva-rāḍ iva

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-Bali Mahārāja; asau-he; bhagavatā-by the Personality of Godhead; baddhaḥ-bound; prītena-because of favor; sutale-in the kingdom of Sutala; punaḥ-again; niveśitaḥ-situated; adhike-more opulent; svargāt-than the heavenly planets; adhunā-at the present moment; āste-is situated; sva-rāṭ iva-equal to the position of Indra.





With great affection, the Personality of Godhead bound Bali and then installed him in the kingdom of Sutala, which is more opulent than the heavenly planets. Mahārāja Bali now resides on that planet and is more comfortably situated than Indra.





TEXTS 15–16



gālavo dīptimān rāmo

droṇa-putraḥ kṛpas tathā

ṛṣyaśṛṅgaḥ pitāsmākaṁ

bhagavān bādarāyaṇaḥ

ime saptarṣayas tatra



bhaviṣyanti sva-yogataḥ

idānīm āsate rājan

sve sva āśrama-maṇḍale

SYNONYMS



gālavaḥ-Gālava; dīptimān-Dīptimān; rāmaḥ-Paraśurāma; droṇa-putraḥ-the son of Droṇācārya, namely Aśvatthāmā; kṛpaḥ-Kṛpācārya; tathā-as well; ṛṣyaśṛṅgaḥ-Ṛṣyaśṛṅga; pitā asmākam-our father; bhagavān-the incarnation of Godhead; bādarāyaṇaḥ-Vyāsadeva; ime-all of them; sapta-ṛṣayaḥ-the seven sages; tatra-in the eighth manvantara; bhaviṣyanti-will become; sva-yogataḥ-as a result of their service to the Lord; idānīm-at the present moment; āsate-they are all existing; rājan-O King; sve sve-in their own; āśrama-maṇḍale-different hermitages.





O King, during the eighth manvantara, the great personalities Gālava, Dīptimān, Paraśurāma, Aśvatthāmā, Kṛpācārya, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga and our father, Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of Nārāyaṇa, will be the seven sages. For the present, they are all residing in their respective āśramas.





TEXT 17



devaguhyāt sarasvatyāṁ

sārvabhauma iti prabhuḥ

sthānaṁ purandarād dhṛtvā

balaye dāsyatīśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



devaguhyāt-from His father, Devaguhya; sarasvatyām-in the womb of Sarasvatī; sārvabhaumaḥ-Sārvabhauma; iti-thus; prabhuḥ-the master; sthānam-place; purandarāt-from Lord Indra; hṛtvā-taking away by force; balaye-unto Bali Mahārāja; dāsyati-will give; īśvaraḥ-the master.





In the eighth manvantara, the greatly powerful Personality of Godhead Sārvabhauma will take birth. His father will be Devaguhya, and His mother will be Sarasvatī. He will take the kingdom away from Purandara [Lord Indra] and give it to Bali Mahārāja.





TEXT 18



navamo dakṣa-sāvarṇir

manur varuṇa-sambhavaḥ

bhūtaketur dīptaketur

ity ādyās tat-sutā nṛpa

SYNONYMS



navamaḥ-ninth; dakṣa-sāvarṇiḥ-Dakṣa-sāvarṇi; manuḥ-the Manu; varuṇa-sambhavaḥ-born as the son of Varuṇa; bhūtaketuḥ-Bhūtaketu; dīptaketuḥ-Dīptaketu; iti-thus; ādyāḥ-and so on; tat-his; sutāḥ-sons; nṛpa-O King.





O King, the ninth Manu will be Dakṣa-sāvarṇi, who is born of Varuṇa. Among his sons will be Bhūtaketu, and Dīptaketu.





TEXT 19



pārā-marīcigarbhādyā

devā indro 'dbhutaḥ smṛtaḥ

dyutimat-pramukhās tatra

bhaviṣyanty ṛṣayas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



pārā-the Pāras; marīcigarbha-the Marīcigarbhas; ādyāḥ-like that; devāḥ-the demigods; indraḥ-the king of heaven; adbhutaḥ-Adbhuta; smṛtaḥ-known; dyutimat-Dyutimān; pramukhāḥ-headed by; tatra-in that ninth period of Manu; bhaviṣyanti-will become; ṛṣayaḥ-the seven ṛṣis; tataḥ-then.





In this ninth manvantara, the Pāras and Marīcigarbhas will be among the demigods. The king of heaven, Indra, will be named Adbhuta, and Dyutimān will be among the seven sages.





TEXT 20



āyuṣmato 'mbudhārāyām

ṛṣabho bhagavat-kalā

bhavitā yena saṁrāddhāṁ

tri-lokīṁ bhokṣyate 'dbhutaḥ

SYNONYMS



āyuṣmataḥ-of the father, Āyuṣmān; ambudhārāyām-in the womb of the mother, Ambudhārā; ṛṣabhaḥ-Ṛṣabha; bhagavat-kalā-a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavitā-will be; yena-by whom; saṁrāddhām-all-opulent; tri-lokīm-the three worlds; bhokṣyate-will enjoy; adbhutaḥ-the Indra of the name Adbhuta.





Ṛṣabhadeva, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will take birth from his father, Āyuṣmān, and his mother, Ambudhārā. He will enable the Indra named Adbhuta to enjoy the opulence of the three worlds.





TEXT 21



daśamo brahma-sāvarṇir

upaśloka-suto manuḥ

tat-sutā bhūriṣeṇādyā

haviṣmat pramukhā dvijāḥ

SYNONYMS



daśamaḥ-the tenth Manu; brahma-sāvarṇiḥ-Brahma-sāvarṇi; upaśloka-sutaḥ-born of Upaśloka; manuḥ-will be Manu; tat-sutāḥ-his sons; bhūriṣeṇa-ādyāḥ-Bhūriṣeṇa and others; haviṣmat-Haviṣmān; pramukhāḥ-headed by; dvijāḥ-the seven sages.





The son of Upaśloka known as Brahma-sāvarṇi will be the tenth Manu. Bhūriṣeṇa will be among his sons, and the brāhmaṇas headed by Haviṣmān will be the seven sages.





TEXT 22



haviṣmān sukṛtaḥ satyo

jayo mūrtis tadā dvijāḥ

suvāsana-viruddhādyā

devāḥ śambhuḥ sureśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



haviṣmān-Haviṣmān; sukṛtaḥ-Sukṛta; satyaḥ-Satya; jayaḥ-Jaya; mūrtiḥ-Mūrti; tadā-at that time; dvijāḥ-the seven sages; suvāsana-the Suvāsanas; viruddha-the Viruddhas; ādyāḥ-and so on; devāḥ-the demigods; śambhuḥ-Śambhu; sura-īśvaraḥ-Indra, king of the demigods.





Haviṣmān, Sukṛta, Satya, Jaya, Mūrti and others will be the seven sages, the Suvāsanas and Viruddhas will be among the demigods, and Śambhu will be their king, Indra.





TEXT 23



viṣvakseno viṣūcyāṁ tu

śambhoḥ sakhyaṁ kariṣyati

jātaḥ svāṁśena bhagavān

gṛhe viśvasṛjo vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



viṣvaksenaḥ-Viṣvaksena; viṣūcyām-in the womb of Viṣūcī; tu-then; śambhoḥ-of Śambhu; sakhyam-friendship; kariṣyati-will create; jātaḥ-being born; sva-aṁśena-by a plenary portion; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gṛhe-in the home; viśvasṛjaḥ-of Viśvasraṣṭā; vibhuḥ-the supremely powerful Lord.





In the home of Viśvasraṣṭā, a plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead will appear from the womb of Viṣūcī as the incarnation known as Viṣvaksena. He will make friends with Śambhu.





TEXT 24



manur vai dharma-sāvarṇir

ekādaśama ātmavān

anāgatās tat-sutāś ca

satyadharmādayo daśa

SYNONYMS



manuḥ-the Manu; vai-indeed; dharma-sāvarṇiḥ-Dharmasāvarṇi; ekādaśamaḥ-eleventh; ātmavān-the controller of the senses; anāgatāḥ-will come in the future; tat-his; sutāḥ-sons; ca-and; satyadharma-ādayaḥ-Satyadharma and others; daśa-ten.





In the eleventh manvantara, the Manu will be Dharma-sāvarṇi, who will be extremely learned in spiritual knowledge. From him there will come ten sons, headed by Satyadharma.





TEXT 25



vihaṅgamāḥ kāmagamā

nirvāṇarucayaḥ surāḥ

indraś ca vaidhṛtas teṣām

ṛṣayaś cāruṇādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



vihaṅgamāḥ-the Vihaṅgamas; kāmagamāḥ-the Kāmagamas; nirvāṇarucayaḥ-the Nirvāṇarucis; surāḥ-the demigods; indraḥ-the king of heaven, Indra; ca-also; vaidhṛtaḥ-Vaidhṛta; teṣām-of them; ṛṣayaḥ-the seven sages; ca-also; aruṇa-ādayaḥ-headed by Aruṇa.





The Vihaṅgamas, Kāmagamas, Nirvāṇarucis and others will be the demigods. The king of the demigods, Indra, will be Vaidhṛta, and the seven sages will be headed by Aruṇa.





TEXT 26



āryakasya sutas tatra

dharmasetur iti smṛtaḥ

vaidhṛtāyāṁ harer aṁśas

tri-lokīṁ dhārayiṣyati

SYNONYMS



āryakasya-of Āryaka; sutaḥ-the son; tatra-in that period (the eleventh manvantara); dharmasetuḥ-Dharmasetu; iti-thus; smṛtaḥ-celebrated; vaidhṛtāyām-from the mother, Vaidhṛtā; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aṁśaḥ-a partial incarnation; tri-lokīm-the three worlds; dhārayiṣyati-will rule.





The son of Āryaka known as Dharmasetu, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will appear from the womb of Vaidhṛtā, the wife of Āryaka, and will rule the three worlds.





TEXT 27



bhavitā rudra-sāvarṇī

rājan dvādaśamo manuḥ

devavān upadevaś ca

devaśreṣṭhādayaḥ sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



bhavitā-will appear; rudra-sāvarṇiḥ-Rudra-sāvarṇi; rājan-O King; dvādaśamaḥ-the twelfth; manuḥ-Manu; devavān-Devavān; upadevaḥ-Upadeva; ca-and; devaśreṣṭha-Devaśreṣṭha; ādayaḥ-such persons; sutāḥ-sons of the Manu.





O King, the twelfth Manu will be named Rudra-sāvarṇi. Devavān, Upadeva and Devaśreṣṭha will be among his sons.





TEXT 28



ṛtadhāmā ca tatrendro

devāś ca haritādayaḥ

ṛṣayaś ca tapomūrtis

tapasvy āgnīdhrakādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



ṛtadhāmā-Ṛtadhāmā; ca-also; tatra-in that period; indraḥ-the king of heaven; devāḥ-the demigods; ca-and; harita-ādayaḥ-headed by the Haritas; ṛṣayaḥ ca-and the seven sages; tapomūrtiḥ-Tapomūrti; tapasvī-Tapasvī; āgnīdhraka-Āgnīdhraka; ādayaḥ-and so on.





In this manvantara, the name of Indra will be Ṛtadhāmā, and the demigods will be headed by the Haritas. Among the sages will be Tapomūrti, Tapasvī and Āgnīdhraka.





TEXT 29



svadhāmākhyo harer aṁśaḥ

sādhayiṣyati tan-manoḥ

antaraṁ satyasahasaḥ

sunṛtāyāḥ suto vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



svadhāmā-ākhyaḥ-Svadhāmā; hareḥ aṁśaḥ-a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sādhayiṣyati-will rule; tat-manoḥ-of that Manu; antaram-the manvantara; satyasahasaḥ-of Satyasahā; sunṛtāyāḥ-of Sunṛtā; sutaḥ-the son; vibhuḥ-most powerful.





From the mother named Sunṛtā and the father named Satyasahā will come Svadhāmā, a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He will rule that manvantara.





TEXT 30



manus trayodaśo bhāvyo

deva-sāvarṇir ātmavān

citrasena-vicitrādyā

deva-sāvarṇi-dehajāḥ

SYNONYMS



manuḥ-the Manu; trayodaśaḥ-thirteenth; bhāvyaḥ-will become; deva-sāvarṇiḥ-Deva-sāvarṇi; ātmavān-well advanced in spiritual knowledge; citrasena-Citrasena; vicitra-ādyāḥ-and others, like Vicitra; deva-sāvarṇi-of Deva-sāvarṇi; deha-jāḥ-sons.





The thirteenth Manu will be named Deva-sāvarṇi, and he will be very advanced in spiritual knowledge. Among his sons will be Citrasena and Vicitra.





TEXT 31



devāḥ sukarma-sutrāma-

saṁjñā indro divaspatiḥ

nirmoka-tattvadarśādyā

bhaviṣyanty ṛṣayas tadā

SYNONYMS



devāḥ-the demigods; sukarma-the Sukarmās; sutrāma-saṁjñāḥ-and the Sutrāmas; indraḥ-the king of heaven; divaspatiḥ-Divaspati; nirmoka-Nirmoka; tattvadarśa-ādyāḥ-and others, like Tattvadarśa; bhaviṣyanti-will become; ṛṣayaḥ-the seven sages; tadā-at that time.





In the thirteenth manvantara, the Sukarmās and Sutrāmas will be among the demigods, Divaspati will be the king of heaven, and Nirmoka and Tattvadarśa will be among the seven sages.





TEXT 32



devahotrasya tanaya

upahartā divaspateḥ

yogeśvaro harer aṁśo

bṛhatyāṁ sambhaviṣyati

SYNONYMS



devahotrasya-of Devahotra; tanayaḥ-the son; upahartā-the benefactor; divaspateḥ-of Divaspati, the Indra at that time; yoga-īśvaraḥ-Yogeśvara, the master of mystic powers; hareḥ aṁśaḥ-a partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bṛhatyām-in the womb of his mother, Bṛhatī; sambhaviṣyati-will appear.





The son of Devahotra known as Yogeśvara will appear as a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His mother's name will be Bṛhatī. He will perform activities for the welfare of Divaspati.





TEXT 33



manur vā indra-sāvarṇiś

caturdaśama eṣyati

uru-gambhīra-budhādyā

indra-sāvarṇi-vīryajāḥ

SYNONYMS



manuḥ-the Manu; vā-either; indra-sāvarṇiḥ-Indra-sāvarṇi; caturdaśamaḥ-fourteenth; eṣyati-will become; uru-Uru; gambhīra-Gambhīra; budha-ādyāḥ-and others, such as Budha; indra-sāvarṇi-of Indra-sāvarṇi; vīrya-jāḥ-born of the semen.





The name of the fourteenth Manu will be Indra-sāvarṇi. He will have sons like Uru, Gambhīra and Budha.





TEXT 34



pavitrāś cākṣuṣā devāḥ

śucir indro bhaviṣyati

agnir bāhuḥ śuciḥ śuddho

māgadhādyās tapasvinaḥ

SYNONYMS



pavitrāḥ-the Pavitras; cākṣuṣāḥ-the Cākṣuṣas; devāḥ-the demigods; śuciḥ-Śuci; indraḥ-the king of heaven; bhaviṣyati-will become; agniḥ-Agni; bāhuḥ-Bāhu; śuciḥ-Śuci; śuddhaḥ-Śuddha; māgadha-Māgadha; ādyāḥ-and so on; tapasvinaḥ-the sages.





The Pavitras and Cākṣuṣas will be among the demigods, and Śuci will be Indra, the king of heaven. Agni, Bāhu, Śuci, Śuddha, Māgadha and others of great austerity will be the seven sages.





TEXT 35



satrāyaṇasya tanayo

bṛhadbhānus tadā hariḥ

vitānāyāṁ mahārāja

kriyā-tantūn vitāyitā

SYNONYMS



satrāyaṇasya-of Satrāyaṇa; tanayaḥ-the son; bṛhadbhānuḥ-Bṛhadbhānu; tadā-at that time; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vitānāyām-in the womb of Vitānā; mahā-rāja-O King; kriyā-tantūn-all spiritual activities; vitāyitā-will perform.





O King Parīkṣit, in the fourteenth manvantara the Supreme Personality of Godhead will appear from the womb of Vitānā, and His father's name will be Satrāyaṇa. This incarnation will be celebrated as Bṛhadbhānu, and He will administer spiritual activities.





TEXT 36



rājaṁś caturdaśaitāni

tri-kālānugatāni te

proktāny ebhir mitaḥ kalpo

yuga-sāhasra-paryayaḥ

SYNONYMS



rājan-O King; caturdaśa-fourteen; etāni-all these; tri-kāla-the three periods of time (past, present and future); anugatāni-covering; te-to you; proktāni-described; ebhiḥ-by these; mitaḥ-estimated; kalpaḥ-one day of Brahmā; yuga-sāhasra-one thousand cycles of four yugas; paryayaḥ-consisting of.





O King, I have now described to you the fourteen Manus appearing in the past, present and future. The total duration of time ruled by these Manus is one thousand yuga cycles. This is called a kalpa, or one day of Lord Brahmā.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Description of Future Manus."



Chapter Fourteen



The System of Universal Management





This chapter describes the duties allotted to Manu by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All the Manus, as well as their sons, the sages, the demigods and the Indras, act under the orders of various incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the end of every catur-yuga, consisting of Satya-yuga, Dvāpara-yuga, Tretā-yuga and Kali-yuga, the sages, acting under the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, distribute the Vedic knowledge and thus reinstate eternal religious principles. Manu's duty is to reestablish the system of religion. Manu's sons execute Manu's orders, and thus the entire universe is maintained by Manu and his descendants. The Indras are various rulers of the heavenly planets. Assisted by the demigods, they rule the three worlds. The Supreme Personality of Godhead also appears as incarnations in different yugas. He appears as Sanaka, Sanātana, Yājñavalkya, Dattātreya and others, and thus He gives instructions in spiritual knowledge, prescribed duties, principles of mystic yoga, and so on. As Marīci and others, He creates progeny; as the king, He punishes the miscreants; and in the form of time, He annihilates the creation. One may argue, "If the all-powerful Supreme Personality of Godhead can do anything simply by His will, why has He arranged for so many personalities to manage?" How and why He does this cannot be understood by those who are under the clutches of māyā.





TEXT 1



śrī-rājovāca

manvantareṣu bhagavan

yathā manv-ādayas tv ime

yasmin karmaṇi ye yena

niyuktās tad vadasva me

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; manvantareṣu-in the reign of each Manu; bhagavan-O great sage; yathā-as; manu-ādayaḥ-the Manus and others; tu-but; ime-these; yasmin-in which; karmaṇi-activities; ye-which persons; yena-by whom; niyuktāḥ-appointed; tat-that; vadasva-kindly describe; me-to me.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired: O most opulent Śukadeva Gosvāmī, please explain to me how Manu and the others in each manvantara are engaged in their respective duties, and by whose order they are so engaged.





TEXT 2



śrī-ṛṣir uvāca

manavo manu-putrāś ca

munayaś ca mahī-pate

indrāḥ sura-gaṇāś caiva

sarve puruṣa-śāsanāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-ṛṣiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; manavaḥ-all the Manus; manu-putrāḥ-all the sons of Manu; ca-and; munayaḥ-all the great sages; ca-and; mahī-pate-O King; indrāḥ-all the Indras; sura-gaṇāḥ-the demigods; ca-and; eva-certainly; sarve-all of them; puruṣa-śāsanāḥ-under the rule of the Supreme person.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The Manus, the sons of Manu, the great sages, the Indras and all the demigods, O King, are appointed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various incarnations such as Yajña.





TEXT 3



yajñādayo yāḥ kathitāḥ

pauruṣyas tanavo nṛpa

manv-ādayo jagad-yātrāṁ

nayanty ābhiḥ pracoditāḥ

SYNONYMS



yajña-ādayaḥ-the Lord's incarnation known as Yajña and others; yāḥ-who; kathitāḥ-already spoken of; pauruṣyaḥ-of the Supreme Person; tanavaḥ-incarnations; nṛpa-O King; manu-ādayaḥ-the Manus and others; jagat-yātrām-universal affairs; nayanti-conduct; ābhiḥ-by the incarnations; pracoditāḥ-being inspired.





O King, I have already described to you various incarnations of the Lord, such as Yajña. The Manus and others are chosen by these incarnations, under whose direction they conduct the universal affairs.





The Manus execute the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various incarnations.





TEXT 4



catur-yugānte kālena

grastāñ chruti-gaṇān yathā

tapasā ṛṣayo 'paśyan

yato dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ

SYNONYMS



catuḥ-yuga-ante-at the end of every four yugas (Satya, Dvāpara, Tretā and Kali); kālena-in due course of time; grastān-lost; śruti-gaṇān-the Vedic instruction; yathā-as; tapasā-by austerity; ṛṣayaḥ-great saintly persons; apaśyan-by seeing misuse; yataḥ-wherefrom; dharmaḥ-occupational duties; sanātanaḥ-eternal.





At the end of every four yugas, the great saintly persons, upon seeing that the eternal occupational duties of mankind have been misused, reestablish the principles of religion.





In this verse, the words dharmaḥ and sanātanaḥ are very important. Sanātana means "eternal," and dharma means "occupational duties." From Satya-yuga to Kali-yuga, the principles of religion and occupational duty gradually deteriorate. In Satya-yuga, the religious principles are observed in full, without deviation. In Tretā-yuga, however, these principles are somewhat neglected, and only three fourths of the religious duties continue. In Dvāpara-yuga only half of the religious principles continue, and in Kali-yuga only one fourth of the religious principles, which gradually disappear. At the end of Kali-yuga, the principles of religion, or the occupational duties of humanity, are almost lost. Indeed, in this Kali-yuga we have passed through only five thousand years, yet the decline of sanātana-dharma is very prominent. The duty of saintly persons, therefore, is to take up seriously the cause of sanātana-dharma and try to reestablish it for the benefit of the entire human society. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has been started according to this principle. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.51):



kaler doṣa-nidhe rājan

asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ

kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya

mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet





The entire Kali-yuga is full of faults. It is like an unlimited ocean of faults. But the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is very authorized. Therefore, following in the footsteps of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who five hundred years ago inaugurated the movement of saṅkīrtana, kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, we are trying to introduce this movement, according to superior orders, all over the world. Now, if the inaugurators of this movement strictly follow the regulative principles and spread this movement for the benefit of all human society, they will certainly usher in a new way of life by reestablishing sanātana-dharma, the eternal occupational duties of humanity. The eternal occupational duty of the human being is to serve Kṛṣṇa. Jīvera 'svarūpa' haya-kṛṣṇera 'nitya-dāsa.' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]. This is the purport of sanātana-dharma. Sanātana means nitya, or "eternal," and kṛṣṇa-dāsa means "servant of Kṛṣṇa." The eternal occupational duty of the human being is to serve Kṛṣṇa. This is the sum and substance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.





TEXT 5



tato dharmaṁ catuṣpādaṁ

manavo hariṇoditāḥ

yuktāḥ sañcārayanty addhā

sve sve kāle mahīṁ nṛpa

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter (at the end of Kali-yuga); dharmam-the religious principle; catuḥ-pādam-in four parts; manavaḥ-all the Manus; hariṇā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uditāḥ-being instructed; yuktāḥ-being engaged; sañcārayanti-reestablish; addhā-directly; sve sve-in their own; kāle-time; mahīm-within this world; nṛpa-O King.





Thereafter, O King, the Manus, being fully engaged according to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, directly reestablish the principles of occupational duty in its full four parts.





Dharma, or occupational duty, can be established in its full four parts as explained in Bhagavad-gītā. In Bhagavad-gītā (4.1) the Lord says:



imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ

proktavān aham avyayam

vivasvān manave prāha

manur ikṣvākave 'bravīt





"I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvān, and Vivasvān instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Ikṣvāku." This is the process of disciplic succession. Following the same process, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching the principles of Bhagavad-gītā as it is, without deviation, all over the world. If the fortunate people of this time accept the instructions of Lord Kṛṣṇa, they will certainly be happy in Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's mission. Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted everyone, at least in India, to become a preacher of this mission. In other words, one should become a guru and preach the Lord's instructions all over the world for the peace and prosperity of humanity.





TEXT 6



pālayanti prajā-pālā

yāvad antaṁ vibhāgaśaḥ

yajña-bhāga-bhujo devā

ye ca tatrānvitāś ca taiḥ

SYNONYMS



pālayanti-execute the order; prajā-pālāḥ-the rulers of the world, namely the sons and grandsons of Manu; yāvat antam-unto the end of Manu's reign; vibhāgaśaḥ-in divisions; yajña-bhāga-bhujaḥ-the enjoyers of the result of yajñas; devāḥ-the demigods; ye-others; ca-also; tatra anvitāḥ-engaged in that business; ca-also; taiḥ-by them.





To enjoy the results of sacrifices [yajñas], the rulers of the world, namely the sons and grandsons of Manu, discharge the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead until the end of Manu's reign. The demigods also share the results of these sacrifices.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.2):



evaṁ paramparā-prāptam

imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ





"This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way." This paramparā system extends from Manu to Ikṣvāku and from Ikṣvāku to his sons and grandsons. The rulers of the world in the line of hierarchy execute the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the paramparā system. Anyone interested in peaceful life must participate in this paramparā system and perform yajñas. As Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in the paramparā system of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, we must perform saṅkīrtana-yajña all over the world (yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]). Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this age of Kali, and He will be easily satisfied if the saṅkīrtana movement is spread vigorously all over the world. This will also make people happy without a doubt.





TEXT 7



indro bhagavatā dattāṁ

trailokya-śriyam ūrjitām

bhuñjānaḥ pāti lokāṁs trīn

kāmaṁ loke pravarṣati

SYNONYMS



indraḥ-the King of heaven; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dattām-given; trailokya-of the three worlds; śriyam ūrjitām-the great opulences; bhuñjānaḥ-enjoying; pāti-maintains; lokān-all the planets; trīn-within the three worlds; kāmam-as much as necessary; loke-within the world; pravarṣati-pours rain.





Indra, King of heaven, receiving benedictions from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus enjoying highly developed opulences, maintains the living entities all over the three worlds by pouring sufficient rain on all the planets.





TEXT 8



jñānaṁ cānuyugaṁ brūte

hariḥ siddha-svarūpa-dhṛk

ṛṣi-rūpa-dharaḥ karma

yogaṁ yogeśa-rūpa-dhṛk

SYNONYMS



jñānam-transcendental knowledge; ca-and; anuyugam-according to the age; brūte-explains; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; siddha-svarūpa-dhṛk-assuming the form of liberated persons like Sanaka and Sanātana; ṛṣi-rūpa-dharaḥ-assuming the form of great saintly persons like Yājñavalkya; karma-karma; yogam-the mystic yoga system; yoga-īśa-rūpa-dhṛk-by assuming the form of a great yogī like Dattātreya.





In every yuga, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, assumes the form of Siddhas such as Sanaka to preach transcendental knowledge, He assumes the form of great saintly persons such as Yājñavalkya to teach the way of karma, and He assumes the form of great yogīs such as Dattātreya to teach the system of mystic yoga.





For the benefit of all human society, not only does the Lord assume the form of Manu as an incarnation to rule the universe properly, but He also assumes the forms of a teacher, yogī, jñānī and so on, for the benefit of human society. The duty of human society, therefore, is to accept the path of action enunciated by the Supreme Lord. In the present age, the sum and substance of all Vedic knowledge is to be found in Bhagavad-gītā, which is personally taught by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the same Supreme Godhead, assuming the form of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, expands the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā all over the world. In other words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is so kind and merciful to human society that He is always anxious to take the fallen souls back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 9



sargaṁ prajeśa-rūpeṇa

dasyūn hanyāt svarāḍ-vapuḥ

kāla-rūpeṇa sarveṣām

abhāvāya pṛthag guṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



sargam-creation of progeny; prajā-īśa-rūpeṇa-in the form of the Prajāpati Marīci and others; dasyūn-thieves and rogues; hanyāt-kills; sva-rāṭ-vapuḥ-in the form of the king; kāla-rūpeṇa-in the form of time; sarveṣām-of everything; abhāvāya-for the annihilation; pṛthak-different; guṇaḥ-possessing qualities.





In the form of Prajāpati Marīci, the Supreme Personality of Godhead creates progeny; becoming the king, He kills the thieves and rogues; and in the form of time, He annihilates everything. All the different qualities of material existence should be understood to be qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 10



stūyamāno janair ebhir

māyayā nāma-rūpayā

vimohitātmabhir nānā-

darśanair na ca dṛśyate

SYNONYMS



stūyamānaḥ-being sought; janaiḥ-by people in general; ebhiḥ-by all of them; māyayā-under the influence of māyā; nāma-rūpayā-possessing different names and forms; vimohita-bewildered; ātmabhiḥ-by illusion; nānā-various; darśanaiḥ-by philosophical approaches; na-not; ca-and; dṛśyate-the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be found.





People in general are bewildered by the illusory energy, and therefore they try to find the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through various types of research and philosophical speculation. Nonetheless, they are unable to see the Supreme Lord.





Whatever actions and reactions take place for the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world are actually brought about by the one Supreme Person. There are many varieties of philosophers trying to search for the ultimate cause under different names and forms, but they are unable to find the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who explains in Bhagavad-gītā that He is the origin of everything and the cause of all causes (ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavaḥ). This inability is due to the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. Devotees, therefore, accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is and remain happy simply by chanting the glories of the Lord.





TEXT 11



etat kalpa-vikalpasya

pramāṇaṁ parikīrtitam

yatra manvantarāṇy āhuś

caturdaśa purāvidaḥ

SYNONYMS



etat-all these; kalpa-in one day of Lord Brahmā; vikalpasya-of the changes in a kalpa, such as the change of Manus; pramāṇam-evidences; parikīrtitam-described (by me); yatra-wherein; manvantarāṇi-periods of Manu; āhuḥ-said; caturdaśa-fourteen; purā-vidaḥ-learned scholars.





In one kalpa, or one day of Brahmā, there take place the many changes called vikalpas. O King, all of these have been previously described to you by me. Learned scholars who know the past, present and future have ascertained that in one day of Brahmā there are fourteen Manus.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The System of Universal Management."



Chapter Fifteen



Bali Mahārāja Conquers the Heavenly Planets





This chapter describes how Bali, after performing the Viśvajit-yajña, received the benediction of a chariot and various kinds of paraphernalia for war, with which he attacked the King of heaven. All the demigods, being afraid of him, left the heavenly planets and went away, following the instructions of their guru.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit wanted to understand how Lord Vāmanadeva, on the plea of taking three paces of land from Bali Mahārāja, took everything away from him and arrested him. Śukadeva Gosvāmī responded to this inquiry with the following explanation. In the fight between the demons and the demigods, as described in the Eleventh Chapter of this canto, Bali was defeated, and he died in the fight, but by the grace of Śukrācārya he regained his life. Thus he engaged himself in the service of Śukrācārya, his spiritual master. The descendants of Bhṛgu, being pleased with him, engaged him in the Viśvajit-yajña. When this yajña was performed, from the fire of yajña came a chariot, horses, a flag, a bow, armor and two quivers of arrows. Mahārāja Prahlāda, Bali Mahārāja's grandfather, gave Bali an eternal garland of flowers, and Śukrācārya gave him a conchshell. Bali Mahārāja, after offering obeisances to Prahlāda, the brāhmaṇas and his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, equipped himself to fight with Indra and went to Indrapurī with his soldiers. Blowing his conchshell, he attacked the outskirts of Indra's kingdom. When Indra saw Bali Mahārāja's prowess, he went to his own spiritual master, Bṛhaspati, told him about Bali's strength, and inquired about his duty. Bṛhaspati informed the demigods that because Bali had been endowed with extraordinary power by the brāhmaṇas, the demigods could not fight with him. Their only hope was to gain the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Indeed, there was no alternative. Under the circumstances, Bṛhaspati advised the demigods to leave the heavenly planets and keep themselves somewhere invisible. The demigods followed his orders, and Bali Mahārāja, along with his associates, gained the entire kingdom of Indra. The descendants of Bhṛgu Muni, being very affectionate to their disciple Bali Mahārāja, engaged him in performing one hundred aśvamedha-yajñas. In this way, Bali enjoyed the opulences of the heavenly planets.





TEXTS 1–2



śrī-rājovāca

baleḥ pada-trayaṁ bhūmeḥ

kasmād dharir ayācata

bhūteśvaraḥ kṛpaṇa-val

labdhārtho 'pi babandha tam

etad veditum icchāmo



mahat kautūhalaṁ hi naḥ

yācñeśvarasya pūrṇasya

bandhanaṁ cāpy anāgasaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-the King said; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; pada-trayam-three steps; bhūmeḥ-of land; kasmāt-why; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead (in the form of Vāmana); ayācata-begged; bhūta-īśvaraḥ-the proprietor of all the universe; kṛpaṇa-vat-like a poor man; labdha-arthaḥ-He got the gift; api-although; babandha-arrested; tam-him (Bali); etat-all this; veditum-to understand; icchāmaḥ-we desire; mahat-very great; kautūhalam-eagerness; hi-indeed; naḥ-our; yācñā-begging; īśvarasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pūrṇasya-who is full in everything; bandhanam-arresting; ca-also; api-although; anāgasaḥ-of he who was faultless.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the proprietor of everything. Why did He beg three paces of land from Bali Mahārāja like a poor man, and when He got the gift for which He had begged, why did He nonetheless arrest Bali Mahārāja? I am very much anxious to know the mystery of these contradictions.





TEXT 3



śrī-śuka uvāca

parājita-śrīr asubhiś ca hāpito

hīndreṇa rājan bhṛgubhiḥ sa jīvitaḥ

sarvātmanā tān abhajad bhṛgūn baliḥ

śiṣyo mahātmārtha-nivedanena

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; parājita-being defeated; śrīḥ-opulences; asubhiḥ ca-of life also; hāpitaḥ-deprived; hi-indeed; indreṇa-by King Indra; rājan-O King; bhṛgubhiḥ-by the descendants of Bhṛgu Muni; saḥ-he (Bali Mahārāja); jīvitaḥ-brought back to life; sarva-ātmanā-in full submission; tān-them; abhajat-worshiped; bhṛgūn-the descendants of Bhṛgu Muni; baliḥ-Mahārāja Bali; śiṣyaḥ-a disciple; mahātmā-the great soul; artha-nivedanena-by giving them everything.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, when Bali Mahārāja lost all his opulence and died in the fight, Śukrācārya, a descendant of Bhṛgu Muni, brought him back to life. Because of this, the great soul Bali Mahārāja became a disciple of Śukrācārya and began to serve him with great faith, offering everything he had.





TEXT 4



taṁ brāhmaṇā bhṛgavaḥ prīyamāṇā

ayājayan viśvajitā tri-ṇākam

jigīṣamāṇaṁ vidhinābhiṣicya

mahābhiṣekeṇa mahānubhāvāḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-upon him (Bali Mahārāja); brāhmaṇāḥ-all the brāhmaṇas; bhṛgavaḥ-the descendants of Bhṛgu Muni; prīyamāṇāḥ-being very pleased; ayājayan-engaged him in performing a sacrifice; viśvajitā-known as Viśvajit; tri-nākam-the heavenly planets; jigīṣamāṇam-desiring to conquer; vidhinā-according to regulative principles; abhiṣicya-after purifying; mahā-abhiṣekeṇa-by bathing him in a great abhiṣeka ceremony; mahā-anubhāvāḥ-the exalted brāhmaṇas.





The brāhmaṇa descendants of Bhṛgu Muni were very pleased with Bali Mahārāja, who desired to conquer the kingdom of Indra. Therefore, after purifying him and properly bathing him according to regulative principles, they engaged him in performing the yajña known as Viśvajit.





TEXT 5



tato rathaḥ kāñcana-paṭṭa-naddho

hayāś ca haryaśva-turaṅga-varṇāḥ

dhvajaś ca siṁhena virājamāno

hutāśanād āsa havirbhir iṣṭāt

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; rathaḥ-a chariot; kāñcana-with gold; paṭṭa-and silk garments; naddhaḥ-wrapped; hayāḥ ca-horses also; haryaśva-turaṅga-varṇāḥ-exactly of the same color as the horses of Indra (yellow); dhvajaḥ ca-a flag also; siṁhena-with the mark of a lion; virājamānaḥ-existing; huta-aśanāt-from the blazing fire; āsa-there was; havirbhiḥ-by offerings of clarified butter; iṣṭāt-worshiped.





When ghee [clarified butter] was offered in the fire of sacrifice, there appeared from the fire a celestial chariot covered with gold and silk. There also appeared yellow horses like those of Indra, and a flag marked with a lion.





TEXT 6



dhanuś ca divyaṁ puraṭopanaddhaṁ

tūṇāv ariktau kavacaṁ ca divyam

pitāmahas tasya dadau ca mālām

amlāna-puṣpāṁ jalajaṁ ca śukraḥ

SYNONYMS



dhanuḥ-a bow; ca-also; divyam-uncommon; puraṭa-upanaddham-covered with gold; tūṇau-two quivers; ariktau-infallible; kavacam ca-and armor; divyam-celestial; pitāmahaḥ tasya-his grandfather, namely Prahlāda Mahārāja; dadau-gave; ca-and; mālām-a garland; amlāna-puṣpām-made of flowers that do not fade away; jala jam-a conchshell (which is born in water); ca-as well as; śukraḥ-Śukrācārya.





A gilded bow, two quivers of infallible arrows, and celestial armor also appeared. Bali Mahārāja's grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja offered Bali a garland of flowers that would never fade, and Śukrācārya gave him a conchshell.





TEXT 7



evaṁ sa viprārjita-yodhanārthas

taiḥ kalpita-svastyayano 'tha viprān

pradakṣiṇī-kṛtya kṛta-praṇāmaḥ

prahrādam āmantrya namaś-cakāra

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; saḥ-he (Bali Mahārāja); vipra-arjita-gained by the grace of the brāhmaṇas; yodhana-arthaḥ-possessing equipment for fighting; taiḥ-by them (the brāhmaṇas); kalpita-advice; svastyayanaḥ-ritualistic performance; atha-as; viprān-all the brāhmaṇas (Śukrācārya and others); pradakṣiṇī-kṛtya-circumambulating; kṛta-praṇāmaḥ-offered his respectful obeisances; prahrādam-unto Prahlāda Mahārāja; āmantrya-addressing; namaḥ-cakāra-offered him obeisances.





When Mahārāja Bali had thus performed the special ritualistic ceremony advised by the brāhmaṇas and had received, by their grace, the equipment for fighting, he circumambulated the brāhmaṇas and offered them obeisances. He also saluted Prahlāda Mahārāja and offered obeisances to him.





TEXTS 8–9



athāruhya rathaṁ divyaṁ

bhṛgu-dattaṁ mahārathaḥ

susrag-dharo 'tha sannahya

dhanvī khaḍgī dhṛteṣudhiḥ

hemāṅgada-lasad-bāhuḥ



sphuran-makara-kuṇḍalaḥ

rarāja ratham ārūḍho

dhiṣṇya-stha iva havyavāṭ

SYNONYMS



atha-thereupon; āruhya-getting on; ratham-the chariot; divyam-celestial; bhṛgu-dattam-given by Śukrācārya; mahā-rathaḥ-Bali Mahārāja, the great charioteer; su-srak-dharaḥ-decorated with a nice garland; atha-thus; sannahya-covering his body with armor; dhanvī-equipped with a bow; khaḍgī-taking a sword; dhṛta-iṣudhiḥ-taking a quiver of arrows; hema-aṅgada-lasat-bāhuḥ-decorated with golden bangles on his arms; sphurat-makara-kuṇḍalaḥ-decorated with brilliant earrings resembling sapphires; rarāja-was illuminating; ratham ārūḍhaḥ-getting on the chariot; dhiṣṇya-sthaḥ-situated on the altar of sacrifice; iva-like; havya-vāṭ-worshipable fire.





Then, after getting on the chariot given by Śukrācārya, Bali Mahārāja, decorated with a nice garland, put protective armor on his body, equipped himself with a bow, and took up a sword and a quiver of arrows. When he sat down on the seat of the chariot, his arms decorated with golden bangles and his ears with sapphire earrings, he shone like a worshipable fire.





TEXTS 10–11



tulyaiśvarya-bala-śrībhiḥ

sva-yūthair daitya-yūthapaiḥ

pibadbhir iva khaṁ dṛgbhir

dahadbhiḥ paridhīn iva

vṛto vikarṣan mahatīm



āsurīṁ dhvajinīṁ vibhuḥ

yayāv indra-purīṁ svṛddhāṁ

kampayann iva rodasī

SYNONYMS



tulya-aiśvarya-equal in opulence; bala-strength; śrībhiḥ-and in beauty; sva-yūthaiḥ-by his own men; daitya-yūtha-paiḥ-and by the chiefs of the demons; pibadbhiḥ-drinking; iva-as if; kham-the sky; dṛgbhiḥ-with the sight; dahadbhiḥ-burning; paridhīn-all directions; iva-as if; vṛtaḥ-surrounded; vikarṣan-attracting; mahatīm-very great; āsurīm-demoniac; dhvajinīm-soldiers; vibhuḥ-most powerful; yayau-went; indra-purīm-to the capital of King Indra; su-ṛddhām-very opulent; kampayan-causing to tremble; iva-as if; rodasī-the complete surface of the world.





When he assembled with his own soldiers and the demon chiefs, who were equal to him in strength, opulence and beauty, they appeared as if they would swallow the sky and burn all directions with their vision. After thus gathering the demoniac soldiers, Bali Mahārāja departed for the opulent capital of Indra. Indeed, he seemed to make the entire surface of the world tremble.





TEXT 12



ramyām upavanodyānaiḥ

śrīmadbhir nandanādibhiḥ

kūjad-vihaṅga-mithunair

gāyan-matta-madhuvrataiḥ

pravāla-phala-puṣporu-

bhāra-śākhāmara-drumaiḥ

SYNONYMS



ramyām-very pleasing; upavana-with orchards; udyānaiḥ-and gardens; śrīmadbhiḥ-very beautiful to see; nandana-ādibhiḥ-such as Nandana; kūjat-chirping; vihaṅga-birds; mithunaiḥ-with pairs; gāyat-singing; matta-mad; madhu-vrataiḥ-with bees; pravāla-of leaves; phala-puṣpa-fruits and flowers; uru-very great; bhāra-bearing the weight; śākhā-whose branches; amara-drumaiḥ-with eternal trees.





King Indra's city was full of pleasing orchards and gardens, such as the Nandana garden. Because of the weight of the flowers, leaves and fruit, the branches of the eternally existing trees were bending down. The gardens were visited by pairs of chirping birds and singing bees. The entire atmosphere was celestial.





TEXT 13



haṁsa-sārasa-cakrāhva-

kāraṇḍava-kulākulāḥ

nalinyo yatra krīḍanti

pramadāḥ sura-sevitāḥ

SYNONYMS



haṁsa-of swans; sārasa-cranes; cakrāhva-birds known as cakravākas; kāraṇḍava-and water fowl; kula-by groups; ākulāḥ-congested; nalinyaḥ-lotus flowers; yatra-where; krīḍanti-enjoyed sporting; pramadāḥ-beautiful women; sura-sevitāḥ-protected by the demigods.





Beautiful women protected by the demigods sported in the gardens, which had lotus ponds full of swans, cranes, cakravākas and ducks.





TEXT 14



ākāśa-gaṅgayā devyā

vṛtāṁ parikha-bhūtayā

prākāreṇāgni-varṇena

sāṭṭālenonnatena ca

SYNONYMS



ākāśa-gaṅgayā-by Ganges water known as Ākāśa-gaṅgā; devyā-the always-worshipable goddess; vṛtām-surrounded; parikha-bhūtayā-as a trench; prākāreṇa-by ramparts; agni-varṇena-resembling fire; sa-aṭṭālena-with places for fighting; unnatena-very high; ca-and.





The city was surrounded by trenches full of Ganges water, known as Ākāśa-gaṅgā, and by a high wall, which was the color of fire. Upon this wall were parapets for fighting.





TEXT 15



rukma-paṭṭa-kapāṭaiś ca

dvāraiḥ sphaṭika-gopuraiḥ

juṣṭāṁ vibhakta-prapathāṁ

viśvakarma-vinirmitām

SYNONYMS



rukma-paṭṭa-possessing plates made of gold; kapāṭaiḥ-the doors of which; ca-and; dvāraiḥ-with entrances; sphaṭika-gopuraiḥ-with gates made of excellent marble; juṣṭām-linked; vibhakta-prapathām-with many different public roads; viśvakarma-vinirmitām-constructed by Viśvakarmā, the heavenly architect.





The doors were made of solid gold plates, and the gates were of excellent marble. These were linked by various public roads. The entire city had been constructed by Viśvakarmā.





TEXT 16



sabhā-catvara-rathyāḍhyāṁ

vimānair nyarbudair yutām

śṛṅgāṭakair maṇimayair

vajra-vidruma-vedibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



sabhā-with assembly houses; catvara-courtyards; rathya-and public roads; āḍhyām-opulent; vimānaiḥ-by airplanes; nyarbudaiḥ-not less than ten crores (one hundred million); yutām-endowed; śṛṅga-āṭakaiḥ-with crossroads; maṇi-mayaiḥ-made of pearls; vajra-made of diamonds; vidruma-and coral; vedibhiḥ-with places to sit.





The city was full of courtyards, wide roads, assembly houses, and not less than one hundred million airplanes. The crossroads were made of pearl, and there were sitting places made of diamond and coral.





TEXT 17



yatra nitya-vayo-rūpāḥ

śyāmā viraja-vāsasaḥ

bhrājante rūpavan-nāryo

hy arcirbhir iva vahnayaḥ

SYNONYMS



yatra-in that city; nitya-vayaḥ-rūpāḥ-who were ever beautiful and young; śyāmāḥ-possessing the quality of śyāmā; viraja-vāsasaḥ-always dressed with clean garments; bhrājante-glitter; rūpa-vat-well decorated; nāryaḥ-women; hi-certainly; arcirbhiḥ-with many flames; iva-like; vahnayaḥ-fires.





Everlastingly beautiful and youthful women, who were dressed with clean garments, glittered in the city like fires with flames. They all possessed the quality of śyāmā.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives a hint of the quality of the śyāmā woman.



śīta-kāle bhaved uṣṇā

uṣma-kāle suśītalāḥ

stanau sukaṭhinau yāsāṁ

tāḥ śyāmāḥ parikīrtitāḥ





A woman whose body is very warm during the winter and cool during the summer and who generally has very firm breasts is called śyāmā.





TEXT 18



sura-strī-keśa-vibhraṣṭa-

nava-saugandhika-srajām

yatrāmodam upādāya

mārga āvāti mārutaḥ

SYNONYMS



sura-strī-of the women of the demigods; keśa-from the hair; vibhraṣṭa-fallen; nava-saugandhika-made of fresh, fragrant flowers; srajām-of the flower garlands; yatra-wherein; āmodam-the fragrance; upādāya-carrying; mārge-on the roads; āvāti-blows; mārutaḥ-the breeze.





The breezes blowing in the streets of the city bore the fragrance of the flowers falling from the hair of the women of the demigods.





TEXT 19



hema-jālākṣa-nirgacchad-

dhūmenāguru-gandhinā

pāṇḍureṇa praticchanna-

mārge yānti sura-priyāḥ

SYNONYMS



hema-jāla-akṣa-from dainty little windows made of networks of gold; nirgacchat-emanating; dhūmena-by smoke; aguru-gandhinā-fragrant due to burning incense known as aguru; pāṇḍureṇa-very white; praticchanna-covered; mārge-on the street; yānti-pass; sura-priyāḥ-beautiful public women known as Apsarās, celestial girls.





Apsarās passed on the streets, which were covered with the white, fragrant smoke of aguru incense emanating from windows with golden filigree.





TEXT 20



muktā-vitānair maṇi-hema-ketubhir

nānā-patākā-valabhībhir āvṛtām

śikhaṇḍi-pārāvata-bhṛṅga-nāditāṁ

vaimānika-strī-kala-gīta-maṅgalām

SYNONYMS



muktā-vitānaiḥ-by canopies decorated with pearls; maṇi-hema-ketubhiḥ-with flags made with pearls and gold; nānā-patākā-possessing various kinds of flags; valabhībhiḥ-with the domes of the palaces; āvṛtām-covered; śikhaṇḍi-of birds like peacocks; pārāvata-pigeons; bhṛṅga-bees; nāditām-vibrated by the respective sounds; vaimānika-getting on airplanes; strī-of women; kala-gīta-from the choral singing; maṅgalām-full of auspiciousness.





The city was shaded by canopies decorated with pearls, and the domes of the palaces had flags of pearl and gold. The city always resounded with the vibrations of peacocks, pigeons and bees, and above the city flew airplanes full of beautiful women who constantly chanted auspicious songs that were very pleasing to the ear.





TEXT 21



mṛdaṅga-śaṅkhānaka-dundubhi-svanaiḥ

satāla-vīṇā-murajeṣṭa-veṇubhiḥ

nṛtyaiḥ savādyair upadeva-gītakair

manoramāṁ sva-prabhayā jita-prabhām

SYNONYMS



mṛdaṅga-of drums; śaṅkha-conchshells; ānaka-dundubhi-and kettledrums; svanaiḥ-by the sounds; sa-tāla-in perfect tune; vīṇā-a stringed instrument; muraja-a kind of drum; iṣṭa-veṇubhiḥ-accompanied by the very nice sound of the flute; nṛtyaiḥ-with dancing; sa-vādyaiḥ-with concert instruments; upadeva-gītakaiḥ-with singing by the secondary demigods like the Gandharvas; manoramām-beautiful and pleasing; sva-prabhayā-by its own brilliance; jita-prabhām-the personification of beauty was conquered.





The city was filled with the sounds of mṛdaṅgas, conchshells, kettledrums, flutes and well-tuned stringed instruments all playing in concert. There was constant dancing and the Gandharvas sang. The combined beauty of Indrapurī defeated beauty personified.





TEXT 22



yāṁ na vrajanty adharmiṣṭhāḥ

khalā bhūta-druhaḥ śaṭhāḥ

māninaḥ kāmino lubdhā

ebhir hīnā vrajanti yat

SYNONYMS



yām-in the streets of the city; na-not; vrajanti-pass; adharmiṣṭhāḥ-irreligious persons; khalāḥ-envious persons; bhūta-druhaḥ-persons violent toward other living entities; śaṭhāḥ-cheaters; māninaḥ-falsely prestigious; kāminaḥ-lusty; lubdhāḥ-greedy; ebhiḥ-these; hīnāḥ-completely devoid of; vrajanti-walk; yat-on the street.





No one who was sinful, envious, violent toward other living entities, cunning, falsely proud, lusty or greedy could enter that city. The people who lived there were all devoid of these faults.





TEXT 23



tāṁ deva-dhānīṁ sa varūthinī-patir

bahiḥ samantād rurudhe pṛtanyayā

ācārya-dattaṁ jalajaṁ mahā-svanaṁ

dadhmau prayuñjan bhayam indra-yoṣitām

SYNONYMS



tām-that; deva-dhānīm-place where Indra lived; saḥ-he (Bali Mahārāja); varūthinī-patiḥ-the commander of the soldiers; bahiḥ-outside; samantāt-in all directions; rurudhe-attacked; pṛtanyayā-by soldiers; ācārya-dattam-given by Śukrācārya; jala-jam-the conchshell; mahā-svanam-a loud sound; dadhmau-resounded; prayuñjan-creating; bhayam-fear; indra-yoṣitām-of all the ladies protected by Indra.





Bali Mahārāja, who was the commander of numberless soldiers, gathered his soldiers outside this abode of Indra and attacked it from all directions. He sounded the conchshell given him by his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, thus creating a fearful situation for the women protected by Indra.





TEXT 24



maghavāṁs tam abhipretya

baleḥ paramam udyamam

sarva-deva-gaṇopeto

gurum etad uvāca ha

SYNONYMS



maghavān-Indra; tam-the situation; abhipretya-understanding; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; paramam udyamam-great enthusiasm; sarva-deva-gaṇa-by all the demigods; upetaḥ-accompanied; gurum-unto the spiritual master; etat-the following words; uvāca-said; ha-indeed.





Seeing Bali Mahārāja's indefatigable endeavor and understanding his motive, King Indra, along with the other demigods, approached his spiritual master, Bṛhaspati, and spoke as follows.





TEXT 25



bhagavann udyamo bhūyān

baler naḥ pūrva-vairiṇaḥ

aviṣahyam imaṁ manye

kenāsīt tejasorjitaḥ

SYNONYMS



bhagavan-O my lord; udyamaḥ-enthusiasm; bhūyān-great; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; naḥ-our; pūrva-vairiṇaḥ-past enemy; aviṣahyam-unbearable; imam-this; manye-I think; kena-by whom; āsīt-got; tejasā-prowess; ūrjitaḥ-achieved.





My lord, our old enemy Bali Mahārāja now has new enthusiasm, and he has obtained such astonishing power that we think that perhaps we cannot resist his prowess.





TEXT 26



nainaṁ kaścit kuto vāpi

prativyoḍhum adhīśvaraḥ

pibann iva mukhenedaṁ

lihann iva diśo daśa

dahann iva diśo dṛgbhiḥ

saṁvartāgnir ivotthitaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; enam-this arrangement; kaścit-anyone; kutaḥ-from anywhere; vā api-either; prativyoḍhum-to counteract; adhīśvaraḥ-capable; piban iva-as if drinking; mukhena-by the mouth; idam-this (world); lihan iva-as if licking up; diśaḥ daśa-all ten directions; dahan iva-as if burning; diśaḥ-all directions; dṛgbhiḥ-by his vision; saṁvarta-agniḥ-the fire known as saṁvarta; iva-like; utthitaḥ-now arisen.





No one anywhere can counteract this military arrangement of Bali's. It now appears that Bali is trying to drink up the entire universe with his mouth, lick up the ten directions with his tongue, and raise fire in every direction with his eyes. Indeed, he has arisen like the annihilating fire known as saṁvartaka.





TEXT 27



brūhi kāraṇam etasya

durdharṣatvasya mad-ripoḥ

ojaḥ saho balaṁ tejo

yata etat samudyamaḥ

SYNONYMS



brūhi-kindly inform us; kāraṇam-the cause; etasya-of all this; durdharṣatvasya-of the formidableness; mat-ripoḥ-of my enemy; ojaḥ-prowess; sahaḥ-energy; balam-strength; tejaḥ-influence; yataḥ-wherefrom; etat-all this; samudyamaḥ-endeavor.





Kindly inform me. What is the cause for Bali Mahārāja's strength, endeavor, influence and victory? How has he become so enthusiastic?





TEXT 28



śrī-gurur uvāca

jānāmi maghavañ chatror

unnater asya kāraṇam

śiṣyāyopabhṛtaṁ tejo

bhṛgubhir brahma-vādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-guruḥ uvāca-Bṛhaspati said; jānāmi-I know; maghavan-O Indra; śatroḥ-of the enemy; unnateḥ-of the elevation; asya-of him; kāraṇam-the cause; śiṣyāya-unto the disciple; upabhṛtam-endowed; tejaḥ-power; bhṛgubhiḥ-by the descendants of Bhṛgu; brahma-vādibhiḥ-all-powerful brāhmaṇas.





Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, said: O Indra, I know the cause for your enemy's becoming so powerful. The brāhmaṇa descendants of Bhṛgu Muni, being pleased by Bali Mahārāja, their disciple, endowed him with such extraordinary power.





Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, informed Indra, "Ordinarily, Bali and his forces could not achieve such strength, but it appears that the brāhmaṇa descendants of Bhṛgu Muni, being pleased with Bali Mahārāja, endowed them with this spiritual power." In other words, Bṛhaspati informed Indra that Bali Mahārāja's prowess was not his own but that of his exalted guru, Śukrācārya. We sing in our daily prayers, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi . By the pleasure of the spiritual master, one can get extraordinary power, especially in spiritual advancement. The blessings of the spiritual master are more powerful than one's personal endeavor for such advancement. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore says:



guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete kariyā aikya,

āra nā kariha mane āśā

Especially for spiritual advancement, one should carry out the bona fide order of the spiritual master. By the paramparā system, one can thus be endowed with the original spiritual power coming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead (evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]).





TEXT 29



ojasvinaṁ baliṁ jetuṁ

na samartho 'sti kaścana

bhavad-vidho bhavān vāpi

varjayitveśvaraṁ harim

vijeṣyati na ko 'py enaṁ

brahma-tejaḥ-samedhitam

nāsya śaktaḥ puraḥ sthātuṁ

kṛtāntasya yathā janāḥ

SYNONYMS



ojasvinam-so powerful; balim-Bali Mahārāja; jetum-to conquer; na-not; samarthaḥ-able; asti-is; kaścana-anyone; bhavat-vidhaḥ-like you; bhavān-you yourself; vā api-either; varjayitvā-excepting; īśvaram-the supreme controller; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vijeṣyati-will conquer; na-not; kaḥ api-anyone; enam-him (Bali Mahārāja); brahma-tejaḥ-samedhitam-now empowered with brahma-tejas, extraordinary spiritual power; na-not; asya-of him; śaktaḥ-is able; puraḥ-in front; sthātum-to stay; kṛta-antasya-of Yamarāja; yathā-as; janāḥ-people.





Neither you nor your men can conquer the most powerful Bali. Indeed, no one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead can conquer him, for he is now equipped with the supreme spiritual power [brahma-tejas]. As no one can stand before Yamarāja, no one can now stand before Bali Mahārāja.





TEXT 30



tasmān nilayam utsṛjya

yūyaṁ sarve tri-viṣṭapam

yāta kālaṁ pratīkṣanto

yataḥ śatror viparyayaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; nilayam-not visible; utsṛjya-giving up; yūyam-you; sarve-all; tri-viṣṭapam-the heavenly kingdom; yāta-go somewhere else; kālam-time; pratīkṣantaḥ-waiting for; yataḥ-whereof; śatroḥ-of your enemy; viparyayaḥ-the reverse condition arrives.





Therefore, waiting until the situation of your enemies is reversed, you should all leave this heavenly planet and go elsewhere, where you will not be seen.





TEXT 31



eṣa vipra-balodarkaḥ

sampraty ūrjita-vikramaḥ

teṣām evāpamānena

sānubandho vinaṅkṣyati

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this (Bali Mahārāja); vipra-bala-udarkaḥ-flourishing because of the brahminical power invested in him; samprati-at the present moment; ūrjita-vikramaḥ-extremely powerful; teṣām-of the same brāhmaṇas; eva-indeed; apamānena-by insult; sa-anubandhaḥ-with friends and assistants; vinaṅkṣyati-will be vanquished.





Bali Mahārāja has now become extremely powerful because of the benedictions given him by the brāhmaṇas, but when he later insults the brāhmaṇas, he will be vanquished, along with his friends and assistants.





Bali Mahārāja and Indra were enemies. Therefore, when Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, predicted that Bali Mahārāja would be vanquished when he insulted the brāhmaṇas by whose grace he had become so powerful, Bali Mahārāja's enemies were naturally anxious to know when that opportune moment would come. To pacify King Indra, Bṛhaspati assured him that the time would certainly come, for Bṛhaspati could see that in the future Bali Mahārāja would defy the orders of Śukrācārya in order to pacify Lord Viṣṇu, Vāmanadeva. Of course, to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can take all risks. To please Vāmanadeva, Bali Mahārāja risked defying the orders of his spiritual master, Śukrācārya. Because of this, he would lose all his property, yet because of devotional service to the Lord, he would get more than he expected, and in the future, in the eighth manvantara, he would occupy the throne of Indra again.





TEXT 32



evaṁ sumantritārthās te

guruṇārthānudarśinā

hitvā tri-viṣṭapaṁ jagmur

gīrvāṇāḥ kāma-rūpiṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; su-mantrita-being well advised; arthāḥ-about duties; te-they (the demigods); guruṇā-by their spiritual master; artha-anudarśinā-whose instructions were quite befitting; hitvā-giving up; tri-viṣṭapam-the heavenly kingdom; jagmuḥ-went; gīrvāṇāḥ-the demigods; kāma-rūpiṇaḥ-who could assume any form they liked.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The demigods, being thus advised by Bṛhaspati for their benefit, immediately accepted his words. Assuming forms according to their desire, they left the heavenly kingdom and scattered, without being observed by the demons.





The word kāma-rūpiṇaḥ indicates that the demigods, the inhabitants of the heavenly planets, can assume any form they desire. Thus it was not at all difficult for them to remain incognito before the eyes of the demons.





TEXT 33



deveṣv atha nilīneṣu

balir vairocanaḥ purīm

deva-dhānīm adhiṣṭhāya

vaśaṁ ninye jagat-trayam

SYNONYMS



deveṣu-all the demigods; atha-in this way; nilīneṣu-when they disappeared; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; vairocanaḥ-the son of Virocana; purīm-the heavenly kingdom; deva-dhānīm-the residence of the demigods; adhiṣṭhāya-taking possession of; vaśam-under control; ninye-brought; jagat-trayam-the three worlds.





When the demigods had disappeared, Bali Mahārāja, the son of Virocana, entered the heavenly kingdom, and from there he brought the three worlds under his control.





TEXT 34



taṁ viśva-jayinaṁ śiṣyaṁ

bhṛgavaḥ śiṣya-vatsalāḥ

śatena hayamedhānām

anuvratam ayājayan

SYNONYMS



tam-unto him (Bali Mahārāja); viśva-jayinam-the conqueror of the entire universe; śiṣyam-because of his being a disciple; bhṛgavaḥ-the brāhmaṇas, descendants of Bhṛgu like Śukrācārya; śiṣya-vatsalāḥ-being very pleased with the disciple; śatena-by one hundred; haya-medhānām-sacrifices known as aśvamedha; anuvratam-following the instruction of the brāhmaṇas; ayājayan-caused to execute.





The brāhmaṇa descendants of Bhṛgu, being very pleased with their disciple, who had conquered the entire universe, now engaged him in performing one hundred aśvamedha sacrifices.





We have seen in the dispute between Mahārāja Pṛthu and Indra that when Mahārāja Pṛthu wanted to perform one hundred aśvamedha-yajñas, Indra wanted to impede him, for it is because of such great sacrifices that Indra was made King of heaven. Here the brāhmaṇa descendants of Bhṛgu decided that although Mahārāja Bali was situated on the throne of Indra, he would not be able to stay there unless he performed such sacrifices. Therefore they advised Mahārāja Bali to perform at least as many aśvamedha-yajñas as Indra. The word ayājayan indicates that all the brāhmaṇas induced Bali Mahārāja to perform such sacrifices.





TEXT 35



tatas tad-anubhāvena

bhuvana-traya-viśrutām

kīrtiṁ dikṣu-vitanvānaḥ

sa reja uḍurāḍ iva

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; tat-anubhāvena-because of performing such great sacrifices; bhuvana-traya-throughout the three worlds; viśrutām-celebrated; kīrtim-reputation; dikṣu-in all directions; vitanvānaḥ-spreading; saḥ-he (Bali Mahārāja); reje-became effulgent; uḍurāṭ-the moon; iva-like.





When Bali Mahārāja performed these sacrifices, he gained a great reputation in all directions, throughout the three worlds. Thus he shone in his position, like the brilliant moon in the sky.





TEXT 36



bubhuje ca śriyaṁ svṛddhāṁ

dvija-devopalambhitām

kṛta-kṛtyam ivātmānaṁ

manyamāno mahāmanāḥ

SYNONYMS



bubhuje-enjoyed; ca-also; śriyam-opulence; su-ṛddhām-prosperity; dvija-of the brāhmaṇas; deva-as good as the demigods; upalambhitām-achieved because of the favor; kṛta-kṛtyam-very satisfied by his activities; iva-like that; ātmānam-himself; manyamānaḥ-thinking; mahā-manāḥ-the great-minded.





Because of the favor of the brāhmaṇas, the great soul Bali Mahārāja, thinking himself very satisfied, became very opulent and prosperous and began to enjoy the kingdom.





The brāhmaṇas are called dvija-deva, and kṣatriyas are generally called nara-deva. The word deva actually refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The brāhmaṇas guide human society in becoming happy by satisfying Lord Viṣṇu, and according to their advice, the kṣatriyas, who are called nara-deva, keep law and order so that other people, namely the vaiśyas and śūdras, may properly follow regulative principles. In this way, people are gradually elevated to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Bali Mahārāja Conquers the Heavenly Planets."



Chapter Sixteen



Executing the Payo-vrata Process of Worship





As described in this chapter, because Aditi, the mother of the demigods, was very afflicted, her husband, Kaśyapa Muni, told her how to observe vows in austerities for the benefit of her sons.





Since the demigods were not visible in the heavenly kingdom, their mother, Aditi, because of separation from them, was very much aggrieved. One day after many, many years, the great sage Kaśyapa emerged from a trance of meditation and returned to his āśrama. He saw that the āśrama was no longer beautiful and that his wife was very morose. Everywhere in the āśrama, he saw signs of lamentation. The great sage therefore inquired from his wife about the well-being of the āśrama and asked her why she looked so morose. After Aditi informed Kaśyapa Muni about the āśrama's well-being, she told him that she was lamenting for the absence of her sons. She then requested him to tell her how her sons could return and reoccupy their positions. She wanted all good fortune for her sons. Moved by Aditi's request, Kaśyapa Muni instructed her in the philosophy of self-realization, the difference between matter and spirit, and how to be unaffected by material loss. But when he saw that Aditi was not satisfied even after he had given these instructions, he advised her to worship Vāsudeva, Janārdana. He assured her that only Lord Vāsudeva could satisfy her and fulfill all her desires. When Aditi then expressed her desire to worship Lord Vāsudeva, Prajāpati Kaśyapa told her about a process of worship known as payo-vrata, which is executed in twelve days. Lord Brahmā had instructed him how to satisfy Lord Kṛṣṇa by this process, and thus he advised his wife to observe this vow and its regulative principles.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ putreṣu naṣṭeṣu

deva-mātāditis tadā

hṛte tri-viṣṭape daityaiḥ

paryatapyad anāthavat

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; putreṣu-when her sons; naṣṭeṣu-disappearing from their position; deva-mātā-the mother of the demigods; aditiḥ-Aditi; tadā-at that time; hṛte-because of being lost; tri-viṣṭape-the kingdom of heaven; daityaiḥ-by the influence of the demons; paryatapyat-began to lament; anātha-vat-as if she had no protector.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, when Aditi's sons, the demigods, had thus disappeared from heaven and the demons had occupied their places, Aditi began lamenting, as if she had no protector.





TEXT 2



ekadā kaśyapas tasyā

āśramaṁ bhagavān agāt

nirutsavaṁ nirānandaṁ

samādher virataś cirāt

SYNONYMS



ekadā-one day; kaśyapaḥ-the great sage Kaśyapa Muni; tasyāḥ-of Aditi; āśramam-to the shelter; bhagavān-greatly powerful; agāt-went; nirutsavam-without enthusiasm; nirānandam-without jubilation; samādheḥ-his trance; virataḥ-stopping; cirāt-after a long time.





After many, many days, the great powerful sage Kaśyapa Muni arose from a trance of meditation and returned home to see the āśrama of Aditi neither jubilant nor festive.





TEXT 3



sa patnīṁ dīna-vadanāṁ

kṛtāsana-parigrahaḥ

sabhājito yathā-nyāyam

idam āha kurūdvaha

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; patnīm-unto his wife; dīna-vadanām-having a dry face; kṛta-āsana-parigrahaḥ-after accepting a sitting place; sabhājitaḥ-being honored by Aditi; yathā-nyāyam-according to time and place; idam āha-spoke as follows; kuru-udvaha-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the best of the Kurus.





O best of the Kurus, when Kaśyapa Muni had been properly received and welcomed, he took his seat and then spoke as follows to his wife, Aditi, who was very morose.





TEXT 4



apy abhadraṁ na viprāṇāṁ

bhadre loke 'dhunāgatam

na dharmasya na lokasya

mṛtyoś chandānuvartinaḥ

SYNONYMS



api-whether; abhadram-ill fortune; na-not; viprāṇām-of the brāhmaṇas; bhadre-O most gentle Aditi; loke-in this world; adhunā-at the present moment; āgatam-has come; na-not; dharmasya-of religious principles; na-not; lokasya-of the people in general; mṛtyoḥ-death; chanda-anuvartinaḥ-who are followers of the whims of death.





O most gentle one, I wonder whether anything inauspicious has now taken place in regard to religious principles, the brāhmaṇas or the people in general, who are subject to the whims of death.





There are prescribed duties for all the inhabitants of this material world, especially for the brāhmaṇas but also for the people in general, who are subject to the whims of death. Kaśyapa Muni wondered whether the regulative principles, which are meant for the well-being of everyone, had been disobeyed. He accordingly continued his inquiries for seven verses.





TEXT 5



api vākuśalaṁ kiñcid

gṛheṣu gṛha-medhini

dharmasyārthasya kāmasya

yatra yogo hy ayoginām

SYNONYMS



api-I am wondering; vā-either; akuśalam-inauspiciousness; kiñcit-some; gṛheṣu-at home; gṛha-medhini-O my wife, who are attached to household life; dharmasya-of the principles of religion; arthasya-of the economic condition; kāmasya-of satisfaction of desires; yatra-at home; yogaḥ-the result of meditation; hi-indeed; ayoginām-even of those who are not transcendentalists.





O my wife, who are very much attached to household life, if the principles of religion, economic development and satisfaction of the senses are properly followed in household life, one's activities are as good as those of a transcendentalist. I wonder whether there have been any discrepancies in following these principles.





In this verse, Aditi has been addressed by her husband, Kaśyapa Muni, as gṛha-medhini, which means "one who is satisfied in household life for sense gratification." Generally, those who are in household life pursue sense gratification in the field of activities performed for material results. Such gṛhamedhīs have only one aim in life-sense gratification. Therefore it is said, yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham: [SB 7.9.45] the householder's life is based on sense gratification, and therefore the happiness derived from it is very meager. Nonetheless, the Vedic process is so comprehensive that even in householder life one can adjust his activities according to the regulative principles of dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa. One's aim should be to achieve liberation, but because one cannot at once give up sense gratification, in the śāstras there are injunctions prescribing how to follow the principles of religion, economic development and sense gratification. As explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.9), dharmasya hy āpavargyasya nārtho 'rthāyopakalpate: "All occupational engagements are certainly meant for ultimate liberation. They should never be performed for material gain." Those who are in household life should not think that religion is meant to improve the process of the householder's sense gratification. Household life is also meant for advancement in spiritual understanding, by which one can ultimately gain liberation from the material clutches. One should remain in household life with the aim of understanding the ultimate goal of life (tattva jijñāsā). Then household life is as good as the life of a yogi. Kaśyapa Muni therefore inquired from his wife whether the principles of religion, economic development and sense gratification were being properly followed in terms of the śāstric injunctions. As soon as one deviates from the injunctions of the śāstra, the purpose of household life is immediately lost in confusion.





TEXT 6



api vātithayo 'bhyetya

kuṭumbāsaktayā tvayā

gṛhād apūjitā yātāḥ

pratyutthānena vā kvacit

SYNONYMS



api-whether; vā-either; atithayaḥ-guests who come without an invitation; abhyetya-coming to the home; kuṭumba-āsaktayā-who were too attached to the family members; tvayā-by you; gṛhāt-from the house; apūjitāḥ-without being properly welcomed; yātāḥ-went away; pratyutthānena-by standing up; vā-either; kvacit-sometimes.





I wonder whether because of being too attached to the members of your family, you failed to properly receive uninvited guests, who therefore were not welcomed and went away.





It is the duty of a householder to receive guests, even if a guest be an enemy. When a guest comes to one's home, one should properly receive him by standing up and offering him a seat. It is enjoined, gṛhe śatrum api prāptaṁ viśvastam akutobhayam: if even an enemy comes to one's home, one should receive him in such a way that the guest will forget that his host is an enemy. According to one's position, one should properly receive anyone who comes to one's home. At least a seat and a glass of water should be offered, so that the guest will not be displeased. Kaśyapa Muni inquired from Aditi whether disrespect had been shown to such guests, or atithis. The word atithi refers to one who comes without an invitation.





TEXT 7



gṛheṣu yeṣv atithayo

nārcitāḥ salilair api

yadi niryānti te nūnaṁ

pherurāja-gṛhopamāḥ

SYNONYMS



gṛheṣu-at home; yeṣu-which; atithayaḥ-uninvited guests; na-not; arcitāḥ-welcomed; salilaiḥ api-even by offering a glass of water; yadi-if; niryānti-they go away; te-such household life; nūnam-indeed; pheru-rāja-of jackals; gṛha-the homes; upamāḥ-like.





Homes from which guests go away without having been received even with an offering of a little water are like those holes in the field which are the homes of jackals.





In a field there may be holes made by snakes and mice, but when there are very big holes, it may be supposed that jackals live there. Certainly no one goes to take shelter in such homes. Thus the homes of human beings where atithis, uninvited guests, are not properly received are like the homes of jackals.





TEXT 8



apy agnayas tu velāyāṁ

na hutā haviṣā sati

tvayodvigna-dhiyā bhadre

proṣite mayi karhicit

SYNONYMS



api-whether; agnayaḥ-fires; tu-indeed; velāyām-in the fire sacrifice; na-not; hutāḥ-offered; haviṣā-by ghee; sati-O chaste woman; tvayā-by you; udvigna-dhiyā-because of some anxiety; bhadre-O auspicious woman; proṣite-was away from home; mayi-when I; karhicit-sometimes.





O chaste and auspicious woman, when I left home for other places, were you in so much anxiety that you did not offer oblations of ghee into the fire?





TEXT 9



yat-pūjayā kāma-dughān

yāti lokān gṛhānvitaḥ

brāhmaṇo 'gniś ca vai viṣṇoḥ

sarva-devātmano mukham

SYNONYMS



yat-pūjayā-by worshiping the fire and brāhmaṇas; kāma-dughān-which fulfill one's desires; yāti-one goes; lokān-to the destination of the higher planetary system; gṛha-anvitaḥ-a person attached to household life; brāhmaṇaḥ-the brāhmaṇas; agniḥ ca-and the fire; vai-indeed; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; sarva-deva-ātmanaḥ-the soul of all the demigods; mukham-the mouth.





By worshiping the fire and the brāhmaṇas, a householder can achieve the desired goal of residing in the higher planets, for the sacrificial fire and the brāhmaṇas are to be considered the mouth of Lord Viṣṇu, who is the Supersoul of all the demigods.





According to the Vedic system, a fire sacrifice is held in order to offer oblations of ghee, grains, fruits, flowers and so on, so that Lord Viṣṇu may eat and be satisfied. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.26):



patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ





"If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will accept it." Therefore, all these items may be offered in the sacrificial fire, and Lord Viṣṇu will be satisfied. Similarly, brāhmaṇa-bhojana, feeding of the brāhmaṇas, is also recommended, for when the brāhmaṇas eat sumptuous remnants of food after yajña, this is another way that Lord Viṣṇu Himself eats. Therefore the Vedic principles recommend that in every festival or ceremony one offer oblations to the fire and give sumptuous food for the brāhmaṇas to eat. By such activities, a householder may be elevated to the heavenly planets and similar places in the higher planetary systems.





TEXT 10



api sarve kuśalinas

tava putrā manasvini

lakṣaye 'svastham ātmānaṁ

bhavatyā lakṣaṇair aham

SYNONYMS



api-whether; sarve-all; kuśalinaḥ-in full auspiciousness; tava-your; putrāḥ-sons; manasvini-O great-minded lady; lakṣaye-I see; asvastham-not in tranquillity; ātmānam-the mind; bhavatyāḥ-of you; lakṣaṇaiḥ-by symptoms; aham-I.





O great-minded lady, are all your sons faring well? Seeing your withered face, I can perceive that your mind is not tranquil. How is this so?





TEXT 11



śrī-aditir uvāca

bhadraṁ dvija-gavāṁ brahman

dharmasyāsya janasya ca

tri-vargasya paraṁ kṣetraṁ

gṛhamedhin gṛhā ime

SYNONYMS



śrī-aditiḥ uvāca-Śrīmatī Aditi said; bhadram-all auspiciousness; dvija-gavām-of the brāhmaṇas and the cows; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; dharmasya asya-of the religious principles mentioned in śāstra; janasya-of the people in general; ca-and; tri-vargasya-of the three processes of elevation (dharma, artha and kāma); param-the supreme; kṣetram-field; gṛhamedhin-O my husband, who are attached to household life; gṛhāḥ-your home; ime-all these things.





Aditi said: O my respected brāhmaṇa husband, all is well with the brāhmaṇas, the cows, religion and the welfare of other people. O master of the house, the three principles of dharma, artha and kāma flourish in household life, which is consequently full of good fortune.





In household life one can develop the three principles of religion, economic development and sense gratification according to the regulations given in the śāstras, but to attain liberation one must give up household life and place himself in the transcendental renounced order. Kaśyapa Muni was not in the renounced order of life. Therefore he is addressed here once as brahman and another time as gṛhamedhin. Aditi, his wife, assured him that as far as household life was concerned, everything was going nicely, and the brāhmaṇas and cows were being honored and protected. In other words, there were no disturbances; household life was duly progressing.





TEXT 12



agnayo 'tithayo bhṛtyā

bhikṣavo ye ca lipsavaḥ

sarvaṁ bhagavato brahmann

anudhyānān na riṣyati

SYNONYMS



agnayaḥ-worshiping the fires; atithayaḥ-receiving the guests; bhṛtyāḥ-satisfying the servants; bhikṣavaḥ-pleasing the beggars; ye-all of them who; ca-and; lipsavaḥ-as they desire (are taken care of); sarvam-all of them; bhagavataḥ-of you, my lord; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; anudhyānāt-from always thinking; na riṣyati-nothing is missed (everything is properly done).





O beloved husband, the fires, guests, servants and beggars are all being properly cared for by me. Because I always think of you, there is no possibility that any of the religious principles will be neglected.





TEXT 13



ko nu me bhagavan kāmo

na sampadyeta mānasaḥ

yasyā bhavān prajādhyakṣa

evaṁ dharmān prabhāṣate

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-what; nu-indeed; me-my; bhagavan-O lord; kāmaḥ-desire; na-not; sampadyeta-can be fulfilled; mānasaḥ-within my mind; yasyāḥ-of me; bhavān-your good self; prajā-adhyakṣaḥ-Prajāpati; evam-thus; dharmān-religious principles; prabhāṣate-talks.





O my lord, since you are a Prajāpati and are personally my instructor in the principles of religion, where is the possibility that all my desires will not be fulfilled?





TEXT 14



tavaiva mārīca manaḥ-śarīrajāḥ

prajā imāḥ sattva-rajas-tamo-juṣaḥ

samo bhavāṁs tāsv asurādiṣu prabho

tathāpi bhaktaṁ bhajate maheśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



tava-your; eva-indeed; mārīca-O son of Marīci; manaḥ-śarīra-jāḥ-born either of your body or of your mind (all the demons and demigods); prajāḥ-born of you; imāḥ-all of them; sattva-rajaḥ-tamaḥ-juṣaḥ-infected with sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa; samaḥ-equal; bhavān-your good self; tāsu-to every one of them; asura-ādiṣu-beginning with the asuras; prabho-O my lord; tathā api-still; bhaktam-unto the devotees; bhajate-takes care of; mahā-īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller.





O son of Marīci, because you are a great personality you are equal toward all the demons and demigods, who are born either from your body or from your mind and who possess one or another of the three qualities-sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa. But although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, is equal toward all living entities, He is especially favorable to the devotees.





In Bhagavad-gītā (9.29) the Lord says:



samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham





Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equal toward everyone, He is especially inclined toward those who engage in His devotional service. The Lord says, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: "My dear son of Kuntī, please declare that My devotee will never be vanquished." Elsewhere, Kṛṣṇa also says:



ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ





(Bg. 4.11)



Actually, everyone is trying to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead in various ways, but according to their methods of approach, the Supreme Lord endows them with different benedictions. Thus Aditi appealed to her husband by saying that since even the supreme controller favors His devotees and since Indra, Kaśyapa's devoted son, was in difficulty, Kaśyapa should bestow his favor upon Indra.





TEXT 15



tasmād īśa bhajantyā me

śreyaś cintaya suvrata

hṛta-śriyo hṛta-sthānān

sapatnaiḥ pāhi naḥ prabho

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; īśa-O powerful controller; bhajantyāḥ-of your servitor; me-me; śreyaḥ-auspiciousness; cintaya-just consider; su-vrata-O most gentle one; hṛta-śriyaḥ-bereft of all opulence; hṛta-sthānān-bereft of a residence; sapatnaiḥ-by the competitors; pāhi-please protect; naḥ-us; prabho-O my lord.





Therefore, most gentle lord, kindly favor your maidservant. We have now been deprived of our opulence and residence by our competitors, the demons. Kindly give us protection.





Aditi, the mother of the demigods, appealed to Kaśyapa Muni to give the demigods protection. When we speak of the demigods, this also includes their mother.





TEXT 16



parair vivāsitā sāhaṁ

magnā vyasana-sāgare

aiśvaryaṁ śrīr yaśaḥ sthānaṁ

hṛtāni prabalair mama

SYNONYMS



paraiḥ-by our enemies; vivāsitā-taken away from our residential quarters; sā-the same; aham-I; magnā-drowned; vyasana-sāgare-in an ocean of trouble; aiśvaryam-opulence; śrīḥ-beauty; yaśaḥ-reputation; sthānam-place; hṛtāni-all taken away; prabalaiḥ-very powerful; mama-my.





The demons, our formidably powerful enemies, have taken away our opulence, our beauty, our fame and even our residence. Indeed, we have now been exiled, and we are drowning in an ocean of trouble.





TEXT 17



yathā tāni punaḥ sādho

prapadyeran mamātmajāḥ

tathā vidhehi kalyāṇaṁ

dhiyā kalyāṇa-kṛttama

SYNONYMS



yathā-as; tāni-all of our lost things; punaḥ-again; sādho-O great saintly person; prapadyeran-can regain; mama-my; ātmajāḥ-offspring (sons); tathā-so; vidhehi-kindly do; kalyāṇam-auspiciousness; dhiyā-by consideration; kalyāṇa-kṛt-tama-O you who are the best person to act for our welfare.





O best of sages, best of all those who grant auspicious benedictions, please consider our situation and bestow upon my sons the benedictions by which they can regain what they have lost.





TEXT 18



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam abhyarthito 'dityā

kas tām āha smayann iva

aho māyā-balaṁ viṣṇoḥ

sneha-baddham idaṁ jagat

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; abhyarthitaḥ-being requested; adityā-by Aditi; kaḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; tām-unto her; āha-said; smayan-smiling; iva-just like; aho-alas; māyā-balam-the influence of the illusory energy; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; sneha-baddham-influenced by this affection; idam-this; jagat-whole world.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When Kaśyapa Muni was thus requested by Aditi, he slightly smiled. "Alas," he said, "how powerful is the illusory energy of Lord Viṣṇu, by which the entire world is bound by affection for children!"





Kaśyapa Muni was surely sympathetic to his wife's affliction, yet he was surprised at how the whole world is influenced by affection.





TEXT 19



kva deho bhautiko 'nātmā

kva cātmā prakṛteḥ paraḥ

kasya ke pati-putrādyā

moha eva hi kāraṇam

SYNONYMS



kva-where is; dehaḥ-this material body; bhautikaḥ-made of five elements; anātmā-not the spirit soul; kva-where is; ca-also; ātmā-the spirit soul; prakṛteḥ-to the material world; paraḥ-transcendental; kasya-of whom; ke-who is; pati-husband; putra-ādyāḥ-or son and so on; mohaḥ-illusion; eva-indeed; hi-certainly; kāraṇam-cause.





Kaśyapa Muni continued: What is this material body, made of five elements? It is different from the spirit soul. Indeed, the spirit soul is completely different from the material elements from which the body is made. But because of bodily attachment, one is regarded as a husband or son. These illusory relationships are caused by misunderstanding.





The spirit soul (ātmā or jīva) is certainly different from the body, which is a combination of five material elements. This is a simple fact, but it is not understood unless one is spiritually educated. Kaśyapa Muni met his wife, Aditi, in the heavenly planets, but the same misconception extends throughout the entire universe and is also here on earth. There are different grades of living entities, but all of them are more or less under the impression of the bodily conception of life. In other words, all living entities in this material world are more or less devoid of spiritual education. The Vedic civilization, however, is based on spiritual education, and spiritual education is the special basis on which Bhagavad-gītā was spoken to Arjuna. In the beginning of Bhagavad-gītā, Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna to understand that the spirit soul is different from the body.



dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati





"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) Unfortunately, this spiritual education is completely absent from modern human civilization. No one understands his real self-interest, which lies with the spirit soul, not with the material body. Education means spiritual education. To work hard in the bodily conception of life, without spiritual education, is to live like an animal. Nāyaṁ deho deha-bhājāṁ nṛ-loke kaṣṭān kāmān arhate vid-bhujāṁ ye (Bhāg. 5.5.1). People are working so hard simply for bodily comforts, without education regarding the spirit soul. Thus they are living in a very risky civilization, for it is a fact that the spirit soul has to transmigrate from one body to another (tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ). Without spiritual education, people are kept in dark ignorance and do not know what will happen to them after the annihilation of the present body. They are working blindly, and blind leaders are directing them. Andhā yathāndhair upanīyamānās te 'pīśa-tantryām uru-dāmni baddhāḥ (Bhāg. 7.5.31). A foolish person does not know that he is completely under the bondage of material nature and that after death material nature will impose upon him a certain type of body, which he will have to accept. He does not know that although in his present body he may be a very important man, he may next get the body of an animal or tree because of his ignorant activities in the modes of material nature. Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is trying to give the true light of spiritual existence to all living entities. This movement is not very difficult to understand, and people must take advantage of it, for it will save them from the risky life of irresponsibility.





TEXT 20



upatiṣṭhasva puruṣaṁ

bhagavantaṁ janārdanam

sarva-bhūta-guhā-vāsaṁ

vāsudevaṁ jagad-gurum

SYNONYMS



upatiṣṭhasva-just try to worship; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; bhagavantam-the Personality of Godhead; janārdanam-who can kill all the enemies; sarva-bhūta-guhā-vāsam-living within the core of the heart of everyone; vāsudevam-Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, who is all-pervading and is the son of Vasudeva; jagat-gurum-the spiritual master and teacher of the whole world.





My dear Aditi, engage in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the master of everything, who can subdue everyone's enemies, and who sits within everyone's heart. Only that Supreme Person-Kṛṣṇa, or Vāsudeva-can bestow all auspicious benedictions upon everyone, for He is the spiritual master of the universe.





With these words, Kaśyapa Muni tried to pacify his wife. Aditi made her appeal to her material husband. Of course, that is nice, but actually a material relative cannot do anything good for anyone. If anything good can be done, it is done by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. Therefore, Kaśyapa Muni advised his wife, Aditi, to begin worshiping Lord Vāsudeva, who is situated in everyone's heart. He is the friend of everyone and is known as Janārdana because He can kill all enemies. There are three modes of material nature-goodness, passion and ignorance-and above material nature, transcendental to material nature, is another existence, which is called śuddha-sattva. In the material world, the mode of goodness is considered the best, but because of material contamination, even the mode of goodness is sometimes overpowered by the modes of passion and ignorance. But when one transcends the competition between these modes and engages himself in devotional service, he rises above the three modes of material nature. In that transcendental position, one is situated in pure consciousness. Sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-śabditam (Bhāg. 4.3.23). Above material nature is the position called vasudeva, or freedom from material contamination. Only in that position can one perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. Thus the vasudeva condition fulfills a spiritual necessity. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]. When one realizes Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he becomes most exalted.



Paramātmā (Vāsudeva) is situated in everyone's heart, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā. The Lord says:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te





"To those who are constantly devoted and who worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10)



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati





"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna." (Bg. 18.61)



bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati





"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of material miseries." (Bg. 5.29)



Whenever one is perplexed, let him take shelter of the lotus feet of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, who will give the devotee intelligence to help him surpass all difficulties and return home, back to Godhead. Kaśyapa Muni advised his wife to seek shelter at the lotus feet of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, so that all her problems would be very easily solved. Thus Kaśyapa Muni was an ideal spiritual master. He was not so foolish that he would present himself as an exalted personality, as good as God. He was actually a bona fide guru because he advised his wife to seek shelter at the lotus feet of Vāsudeva. One who trains his subordinate or disciple to worship Vāsudeva is the truly bona fide spiritual master. The word jagad-gurum is very important in this regard. Kaśyapa Muni did not falsely declare himself to be jagad-guru, although he actually was jagad-guru because he advocated the cause of Vāsudeva. Actually, Vāsudeva is jagad-guru, as clearly stated here (vāsudevaṁ jagad-gurum). One who teaches the instructions of Vāsudeva, Bhagavad-gītā, is as good as vāsudevaṁ jagad-gurum. But when one who does not teach this instruction-as it is-declares himself jagad-guru, he simply cheats the public. Kṛṣṇa is jagad-guru, and one who teaches the instruction of Kṛṣṇa as it is, on behalf of Kṛṣṇa, may be accepted as jagad-guru. One who manufactures his own theories cannot be accepted; he becomes jagad-guru falsely.





TEXT 21



sa vidhāsyati te kāmān

harir dīnānukampanaḥ

amoghā bhagavad-bhaktir

netareti matir mama

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Vāsudeva); vidhāsyati-will undoubtedly fulfill; te-your; kāmān-desires; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dīna-unto the poor; anukampanaḥ-very merciful; amoghā-infallible; bhagavat-bhaktiḥ-devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na-not; itarā-anything but bhagavad-bhakti; iti-thus; matiḥ-opinion; mama-my.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is very merciful to the poor, will fulfill all of your desires, for devotional service unto Him is infallible. Any method other than devotional service is useless. That is my opinion.





There are three kinds of men, who are called akāma, mokṣa-kāma and sarva-kāma. One who tries to get liberation from this material world is called mokṣa-kāma, one who wants to enjoy this material world to its fullest extent is called sarva-kāma, and one who has fulfilled all his desires and has no further material desires is called akāma. A bhakta has no desire. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. He is purified and free from material desires. The mokṣa-kāmī wants to achieve liberation by merging into the existence of the Supreme Brahman, and because of this desire to merge into the existence of the Lord, he is not yet pure. And since those who want liberation are impure, what to speak of the karmīs, who have so many desires to fulfill? Nonetheless, the śāstra says:



akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param





"Whether one desires everything or nothing or desires to merge into the existence of the Lord, he is intelligent only if he worships Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by rendering transcendental loving service." (Bhāg. 2.3.10)



Kaśyapa Muni saw that his wife, Aditi, had some material desires for the welfare of her sons, but still he advised her to render devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, everyone, regardless of whether he is a karmī, jñānī, yogī or bhakta, should invariably take shelter of the lotus feet of Vāsudeva and render transcendental loving service unto Him so that all his desires will be duly fulfilled. Kṛṣṇa is dīna-anukampana: He is very merciful to everyone. Therefore if one wants to fulfill his material desires, Kṛṣṇa helps him. Of course, sometimes if a devotee is very sincere, the Lord, as a special favor to him, refuses to fulfill his material desires and directly blesses him with pure, unalloyed devotional service. It is said in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 22.38–39):



kṛṣṇa kahe,--'āmā bhaje, māge viṣaya-sukha

amṛta chāḍi' viṣa māge,--ei baḍa mūrkha





āmi--vijña, ei mūrkhe 'viṣaya' kene diba?

sva-caraṇāmṛta diyā 'viṣaya' bhulāiba





"Kṛṣṇa says, 'If one engages in My transcendental loving service but at the same time wants the opulence of material enjoyment, he is very, very foolish. Indeed, he is just like a person who gives up ambrosia to drink poison. Since I am very intelligent, why should I give this fool material prosperity? Instead I shall induce him to take the nectar of the shelter of My lotus feet and make him forget illusory material enjoyment.' " If a devotee maintains some material desire and at the same time very sincerely desires to engage at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa may directly give him unalloyed devotional service and take away all his material desires and possessions. This is the Lord's special favor to devotees. Otherwise, if one takes to Kṛṣṇa's devotional service but still has material desires to fulfill, he may become free from all material desires, as Dhruva Mahārāja did, but this may take some time. However, if a very sincere devotee wants only Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, Kṛṣṇa directly gives him the position of śuddha-bhakti, unalloyed devotional service.





TEXT 22



śrī-aditir uvāca

kenāhaṁ vidhinā brahmann

upasthāsye jagat-patim

yathā me satya-saṅkalpo

vidadhyāt sa manoratham

SYNONYMS



śrī-aditiḥ uvāca-Śrīmatī Aditi began to pray; kena-by which; aham-I; vidhinā-by regulative principles; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; upasthāsye-can please; jagat-patim-the Lord of the universe, Jagannātha; yathā-by which; me-my; satya-saṅkalpaḥ-desire may actually be fulfilled; vidadhyāt-may fulfill; saḥ-He (the Supreme Lord); manoratham-ambitions or desires.





Śrīmatī Aditi said: O brāhmaṇa, tell me the regulative principles by which I may worship the supreme master of the world so that the Lord will be pleased with me and fulfill all my desires.





It is said, "Man proposes, God disposes." Thus a person may desire many things, but unless these desires are fulfilled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they cannot be fulfilled. Fulfillment of desire is called satya-saṅkalpa. Here the word satya-saṅkalpa is very important. Aditi placed herself at the mercy of her husband so that he would give her directions by which to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that all her desires would be fulfilled. A disciple must first decide that he should worship the Supreme Lord, and then the spiritual master will give the disciple correct directions. One cannot dictate to the spiritual master, just as a patient cannot demand that his physician prescribe a certain type of medicine. Here is the beginning of worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (7.16):



catur-vidhā bhajante māṁ

janāḥ sukṛtino 'rjuna

ārto jijñāsur arthārthī

jñānī ca bharatarṣabha





"O best among the Bhāratas, four kinds of pious men render devotional service unto Me-the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute." Aditi was ārta, a person in distress. She was very much aggrieved because her sons, the demigods, were bereft of everything. Thus she wanted to take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead under the direction of her husband, Kaśyapa Muni.





TEXT 23



ādiśa tvaṁ dvija-śreṣṭha

vidhiṁ tad-upadhāvanam

āśu tuṣyati me devaḥ

sīdantyāḥ saha putrakaiḥ

SYNONYMS



ādiśa-just instruct me; tvam-O my husband; dvija-śreṣṭha-O best of the brāhmaṇas; vidhim-the regulative principles; tat-the Lord; upadhāvanam-the process of worshiping; āśu-very soon; tuṣyati-becomes satisfied; me-unto me; devaḥ-the Lord; sīdantyāḥ-now lamenting; saha-with; putrakaiḥ-all my sons, the demigods.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, kindly instruct me in the perfect method of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotional service, by which the Lord may very soon be pleased with me and save me, along with my sons, from this most dangerous condition.





Sometimes less intelligent men ask whether one has to approach a guru to be instructed in devotional service for spiritual advancement. The answer is given here-indeed, not only here, but also in Bhagavad-gītā, where Arjuna accepted Kṛṣṇa as his guru (śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam). The Vedas also instruct, tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa guruṁ evābhigacchet: [MU tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham





"To understand these things properly, one must humbly approach, with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth."

[Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 1.2.12]



1.2.12] one must accept a guru for proper direction if one is seriously inclined toward advancement in spiritual life. The Lord says that one must worship the ācārya, who is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyāt). One should definitely understand this. In Caitanya-caritāmṛta it is said that the guru is the manifestation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, according to all the evidence given by the śāstra and by the practical behavior of devotees, one must accept a guru. Aditi accepted her husband as her guru, so that he would direct her how to advance in spiritual consciousness, devotional service, by worshiping the Supreme Lord.





TEXT 24



śrī-kaśyapa uvāca

etan me bhagavān pṛṣṭaḥ

prajā-kāmasya padmajaḥ

yad āha te pravakṣyāmi

vrataṁ keśava-toṣaṇam

SYNONYMS



śrī-kaśyapaḥ uvāca-Kaśyapa Muni said; etat-this; me-by me; bhagavān-the most powerful; pṛṣṭaḥ-when he was requested; prajā-kāmasya-desiring offspring; padma-jaḥ-Lord Brahmā, who was born of a lotus flower; yat-whatever; āha-he said; te-unto you; pravakṣyāmi-I shall explain; vratam-in the form of worship; keśava-toṣaṇam-by which Keśava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.





Śrī Kaśyapa Muni said: When I desired offspring, I placed inquiries before Lord Brahmā, who is born from a lotus flower. Now I shall explain to you the same process Lord Brahmā instructed me, by which Keśava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.





Here the process of devotional service is further explained. Kaśyapa Muni wanted to instruct Aditi in the same process recommended to him by Brahmā for satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is valuable. The guru does not manufacture a new process to instruct the disciple. The disciple receives from the guru an authorized process received by the guru from his guru. This is called the system of disciplic succession (evaṁ paramparā-prāptaṁ imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ [Bg. 4.2]). This is the bona fide Vedic system of receiving the process of devotional service, by which the Supreme Personality of Godhead is pleased. Therefore, to approach a bona fide guru, or spiritual master, is essential. The bona fide spiritual master is he who has received the mercy of his guru, who in turn is bona fide because he has received the mercy of his guru. This is called the paramparā system. Unless one follows this paramparā system, the mantra one receives will be chanted for no purpose. Nowadays there are so many rascal gurus who manufacture their mantras as a process for material advancement, not spiritual advancement. Still, the mantra cannot be successful if it is manufactured. Mantras and the process of devotional service have special power, provided they are received from the authorized person.





TEXT 25



phālgunasyāmale pakṣe

dvādaśāhaṁ payo-vratam

arcayed aravindākṣaṁ

bhaktyā paramayānvitaḥ

SYNONYMS



phālgunasya-of the month of Phālguna (February and March); amale-during the bright; pakṣe-fortnight; dvādaśa-aham-for twelve days, ending with Dvādaśī, the day after Ekādaśī; payaḥ-vratam-accepting the vow of taking only milk; arcayet-one should worship; aravinda-akṣam-the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyā-with devotion; paramayā-unalloyed; anvitaḥ-surcharged.





In the bright fortnight of the month of Phālguna [February and March], for twelve days ending with Dvādaśī, one should observe the vow of subsisting only on milk and should worship the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead with all devotion.





Worshiping the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu with devotion means following arcana-mārga.



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]





One should install the Deity of Lord Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa and worship Him nicely by dressing Him, decorating Him with flower garlands, and offering Him all kinds of fruits, flowers and cooked food, nicely prepared with ghee, sugar and grains. One should also offer a flame, incense and so on, while ringing a bell, as prescribed. This is called worship of the Lord. Here it is recommended that one observe the vow of subsisting only by drinking milk. This is called payo-vrata. As we generally perform devotional service on Ekādaśī by not eating grains, it is generally recommended that on Dvādaśī one not consume anything but milk. payo-vrata and arcana devotional service to the Supreme Lord should be performed with a pure devotional attitude (bhaktyā). Without bhakti, one cannot worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ [Bg. 18.55]. If one wants to know the Supreme Personality of Godhead and be directly connected with Him, knowing what He wants to eat and how He is satisfied, one must take to the process of bhakti. As recommended here also, bhaktyā paramayānvitaḥ: one should be surcharged with unalloyed devotional service.





TEXT 26



sinīvālyāṁ mṛdālipya

snāyāt kroḍa-vidīrṇayā

yadi labhyeta vai srotasy

etaṁ mantram udīrayet

SYNONYMS



sinīvālyām-on the dark-moon day; mṛdā-with dirt; ālipya-smearing the body; snāyāt-one should bathe; kroḍa-vidīrṇayā-dug up by the tusk of a boar; yadi-if; labhyeta-it is available; vai-indeed; srotasi-in a flowing river; etam mantram-this mantra; udīrayet-one should chant.





If dirt dug up by a boar is available, on the day of the dark moon one should smear this dirt on his body and then bathe in a flowing river. While bathing, one should chant the following mantra.





TEXT 27



tvaṁ devy ādi-varāheṇa

rasāyāḥ sthānam icchatā

uddhṛtāsi namas tubhyaṁ

pāpmānaṁ me praṇāśaya

SYNONYMS



tvam-you; devi-O mother earth; ādi-varāheṇa-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar; rasāyāḥ-from the bottom of the universe; sthānam-a place; icchatā-desiring; uddhṛtā asi-you have been raised; namaḥ tubhyam-I offer my respectful obeisances unto you; pāpmānam-all sinful activities and their reactions; me-of me; praṇāśaya-please undo.





O mother earth, you were raised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar because of your desiring to have a place to stay. I pray that you kindly vanquish all the reactions of my sinful life. I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.





TEXT 28



nirvartitātma-niyamo

devam arcet samāhitaḥ

arcāyāṁ sthaṇḍile sūrye

jale vahnau gurāv api

SYNONYMS



nirvartita-finished; ātma-niyamaḥ-the daily duties of washing, chanting other mantras and so on, according to one's practice; devam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arcet-one should worship; samāhitaḥ-with full attention; arcāyām-unto the Deities; sthaṇḍile-unto the altar; sūrye-unto the sun; jale-unto the water; vahnau-unto the fire; gurau-unto the spiritual master; api-indeed.





Thereafter, one should perform his daily spiritual duties and then, with great attention, offer worship to the Deity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and also to the altar, the sun, water, fire and the spiritual master.





TEXT 29



namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate

puruṣāya mahīyase

sarva-bhūta-nivāsāya

vāsudevāya sākṣiṇe

SYNONYMS



namaḥ tubhyam-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; bhagavate-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣāya-the Supreme Person; mahīyase-the best of all personalities; sarva-bhūta-nivāsāya-the person who lives in everyone's heart; vāsudevāya-the Lord who lives everywhere; sākṣiṇe-the witness of everything.





O Supreme Personality of Godhead, greatest of all, who lives in everyone's heart and in whom everyone lives, O witness of everything, O Vāsudeva, supreme and all-pervading person, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 30



namo 'vyaktāya sūkṣmāya

pradhāna-puruṣāya ca

catur-viṁśad-guṇa-jñāya

guṇa-saṅkhyāna-hetave

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; avyaktāya-who are never seen by material eyes; sūkṣmāya-transcendental; pradhāna-puruṣāya-the Supreme Person; ca-also; catuḥ-viṁśat-twenty-four; guṇa-jñāya-the knower of the elements; guṇa-saṅkhyāna-of the sāṅkhya-yoga system; hetave-the original cause.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Person. Being very subtle, You are never visible to material eyes. You are the knower of the twenty-four elements, and You are the inaugurator of the sāṅkhya-yoga system.





Catur-viṁśad-guṇa, the twenty-four elements, are the five gross elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether), the three subtle elements (mind, intelligence and false ego), the ten senses (five for working and five for acquiring knowledge), the five sense objects, and contaminated consciousness. These are the subject matter of sāṅkhya-yoga, which was inaugurated by Lord Kapiladeva. This sāṅkhya-yoga was again propounded by another Kapila, but he was an atheist, and his system is not accepted as bona fide.





TEXT 31



namo dvi-śīrṣṇe tri-pade

catuḥ-śṛṅgāya tantave

sapta-hastāya yajñāya

trayī-vidyātmane namaḥ

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; dvi-śīrṣṇe-who have two heads; tri-pade-who have three legs; catuḥ-śṛṅgāya-who have four horns; tantave-who expand; sapta-hastāya-who have seven hands; yajñāya-unto the yajña-puruṣa, the supreme enjoyer; trayī-the three modes of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; vidyā-ātmane-the Personality of Godhead, the embodiment of all knowledge; namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have two heads [prāyaṇīya and udāyanīya], three legs [savana-traya], four horns [the four Vedas] and seven hands [the seven chandas, such as Gāyatrī]. I offer my obeisances unto You, whose heart and soul are the three Vedic rituals [karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa and upāsanā-kāṇḍa] and who expand these rituals in the form of sacrifice.





TEXT 32



namaḥ śivāya rudrāya

namaḥ śakti-dharāya ca

sarva-vidyādhipataye

bhūtānāṁ pataye namaḥ

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; śivāya-the incarnation named Lord Śiva; rudrāya-the expansion named Rudra; namaḥ-obeisances; śakti-dharāya-the reservoir of all potencies; ca-and; sarva-vidyā-adhipataye-the reservoir of all knowledge; bhūtānām-of the living entities; pataye-the supreme master; namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, Lord Śiva, or Rudra, who are the reservoir of all potencies, the reservoir of all knowledge, and the master of everyone.





It is the system for one to offer obeisances unto the expansion or incarnation of the Lord. Lord Śiva is the incarnation of ignorance, one of the material modes of nature.





TEXT 33



namo hiraṇyagarbhāya

prāṇāya jagad-ātmane

yogaiśvarya-śarīrāya

namas te yoga-hetave

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; hiraṇyagarbhāya-situated as the four-headed Hiraṇyagarbha, Brahmā; prāṇāya-the source of everyone's life; jagat-ātmane-the Supersoul of the entire universe; yoga-aiśvarya-śarīrāya-whose body is full of opulences and mystic power; namaḥ te-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; yoga-hetave-the original master of all mystic power.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are situated as Hiraṇyagarbha, the source of life, the Supersoul of every living entity. Your body is the source of the opulence of all mystic power. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 34



namas ta ādi-devāya

sākṣi-bhūtāya te namaḥ

nārāyaṇāya ṛṣaye

narāya haraye namaḥ

SYNONYMS



namaḥ te-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; ādi-devāya-who are the original Personality of Godhead; sākṣi-bhūtāya-the witness of everything within the heart of everyone; te-unto You; namaḥ- I offer my respectful obeisances; nārāyaṇāya-who take the incarnation of Nārāyaṇa; ṛṣaye-the sage; narāya-the incarnation of a human being; haraye-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the original Personality of Godhead, the witness in everyone's heart, and the incarnation of Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi in the form of a human being. O Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 35



namo marakata-śyāma-

vapuṣe 'dhigata-śriye

keśavāya namas tubhyaṁ

namas te pīta-vāsase

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; marakata-śyāma-vapuṣe-whose bodily hue is blackish like the marakata gem; adhigata-śriye-under whose control is mother Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; keśavāya-Lord Keśava, who killed the Keśī demon; namaḥ tubhyam-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; namaḥ te-again I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; pīta-vāsase-whose garment is yellow.





My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are dressed in yellow garments, whose bodily hue resembles the marakata gem, and who have full control over the goddess of fortune. O my Lord Keśava, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 36



tvaṁ sarva-varadaḥ puṁsāṁ

vareṇya varadarṣabha

atas te śreyase dhīrāḥ

pāda-reṇum upāsate

SYNONYMS



tvam-You; sarva-vara-daḥ-who can give all kinds of benedictions; puṁsām-to all living entities; vareṇya-O most worshipable; vara-da-ṛṣabha-O most powerful of all givers of benediction; ataḥ-for this reason; te-Your; śreyase-the source of all auspiciousness; dhīrāḥ-the most sober; pāda-reṇum upāsate-worship the dust of the lotus feet.





O most exalted and worshipable Lord, best of those who bestow benediction, You can fulfill the desires of everyone, and therefore those who are sober, for their own welfare, worship the dust of Your lotus feet.





TEXT 37



anvavartanta yaṁ devāḥ

śrīś ca tat-pāda-padmayoḥ

spṛhayanta ivāmodaṁ

bhagavān me prasīdatām

SYNONYMS



anvavartanta-engaged in devotional service; yam-unto whom; devāḥ-all the demigods; śrīḥ ca-and the goddess of fortune; tat-pāda-padmayoḥ-of the lotus feet of His Lordship; spṛhayantaḥ-desiring; iva-exactly; āmodam-celestial bliss; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; me-upon me; prasīdatām-may be pleased.





All the demigods, as well as the goddess of fortune, engage in the service of His lotus feet. Indeed, they respect the fragrance of those lotus feet. May the Supreme Personality of Godhead be pleased with me.





TEXT 38



etair mantrair hṛṣīkeśam

āvāhana-puraskṛtam

arcayec chraddhayā yuktaḥ

pādyopasparśanādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



etaiḥ mantraiḥ-by chanting all these mantras; hṛṣīkeśam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all senses; āvāhana-calling; puraskṛtam-honoring Him in all respects; arcayet-one should worship; śraddhayā-with faith and devotion; yuktaḥ-engaged; pādya-upasparśana-ādibhiḥ-with the paraphernalia of worship (pādya, arghya, etc.).





Kaśyapa Muni continued: By chanting all these mantras, welcoming the Supreme Personality of Godhead with faith and devotion, and offering Him items of worship [such as pādya and arghya], one should worship Keśava, Hṛṣīkeśa, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 39



arcitvā gandha-mālyādyaiḥ

payasā snapayed vibhum

vastropavītābharaṇa-

pādyopasparśanais tataḥ

gandha-dhūpādibhiś cārced

dvādaśākṣara-vidyayā

SYNONYMS



arcitvā-worshiping in this way; gandha-mālya-ādyaiḥ-with incense, flower garlands, etc.; payasā-with milk; snapayet-should bathe; vibhum-the Lord; vastra-dress; upavīta-sacred thread; ābharaṇa-ornaments; pādya-water for washing the lotus feet; upasparśanaiḥ-touching; tataḥ-thereafter; gandha-fragrance; dhūpa-incense; ādibhiḥ-with all of these; ca-and; arcet-should worship; dvādaśa-akṣara-vidyayā-with the mantra of twelve syllables.





In the beginning, the devotee should chant the dvādaśākṣara-mantra and offer flower garlands, incense and so on. After worshiping the Lord in this way, one should bathe the Lord with milk and dress Him with proper garments, a sacred thread, and ornaments. After offering water to wash the Lord's feet, one should again worship the Lord with fragrant flowers, incense and other paraphernalia.





The dvādaśākṣara-mantra is oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. While worshiping the Deity, one should ring a bell with his left hand and offer pādya, arghya, vastra, gandha, mālā, ābharaṇa, bhūṣaṇa and so on. In this way, one should bathe the Lord with milk, dress Him and again worship Him with all paraphernalia.





TEXT 40



śṛtaṁ payasi naivedyaṁ

śāly-annaṁ vibhave sati

sasarpiḥ saguḍaṁ dattvā

juhuyān mūla-vidyayā

SYNONYMS



śṛtam-cooked; payasi-in milk; naivedyam-offering to the Deity; śāli-annam-fine rice; vibhave-if available; sati-in this way; sa-sarpiḥ-with ghee (clarified butter); sa-guḍam-with molasses; dattvā-offering Him; juhuyāt-should offer oblations in the fire; mūla-vidyayā-with chanting of the same dvādaśākṣara-mantra





If one can afford to, one should offer the Deity fine rice boiled in milk with clarified butter and molasses. While chanting the same original mantra, one should offer all this to the fire.





TEXT 41



niveditaṁ tad-bhaktāya

dadyād bhuñjīta vā svayam

dattvācamanam arcitvā

tāmbūlaṁ ca nivedayet

SYNONYMS



niveditam-this offering of prasāda; tat-bhaktāya-unto His devotee; dadyāt-should be offered; bhuñjīta-one should take; vā-either; svayam-personally; dattvā ācamanam-giving water to wash the hands and mouth; arcitvā-in this way worshiping the Deity; tāmbūlam-betel nuts with spices; ca-also; nivedayet-one should offer.





One should offer all the prasāda to a Vaiṣṇava or offer him some of the prasāda and then take some oneself. After this, one should offer the Deity ācamana and then betel nut and then again worship the Lord.





TEXT 42



japed aṣṭottara-śataṁ

stuvīta stutibhiḥ prabhum

kṛtvā pradakṣiṇaṁ bhūmau

praṇamed daṇḍavan mudā

SYNONYMS



japet-should silently murmur; aṣṭottara-śatam-108 times; stuvīta-should offer prayers; stutibhiḥ-by various prayers of glorification; prabhum-unto the Lord; kṛtvā-thereafter doing; pradakṣiṇam-circumambulation; bhūmau-on the ground; praṇamet-should offer obeisances; daṇḍavat-straight, with the whole body; mudā-with great satisfaction.





Thereafter, one should silently murmur the mantra 108 times and offer prayers to the Lord for His glorification. Then one should circumambulate the Lord and finally, with great delight and satisfaction, offer obeisances, falling straight like a rod [daṇḍavat].





TEXT 43



kṛtvā śirasi tac-cheṣāṁ

devam udvāsayet tataḥ

dvy-avarān bhojayed viprān

pāyasena yathocitam

SYNONYMS



kṛtvā-taking; śirasi-on the head; tat-śeṣām-all the remnants (the water and flowers offered to the Deity); devam-unto the Deity; udvāsayet-should be thrown into a sacred place; tataḥ-thereafter; dvi-avarān-a minimum of two; bhojayet-should feed; viprān-brāhmaṇas; pāyasena-with sweet rice; yathā-ucitam-as each deserves.





After touching to one's head all the flowers and water offered to the Deity, one should throw them into a sacred place. Then one should feed at least two brāhmaṇas with sweet rice.





TEXTS 44–45



bhuñjīta tair anujñātaḥ

seṣṭaḥ śeṣaṁ sabhājitaiḥ

brahmacāry atha tad-rātryāṁ

śvo bhūte prathame 'hani

snātaḥ śucir yathoktena



vidhinā susamāhitaḥ

payasā snāpayitvārced

yāvad vrata-samāpanam

SYNONYMS



bhuñjīta-should take the prasāda; taiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; anujñātaḥ-being permitted; sa-iṣṭaḥ-with friends and relatives; śeṣam-the remnants; sabhājitaiḥ-properly honored; brahmacārī-observance of celibacy; atha-of course; tat-rātryām-at night; śvaḥ bhūte-at the end of the night, when the morning comes; prathame ahani-on the first day; snātaḥ-bathing; śuciḥ-becoming purified; yathā-uktena-as stated before; vidhinā-by following the regulative principles; su-samāhitaḥ-with great attention; payasā-with milk; snāpayitvā-bathing the Deity; arcet-should offer worship; yāvat-as long as; vrata-samāpanam-the period of worship is not over.





One should perfectly honor the respectable brāhmaṇas one has fed, and then, after taking their permission, one should take prasāda with his friends and relatives. For that night, one should observe strict celibacy, and the next morning, after bathing again, with purity and attention one should bathe the Deity of Viṣṇu with milk and worship Him according to the methods formerly stated in detail.





TEXT 46



payo-bhakṣo vratam idaṁ

cared viṣṇv-arcanādṛtaḥ

pūrvavaj juhuyād agniṁ

brāhmaṇāṁś cāpi bhojayet

SYNONYMS



payaḥ-bhakṣaḥ-one who drinks milk only; vratam idam-this process of worshiping with a vow; caret-one should execute; viṣṇu-arcana-ādṛtaḥ-worshiping Lord Viṣṇu with great faith and devotion; pūrva-vat-as prescribed previously; juhuyāt-one should offer oblations; agnim-into the fire; brāhmaṇān-unto the brāhmaṇas; ca api-as well as; bhojayet-should feed.





Worshiping Lord Viṣṇu with great faith and devotion and living only by drinking milk, one should follow this vow. One should also offer oblations to the fire and feed the brāhmaṇas as mentioned before.





TEXT 47



evaṁ tv ahar ahaḥ kuryād

dvādaśāhaṁ payo-vratam

harer ārādhanaṁ homam

arhaṇaṁ dvija-tarpaṇam

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; tu-indeed; ahaḥ ahaḥ-day after day; kuryāt-should execute; dvādaśa-aham-until twelve days; payaḥ-vratam-the observance of the vrata known as payo-vrata; hareḥ ārādhanam-worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; homam-by executing a fire sacrifice; arhaṇam-worshiping the Deity; dvija-tarpaṇam-and satisfying the brāhmaṇas by feeding them.





In this way, until twelve days have passed, one should observe this payo-vrata, worshiping the Lord every day, executing the routine duties, performing sacrifices and feeding the brāhmaṇas.





TEXT 48



pratipad-dinam ārabhya

yāvac chukla-trayodaśīm

brahmacaryam adhaḥ-svapnaṁ

snānaṁ tri-ṣavaṇaṁ caret

SYNONYMS



pratipat-dinam-on the day of pratipat; ārabhya-beginning; yāvat-until; śukla-of the bright fortnight; trayodaśīm-the thirteenth day of the moon (the second day after Ekādaśī); brahmacaryam-observing complete celibacy; adhaḥ-svapnam-lying down on the floor; snānam-bathing; tri-savanam-three times (morning, evening and noon); caret-one should execute.





From pratipat until the thirteenth day of the next bright moon [śukla-trayodaśī], one should observe complete celibacy, sleep on the floor, bathe three times a day and thus execute the vow.





TEXT 49



varjayed asad-ālāpaṁ

bhogān uccāvacāṁs tathā

ahiṁsraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

vāsudeva-parāyaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



varjayet-one should give up; asat-ālāpam-unnecessary talk on material subject matters; bhogān-sense gratification; ucca-avacān-superior or inferior; tathā-as well as; ahiṁsraḥ-without being envious; sarva-bhūtānām-of all living entities; vāsudeva-parāyaṇaḥ-simply being a devotee of Lord Vāsudeva.





During this period, one should not unnecessarily talk of material subjects or topics of sense gratification, one should be completely free from envy of all living entities, and one should be a pure and simple devotee of Lord Vāsudeva.





TEXT 50



trayodaśyām atho viṣṇoḥ

snapanaṁ pañcakair vibhoḥ

kārayec chāstra-dṛṣṭena

vidhinā vidhi-kovidaiḥ

SYNONYMS



trayodaśyām-on the thirteenth day of the moon; atho-thereafter; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; snapanam-bathing; pañcakaiḥ-by pañcāmṛta, five substances; vibhoḥ-the Lord; kārayet-one should execute; śāstra-dṛṣṭena-enjoined in the scripture; vidhinā-under regulative principles; vidhi-kovidaiḥ-assisted by the priests who know the regulative principles.





Thereafter, following the directions of the śāstra with help from brāhmaṇas who know the śāstra, on the thirteenth day of the moon one should bathe Lord Viṣṇu with five substances [milk, yogurt, ghee, sugar and honey].





TEXTS 51–52,



pūjāṁ ca mahatīṁ kuryād

vitta-śāṭhya-vivarjitaḥ

caruṁ nirūpya payasi

śipiviṣṭāya viṣṇave

sūktena tena puruṣaṁ



yajeta susamāhitaḥ

naivedyaṁ cātiguṇavad

dadyāt puruṣa-tuṣṭidam

SYNONYMS



pūjām-worship; ca-also; mahatīm-very gorgeous; kuryāt-should do; vitta-śāṭhya-miserly mentality (not spending sufficient money); vivarjitaḥ-giving up; carum-grains offered in the yajña; nirūpya-seeing properly; payasi-with milk; śipiviṣṭāya-unto the Supersoul, who is situated in the heart of every living entity; viṣṇave-unto Lord Viṣṇu; sūktena-by chanting the Vedic mantra known as puruṣa-sūkta; tena-by that; puruṣam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajeta-one should worship; su-samāhitaḥ-with great attention; naivedyam-food offered to the Deity; ca-and; ati-guṇa-vat-prepared very gorgeously with all varieties of taste; dadyāt-should offer; puruṣa-tuṣṭi-dam-everything extremely pleasing to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Giving up the miserly habit of not spending money, one should arrange for the gorgeous worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who is situated in the heart of every living entity. With great attention, one must prepare an oblation of grains boiled in ghee and milk and must chant the Puruṣa-sūkta mantra. The offerings of food should be of varieties of tastes. In this way, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 53



ācāryaṁ jñāna-sampannaṁ

vastrābharaṇa-dhenubhiḥ

toṣayed ṛtvijaś caiva

tad viddhy ārādhanaṁ hareḥ

SYNONYMS



ācāryam-the spiritual master; jñāna-sampannam-very advanced in spiritual knowledge; vastra-ābharaṇa-dhenubhiḥ-with clothing, ornaments and many cows; toṣayet-should satisfy; ṛtvijaḥ-the priests recommended by the spiritual master; ca eva-as well as; tat viddhi-try to understand that; ārādhanam-worship; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





One should satisfy the spiritual master [ācārya], who is very learned in Vedic literature, and should satisfy his assistant priests [known as hotā, udgātā, adhvaryu and brahma]. One should please them by offering them clothing, ornaments and cows. This is the ceremony called viṣṇu-ārādhana, or worship of Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 54



bhojayet tān guṇavatā

sad-annena śuci-smite

anyāṁś ca brāhmaṇāñ chaktyā

ye ca tatra samāgatāḥ

SYNONYMS



bhojayet-should distribute prasāda; tān-unto all of them; guṇa-vatā-by rich foods; sat-annena-with food prepared with ghee and milk, which is supposed to be very pure; śuci-smite-O most pious lady; anyān ca-others also; brāhmaṇān-brāhmaṇas; śaktyā-as far as possible; ye-all of them who; ca-also; tatra-there (at the ceremonies); samāgatāḥ-assembled.





O most auspicious lady, one should perform all the ceremonies under the direction of learned ācāryas and should satisfy them and their priests. By distributing prasāda, one should also satisfy the brāhmaṇas and others who have assembled.





TEXT 55



dakṣiṇāṁ gurave dadyād

ṛtvigbhyaś ca yathārhataḥ

annādyenāśva-pākāṁś ca

prīṇayet samupāgatān

SYNONYMS



dakṣiṇām-some contribution of money or gold; gurave-unto the spiritual master; dadyāt-one should give; ṛtvigbhyaḥ ca-and to the priests engaged by the spiritual master; yathā-arhataḥ-as far as possible; anna-adyena-by distributing prasāda; āśva-pākān-even to the caṇḍālas, persons habituated to eating the flesh of dogs; ca-also; prīṇayet-one should please; samupāgatān-because they have assembled there for the ceremony.





One should satisfy the spiritual master and assistant priests by giving them cloth, ornaments, cows and also some monetary contribution. And by distributing prasāda one should satisfy everyone assembled, including even the lowest of men, the caṇḍālas [eaters of dog flesh].





In the Vedic system, prasāda is distributed, as recommended here, without discrimination as to who may take the prasāda. Regardless of whether one be a brāhmaṇa, śūdra, vaiśya, kṣatriya, or even the lowest of men, a caṇḍāla, he should be welcome to accept prasāda. However, when the caṇḍālas, the lower class or poorer class, are taking prasāda, this does not mean that they have become Nārāyaṇa or Viṣṇu. Nārāyaṇa is situated in everyone's heart, but this does not mean Nārāyaṇa is a caṇḍāla or poor man. The Māyāvāda philosophy of accepting a poor man as Nārāyaṇa is the most envious and atheistic movement in Vedic culture. This mentality should be completely given up. Everyone should be given the opportunity to take prasāda, but this does not mean that everyone has the right to become Nārāyaṇa.





TEXT 56



bhuktavatsu ca sarveṣu

dīnāndha-kṛpaṇādiṣu

viṣṇos tat prīṇanaṁ vidvān

bhuñjīta saha bandhubhiḥ

SYNONYMS



bhuktavatsu-after feeding; ca-also; sarveṣu-everyone present there; dīna-very poor; andha-blind; kṛpaṇa-those who are not brāhmaṇas; ādiṣu-and so on; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu, who is situated in everyone's heart; tat-that (prasāda); prīṇanam-pleasing; vidvān-one who understands this philosophy; bhuñjīta-should take prasāda himself; saha-with; bandhubhiḥ-friends and relatives.





One should distribute viṣṇu-prasāda to everyone, including the poor man, the blind man, the nondevotee and the non-brāhmaṇa. Knowing that Lord Viṣṇu is very pleased when everyone is sumptuously fed with viṣṇu-prasāda, the performer of yajña should then take prasāda with his friends and relatives.





TEXT 57



nṛtya-vāditra-gītaiś ca

stutibhiḥ svasti-vācakaiḥ

kārayet tat-kathābhiś ca

pūjāṁ bhagavato 'nvaham

SYNONYMS



nṛtya-by dancing; vāditra-by beating the drum; gītaiḥ-and by singing; ca-also; stutibhiḥ-by chanting auspicious mantras; svasti-vācakaiḥ-by offering prayers; kārayet-should execute; tat-kathābhiḥ-by reciting the Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā and similar literature; ca-also; pūjām-worship; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; anvaham-every day (from pratipat to trayodaśī).





Every day from pratipat to trayodaśī, one should continue the ceremony, to the accompaniment of dancing, singing, the beating of a drum, the chanting of prayers and all-auspicious mantras, and recitation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In this way, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 58



etat payo-vrataṁ nāma

puruṣārādhanaṁ param

pitāmahenābhihitaṁ

mayā te samudāhṛtam

SYNONYMS



etat-this; payaḥ-vratam-ceremony known as payo-vrata; nāma-by that name; puruṣa-ārādhanam-the process of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param-the best; pitāmahena-by my grandfather, Lord Brahmā; abhihitam-stated; mayā-by me; te-unto you; samudāhṛtam-described in all details.





This is the religious ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata, by which one may worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I received this information from Brahmā, my grandfather, and now I have described it to you in all details.





TEXT 59



tvaṁ cānena mahā-bhāge

samyak cīrṇena keśavam

ātmanā śuddha-bhāvena

niyatātmā bhajāvyayam

SYNONYMS



tvam ca-you also; anena-by this process; mahā-bhāge-O greatly fortunate one; samyak cīrṇena-executed properly; keśavam-unto Lord Keśava; ātmanā-by oneself; śuddha-bhāvena-in a pure state of mind; niyata-ātmā-controlling oneself; bhaja-go on worshiping; avyayam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inexhaustible.





O most fortunate lady, establishing your mind in a good spirit, execute this process of payo-vrata and thus worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Keśava, who is inexhaustible.





TEXT 60



ayaṁ vai sarva-yajñākhyaḥ

sarva-vratam iti smṛtam

tapaḥ-sāram idaṁ bhadre

dānaṁ ceśvara-tarpaṇam

SYNONYMS



ayam-this; vai-indeed; sarva-yajña-all kinds of religious rituals and sacrifices; ākhyaḥ-called; sarva-vratam-all religious ceremonies; iti-thus; smṛtam-understood; tapaḥ-sāram-the essence of all austerities; idam-this; bhadre-O good lady; dānam-acts of charity; ca-and; īśvara-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tarpaṇam-the process of pleasing.





This payo-vrata is also known as sarva-yajña. In other words, by performing this sacrifice one can perform all other sacrifices automatically. This is also acknowledged to be the best of all ritualistic ceremonies. O gentle lady, it is the essence of all austerities, and it is the process of giving charity and pleasing the supreme controller.





Ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param. This is a statement made by Lord Śiva to Pārvatī. Worshiping Lord Viṣṇu is the supreme process of worship. And how Lord Viṣṇu is worshiped in this payo-vrata ceremony has now been fully described. The ultimate goal of life is to please Lord Viṣṇu by varṇāśrama-dharma. The Vedic principles of four varṇas and four āśramas are meant for worship of Viṣṇu (viṣṇur ārādhyate puṁsāṁ nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam). The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is also viṣṇu-ārādhanam, or worship of Lord Viṣṇu, according to the age. The payo-vrata method of viṣṇu-ārādhanam was enunciated long, long ago by Kaśyapa Muni to his wife, Aditi, in the heavenly planets, and the same process is bona fide on earth even now. Especially for this age of Kali, the process accepted by the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to open hundreds and thousands of Viṣṇu temples (temples of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Jagannātha, Balarāma, Sītā-Rāma, Gaura-Nitāi and so on). Performing prescribed worship in such temples of Viṣṇu and thus worshiping the Lord is as good as performing the payo-vrata ceremony recommended here. The payo-vrata ceremony is performed from the first to the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of the moon, but in our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement Lord Viṣṇu is worshiped in every temple according to a schedule of twenty-four hours of engagement in performing kīrtana, chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, offering palatable food to Lord Viṣṇu and distributing this food to Vaiṣṇavas and others. These are authorized activities, and if the members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement stick to these principles, they will achieve the same result one gains by observing the payo-vrata ceremony. Thus the essence of all auspicious activities, such as performing yajña, giving in charity, observing vratas, and undergoing austerities, is included in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. The members of this movement should immediately and sincerely follow the processes already recommended. Of course, sacrifice is meant to please Lord Viṣṇu. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ: [SB 11.5.32] in Kali-yuga, those who are intelligent perform the saṅkīrtana-yajña. One should follow this process conscientiously.





TEXT 61



ta eva niyamāḥ sākṣāt

ta eva ca yamottamāḥ

tapo dānaṁ vrataṁ yajño

yena tuṣyaty adhokṣajaḥ

SYNONYMS



te-that is; eva-indeed; niyamāḥ-all regulative principles; sākṣāt-directly; te-that is; eva-indeed; ca-also; yama-uttamāḥ-the best process of controlling the senses; tapaḥ-austerities; dānam-charity; vratam-observing vows; yajñaḥ-sacrifice; yena-by which process; tuṣyati-is very pleased; adhokṣajaḥ-the Supreme Lord, who is not perceived by material senses.





This is the best process for pleasing the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Adhokṣaja. It is the best of all regulative principles, the best austerity, the best process of giving charity, and the best process of sacrifice.





The Supreme Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66):



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ





"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." Unless one pleases the Supreme Personality of Godhead according to His demand, no good result will come from any of his actions.



dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam





"The occupational activities a man performs according to his own position are only so much useless labor if they do not provoke attraction for the message of the Personality of Godhead." (Bhāg. 1.2.8) If one is not interested in satisfying Lord Viṣṇu, Vāsudeva, all his so-called auspicious activities are fruitless. Moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ: [Bg. 9.12] because he is bewildered, he is baffled in his hopes, baffled in his activities, and baffled in his knowledge. In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī remarks, napuṁsakam anapuṁsakenety-ādinaikatvam. One cannot equate the potent and the impotent. Among modern Māyāvādīs it has become fashionable to say that whatever one does or whatever path one follows is all right. But these are all foolish statements. Here it is forcefully affirmed that this is the only method for success in life. Īśvara-tarpaṇaṁ vinā sarvam eva viphalam. Unless Lord Viṣṇu is satisfied, all of one's pious activities, ritualistic ceremonies and yajñas are simply for show and have no value. Unfortunately, foolish people do not know the secret of success. Na te viduḥ svārtha-gatiṁ hi viṣṇum [SB 7.5.31]. They do not know that real self-interest ends in pleasing Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 62



tasmād etad vrataṁ bhadre

prayatā śraddhayācara

bhagavān parituṣṭas te

varān āśu vidhāsyati

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; etat-this; vratam-observance of a vrata ceremony; bhadre-my dear gentle lady; prayatā-by observing rules and regulations; śraddhayā-with faith; ācara-execute; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parituṣṭaḥ-being very satisfied; te-unto you; varān-benedictions; āśu-very soon; vidhāsyati-will bestow.





Therefore, my dear gentle lady, follow this ritualistic vow, strictly observing the regulative principles. By this process, the Supreme Person will very soon be pleased with you and will satisfy all your desires.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Executing the Payo-vrata Process of Worship."



Chapter Seventeen



The Supreme Lord Agrees to Become Aditi's Son





As explained in this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, being very pleased by the payo-vrata ceremony performed by Aditi, appeared before her in full opulence. At her request, the Lord agreed to become her son.





After Aditi performed the payo-vrata ceremony for twelve continuous days, the Lord, who was certainly very pleased with her, appeared before her with four hands and dressed in yellow garments. As soon as Aditi saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead present before her, she immediately got up, and with great ecstatic love for the Lord she fell to the ground to offer respectful obeisances. Aditi's throat was choked because of ecstatic feelings, and her entire body trembled with devotion. Although she wanted to offer suitable prayers to the Lord, she could not do anything, and thus she remained silent for some time. Then, feeling solace, observing the beauty of the Lord, she offered her prayers. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul of all living entities, was very pleased with her, and He agreed to become her son by incarnating as a plenary expansion. He was already pleased by Kaśyapa Muni's austerities, and thus He agreed to become their son and maintain the demigods. After giving His word of honor to this effect, the Lord disappeared. Following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Aditi engaged in the service of Kaśyapa Muni, who could see by samādhi that the Lord was within him and who thus placed his semen in the womb of Aditi. Lord Brahmā, who is known as Hiraṇyagarbha, understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had entered Aditi's womb. Thus he offered prayers to the Lord.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity uktā sāditī rājan

sva-bhartrā kaśyapena vai

anv atiṣṭhad vratam idaṁ

dvādaśāham atandritā

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; uktā-being advised; sā-that lady; aditiḥ-Aditi; rājan-O King; sva-bhartrā-by her husband; kaśyapena-Kaśyapa Muni; vai-indeed; anu-similarly; atiṣṭhat-executed; vratam idam-this payo-vrata ritualistic ceremony; dvādaśa-aham-for twelve days; atandritā-without any laziness.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, after Aditi was thus advised by her husband, Kaśyapa Muni, she strictly followed his instructions without laziness and in this way performed the payo-vrata ritualistic ceremony.





For advancement in anything, especially in spiritual life, one must strictly follow the bona fide instructions of the teacher. Aditi did this. She strictly followed the instructions of her husband and guru. As confirmed in the Vedic injunctions, yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau [ŚU yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ





"Unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and the spiritual master, all the imports of Vedic knowledge are automatically revealed." (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23)



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ





"No one can understand Kṛṣṇa as He is by the blunt material senses. But He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their transcendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)



bhaktyā mām abhijānāti

yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ

tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā

viśate tad-anantaram





"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." (Bg. 18.55)



These are Vedic instructions. One must have full faith in the words of the spiritual master and similar faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the real knowledge of ātmā and Paramātmā and the distinction between matter and spirit will be automatically revealed. This ātma-tattva, or spiritual knowledge, will be revealed within the core of a devotee's heart because of his having taken shelter of the lotus feet of a mahājana such as Prahlāda Mahārāja.6.23]. One should have complete faith in the guru, who helps the disciple make progress in spiritual life. As soon as the disciple thinks independently, not caring for the instructions of the spiritual master, he is a failure (yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto 'pi). Aditi very strictly followed the instructions of her husband and spiritual master, and thus she was successful.





TEXTS 2–3



cintayanty ekayā buddhyā

mahā-puruṣam īśvaram

pragṛhyendriya-duṣṭāśvān

manasā buddhi-sārathiḥ

manaś caikāgrayā buddhyā



bhagavaty akhilātmani

vāsudeve samādhāya

cacāra ha payo-vratam

SYNONYMS



cintayanti-constantly thinking; ekayā-with one attention; buddhyā-and intelligence; mahā-puruṣam-upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśvaram-the supreme controller, Lord Viṣṇu; pragṛhya-completely controlling; indriya-the senses; duṣṭa-formidable, powerful; aśvān-horses; manasā-by the mind; buddhi-sārathiḥ-with the help of intelligence, the chariot driver; manaḥ-the mind; ca-also; eka-agrayā-with full attention; buddhyā-with the intelligence; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akhila-ātmani-the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul of all living entities; vāsudeve-unto Lord Vāsudeva; samādhāya-keeping full attention; cacāra-executed; ha-thus; payaḥ-vratam-the ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata.





With full, undiverted attention, Aditi thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and in this way brought under full control her mind and senses, which resembled forceful horses. She concentrated her mind upon the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva. Thus she performed the ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata.





This is the process of bhakti-yoga.



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." One simply has to concentrate upon the lotus feet of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ). Then the mind and senses will be controlled, and one can engage himself fully in the devotional service of the Lord. The devotee does not need to practice the haṭha-yoga system to control the mind and senses; his mind and senses are automatically controlled because of unalloyed devotional service to the Lord.





TEXT 4



tasyāḥ prādurabhūt tāta

bhagavān ādi-puruṣaḥ

pīta-vāsāś catur-bāhuḥ

śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-before her; prādurabhūt-appeared; tāta-my dear King; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-puruṣaḥ-the original person; pīta-vāsāḥ-dressed in yellow garments; catuḥ-bāhuḥ-with four arms; śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharaḥ-bearing the conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower.





My dear King, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, dressed in yellow garments and bearing a conchshell, disc, club and lotus in His four hands, then appeared before Aditi.





TEXT 5



taṁ netra-gocaraṁ vīkṣya

sahasotthāya sādaram

nanāma bhuvi kāyena

daṇḍavat-prīti-vihvalā

SYNONYMS



tam-Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); netra-gocaram-visible by her eyes; vīkṣya-after seeing; sahasā-all of a sudden; utthāya-getting up; sa-ādaram-with great respect; nanāma-offered respectful obeisances; bhuvi-on the ground; kāyena-by the whole body; daṇḍa-vat-falling like a rod; prīti-vihvalā-almost puzzled because of transcendental bliss.





When the Supreme Personality of Godhead became visible to Aditi's eyes, Aditi was so overwhelmed by transcendental bliss that she at once stood up and then fell to the ground like a rod to offer the Lord her respectful obeisances.





TEXT 6



sotthāya baddhāñjalir īḍituṁ sthitā

notseha ānanda-jalākulekṣaṇā

babhūva tūṣṇīṁ pulakākulākṛtis

tad-darśanātyutsava-gātra-vepathuḥ

SYNONYMS



sā-she; utthāya-standing up; baddha-añjaliḥ-with folded hands; īḍitum-to worship the Lord; sthitā-situated; na utsehe-could not endeavor; ānanda-from transcendental bliss; jala-with water; ākula-īkṣaṇā-her eyes were filled; babhūva-remained; tūṣṇīm-silent; pulaka-with standing of the hairs of the body; ākula-overwhelmed; ākṛtiḥ-her form; tat-darśana-by seeing the Lord; ati-utsava-with great pleasure; gātra-her body; vepathuḥ-began to tremble.





Aditi stood silently with folded hands, unable to offer prayers to the Lord. Because of transcendental bliss, tears filled her eyes, and the hairs on her body stood on end. Because she could see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, she felt ecstasy, and her body trembled.





TEXT 7



prītyā śanair gadgadayā girā hariṁ

tuṣṭāva sā devy aditiḥ kurūdvaha

udvīkṣatī sā pibatīva cakṣuṣā

ramā-patiṁ yajña-patiṁ jagat-patim

SYNONYMS



prītyā-because of love; śanaiḥ-again and again; gadgadayā-faltering; girā-with a voice; harim-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tuṣṭāva-pleased; sā-she; devī-the demigoddess; aditiḥ-Aditi; kuru-udvaha-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; udvīkṣatī-while staring; sā-she; pibatī iva-appeared as if she were drinking; cakṣuṣā-through the eyes; ramā-patim-unto the Lord, the husband of the goddess of fortune; yajña-patim-unto the Lord, the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies; jagat-patim-the master and Lord of the entire universe.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the demigoddess Aditi then began offering her prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead in a faltering voice and with great love. She appeared as though drinking through her eyes the Supreme Lord, who is the husband of the goddess of fortune, the enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies, and the master and Lord of the entire universe.





After observing the payo-vrata, Aditi was certain that the Lord had appeared before her as Ramā-pati, the husband of all good fortune, just to offer her sons all opulences. She had performed the yajña of payo-vrata under the direction of her husband, Kaśyapa, and therefore she thought of the Lord as Yajña-pati. She was completely satisfied to see the master and Lord of the entire universe come before her to fulfill her desire.





TEXT 8



śrī-aditir uvāca

yajñeśa yajña-puruṣācyuta tīrtha-pāda

tīrtha-śravaḥ śravaṇa-maṅgala-nāmadheya

āpanna-loka-vṛjinopaśamodayādya

śaṁ naḥ kṛdhīśa bhagavann asi dīna-nāthaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-aditiḥ uvāca-the demigoddess Aditi said; yajña-īśa-O controller of all sacrificial ceremonies; yajña-puruṣa-the person who enjoys the benefits of all sacrifices; acyuta-infallible; tīrtha-pāda-at whose lotus feet stand all the holy places of pilgrimage; tīrtha-śravaḥ-celebrated as the ultimate shelter of all saintly persons; śravaṇa-hearing about whom; maṅgala-is auspicious; nāmadheya-to chant His name is also auspicious; āpanna-surrendered; loka-of people; vṛjina-dangerous material position; upaśama-diminishing; udaya-who has appeared; ādya-the original Personality of Godhead; śam-auspiciousness; naḥ-our; kṛdhi-kindly bestow upon us; īśa-O supreme controller; bhagavan-O Lord; asi-You are; dīna-nāthaḥ-the only shelter of the down-trodden.





The goddess Aditi said: O master and enjoyer of all sacrificial ceremonies, O infallible and most famous person, whose name, when chanted, spreads all good fortune! O original Supreme Personality of Godhead, supreme controller, shelter of all holy places, You are the shelter of all poor, suffering living entities, and You have appeared to diminish their suffering. Please be kind to us and spread our good fortune.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of those who observe vows and austerities, and it is He who bestows benedictions upon them. He is worshipable for the devotee throughout the devotee's life, for He never breaks His promises. As He says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.31), kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: "O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes." The Lord is addressed here as acyuta, the infallible, because He takes care of His devotees. Anyone inimical to the devotees is certainly vanquished by the mercy of the Lord. The Lord is the source of the Ganges water, and therefore He is addressed here as tīrtha-pāda, indicating that all the holy places are at His lotus feet, or that whatever He touches with His foot becomes a holy place. Bhagavad-gītā, for example, begins with the words dharma-kṣetre kuru-kṣetre [Bg. 1.1]. Because the Lord was present on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, it became a dharma-kṣetra, a place of pilgrimage. Therefore the Pāṇḍavas, who were extremely religious, were assured of victory. Any place where the Supreme Personality of Godhead displays His pastimes, such as Vṛndāvana or Dvārakā, becomes a holy place. The chanting of the holy name of the Lord-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare-is pleasing to the ear, and it expands good fortune to the audience who hears it chanted. Owing to the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Aditi was fully assured that the troublesome condition created for her by the demons would now be ended.





TEXT 9



viśvāya viśva-bhavana-sthiti-saṁyamāya

svairaṁ gṛhīta-puru-śakti-guṇāya bhūmne

sva-sthāya śaśvad-upabṛṁhita-pūrṇa-bodha-

vyāpāditātma-tamase haraye namas te

SYNONYMS



viśvāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is actually the entire universe; viśva-of the universe; bhavana-creation; sthiti-maintenance; saṁyamāya-and annihilation; svairam-fully independent; gṛhīta-taking in hand; puru-completely; śakti-guṇāya-controlling the three modes of material nature; bhūmne-the supreme great; sva-sthāya-who is always situated in His original form; śaśvat-eternally; upabṛṁhita-achieved; pūrṇa-complete; bodha-knowledge; vyāpādita-completely vanquished; ātma-tamase-the illusory energy of Your Lordship; haraye-unto the Supreme Lord; namaḥ te-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





My Lord, You are the all-pervading universal form, the fully independent creator, maintainer and destroyer of this universe. Although You engage Your energy in matter, You are always situated in Your original form and never fall from that position, for Your knowledge is infallible and always suitable to any situation. You are never bewildered by illusion. O my Lord, let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 2.117) it is said:



siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa





Anyone trying to become fully Kṛṣṇa conscious must know the Lord's glories as far as they are possible to understand. Here Aditi hints at these glories. The universe is nothing but the external potency of the Lord. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.4): mayā tatam idaṁ sarvam. Whatever we see in this universe is but an expansion of the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as the sunshine and heat all over the universe are expansions of the sun. When one surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he surpasses the influence of the illusory energy, for the Supreme Lord, being fully wise and being situated in the heart of everyone, especially in the heart of the devotee, gives one intelligence by which one is sure never to fall into illusion.





TEXT 10



āyuḥ paraṁ vapur abhīṣṭam atulya-lakṣmīr

dyo-bhū-rasāḥ sakala-yoga-guṇās tri-vargaḥ

jñānaṁ ca kevalam ananta bhavanti tuṣṭāt

tvatto nṛṇāṁ kim u sapatna-jayādir āśīḥ

SYNONYMS



āyuḥ-duration of life; param-as long as that of Lord Brahmā; vapuḥ-a particular type of body; abhīṣṭam-the goal of life; atulya-lakṣmīḥ-unparalleled opulence in material existence; dyo-the upper planetary system; bhū-Bhūloka; rasāḥ-the lower planetary system; sakala-all kinds of; yoga-guṇāḥ-the eight mystic perfections; tri-vargaḥ-the principles of religiosity, economic development and sense gratification; jñānam-transcendental knowledge; ca-and; kevalam-complete; ananta-O unlimited one; bhavanti-all become possible; tuṣṭāt-by Your satisfaction; tvattaḥ-from You; nṛṇām-of all living entities; kim u-what to speak of; sapatna-enemies; jaya-conquering; ādiḥ-and others; āśīḥ-such benedictions.





O unlimited one, if Your Lordship is satisfied, one can very easily obtain a lifetime as long as that of Lord Brahmā, a body either in the upper, lower or middle planetary systems, unlimited material opulence, religion, economic development and satisfaction of the senses, full transcendental knowledge, and the eight yogic perfections, what to speak of such petty achievements as conquering one's rivals.





TEXT 11



śrī-śuka uvāca

adityaivaṁ stuto rājan

bhagavān puṣkarekṣaṇaḥ

kṣetra-jñaḥ sarva-bhūtānām

iti hovāca bhārata

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; adityā-by Aditi; evam-thus; stutaḥ-being worshiped; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puṣkara-īkṣaṇaḥ-whose eyes are like lotus flowers; kṣetra-jñaḥ-the Supersoul; sarva-bhūtānām-of all living entities; iti-thus; ha-indeed; uvāca-replied; bhārata-O best of the Bharata dynasty.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, best of the Bharata dynasty, when the lotus-eyed Lord, the Supersoul of all living entities, was thus worshiped by Aditi, He replied as follows.





TEXT 12



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

deva-mātar bhavatyā me

vijñātaṁ cira-kāṅkṣitam

yat sapatnair hṛta-śrīṇāṁ

cyāvitānāṁ sva-dhāmataḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; deva-mātaḥ-O mother of the demigods; bhavatyāḥ-of you; me-by Me; vijñātam-understood; cira-kāṅkṣitam-what You have desired for a long time; yat-because; sapatnaiḥ-by the rivals; hṛta-śrīṇām-of your sons, who are bereft of all opulences; cyāvitānām-vanquished; sva-dhāmataḥ-from their own residential quarters.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O mother of the demigods, I have already understood your long-cherished desires for the welfare of your sons, who have been deprived of all opulences and driven from their residence by their enemies.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being situated in everyone's heart, and especially in the hearts of His devotees, is always ready to help devotees in adversity. Since He knows everything, He knows how things are to be adjusted, and He does the needful to relieve the suffering of His devotee.





TEXT 13



tān vinirjitya samare

durmadān asurarṣabhān

pratilabdha-jaya-śrībhiḥ

putrair icchasy upāsitum

SYNONYMS



tān-them; vinirjitya-defeating; samare-in the fight; durmadān-puffed up by strength; asura-ṛṣabhān-the leaders of the demons; pratilabdha-getting back; jaya-victory; śrībhiḥ-as well as the opulence; putraiḥ-with your sons; icchasi-you are desiring; upāsitum-to come together and worship Me.





O Devī, O goddess, I can understand that you want to regain your sons and be together with them to worship Me, after defeating the enemies in battle and retrieving your abode and opulences.





TEXT 14



indra-jyeṣṭhaiḥ sva-tanayair

hatānāṁ yudhi vidviṣām

striyo rudantīr āsādya

draṣṭum icchasi duḥkhitāḥ

SYNONYMS



indra-jyeṣṭhaiḥ-persons of whom King Indra is the eldest; sva-tanayaiḥ-by your own sons; hatānām-who are killed; yudhi-in the fight; vidviṣām-of the enemies; striyaḥ-the wives; rudantīḥ-lamenting; āsādya-coming near the dead bodies of their husbands; draṣṭum icchasi-you want to see; duḥkhitāḥ-very much aggrieved.





You want to see the wives of the demons lamenting for the death of their husbands when those demons, the enemies of your sons, are killed in battle by the demigods, of whom Indra is the chief.





TEXT 15



ātmajān susamṛddhāṁs tvaṁ

pratyāhṛta-yaśaḥ-śriyaḥ

nāka-pṛṣṭham adhiṣṭhāya

krīḍato draṣṭum icchasi

SYNONYMS



ātma-jān-your own sons; su-samṛddhān-completely opulent; tvam-you; pratyāhṛta-having received back; yaśaḥ-reputation; śriyaḥ-opulence; nāka-pṛṣṭham-in the heavenly kingdom; adhiṣṭhāya-situated; krīḍataḥ-enjoying their life; draṣṭum-to see; icchasi-you are desiring.





You want your sons to regain their lost reputation and opulence and live again on their heavenly planet as usual.





TEXT 16



prāyo 'dhunā te 'sura-yūtha-nāthā

apāraṇīyā iti devi me matiḥ

yat te 'nukūleśvara-vipra-guptā

na vikramas tatra sukhaṁ dadāti

SYNONYMS



prāyaḥ-almost; adhunā-at the present moment; te-all of them; asura-yūtha-nāthāḥ-the chiefs of the demons; apāraṇīyāḥ-unconquerable; iti-thus; devi-O mother Aditi; me-My; matiḥ-opinion; yat-because; te-all the demons; anukūla-īśvara-vipra-guptāḥ-protected by brāhmaṇas, by whose favor the supreme controller is always present; na-not; vikramaḥ-the use of power; tatra-there; sukham-happiness; dadāti-can give.





O mother of the demigods, in My opinion almost all the chiefs of the demons are now unconquerable, for they are being protected by brāhmaṇas, whom the Supreme Lord always favors. Thus the use of power against them now will not at all be a source of happiness.





When a person is favored by brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas, no one can defeat him. Even the Supreme Personality of Godhead does not interfere when one is protected by a brāhmaṇa. It is said, go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. The Lord's first inclination is to give all benedictions to the cows and brāhmaṇas. Therefore if brāhmaṇas favor someone, the Lord does not interfere, nor can anyone interfere with the happiness of such a person.





TEXT 17



athāpy upāyo mama devi cintyaḥ

santoṣitasya vrata-caryayā te

mamārcanaṁ nārhati gantum anyathā

śraddhānurūpaṁ phala-hetukatvāt

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; api-in spite of this situation; upāyaḥ-some means; mama-by Me; devi-O goddess; cintyaḥ-must be considered; santoṣitasya-very pleased; vrata-caryayā-observing the vow; te-by you; mama arcanam-worshiping Me; na-never; arhati-deserves; gantum anyathā-to become otherwise; śraddhā-anurūpam-according to one's faith and devotion; phala-of the result; hetukatvāt-from being the cause.





Yet because I have been satisfied by the activities of your vow, O goddess Aditi, I must find some means to favor you, for worship of Me never goes in vain but certainly gives the desired result according to what one deserves.





TEXT 18



tvayārcitaś cāham apatya-guptaye

payo-vratenānuguṇaṁ samīḍitaḥ

svāṁśena putratvam upetya te sutān

goptāsmi mārīca-tapasy adhiṣṭhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tvayā-by you; arcitaḥ-being worshiped; ca-also; aham-I; apatya-guptaye-giving protection to your sons; payaḥ-vratena-by the payo-vrata vow; anuguṇam-as far as possible; samīḍitaḥ-properly worshiped; sva-aṁśena-by My plenary portion; putratvam-becoming your son; upetya-taking this opportunity; te sutān-to your other sons; goptā asmi-I shall give protection; mārīca-of Kaśyapa Muni; tapasi-in the austerity; adhiṣṭhitaḥ-situated.





You have prayed to Me and properly worshiped Me by performing the great payo-vrata ceremony for the sake of protecting your sons. Because of Kaśyapa Muni's austerities, I shall agree to become your son and thus protect your other sons.





TEXT 19



upadhāva patiṁ bhadre

prajāpatim akalmaṣam

māṁ ca bhāvayatī patyāv

evaṁ rūpam avasthitam

SYNONYMS



upadhāva-just go worship; patim-your husband; bhadre-O gentle woman; prajāpatim-who is a Prajāpati; akalmaṣam-very much purified because of his austerity; mām-Me; ca-as well as; bhāvayatī-thinking of; patyau-within your husband; evam-thus; rūpam-form; avasthitam-situated there.





Always thinking of Me as being situated within the body of your husband, Kaśyapa, go worship your husband, who has been purified by his austerity.





TEXT 20



naitat parasmā ākhyeyaṁ

pṛṣṭayāpi kathañcana

sarvaṁ sampadyate devi

deva-guhyaṁ susaṁvṛtam

SYNONYMS



na-not; etat-this; parasmai-to outsiders; ākhyeyam-is to be disclosed; pṛṣṭayā api-even though questioned; kathañcana-by anyone; sarvam-everything; sampadyate-becomes successful; devi-O lady; deva-guhyam-very confidential even to the demigods; su-saṁvṛtam-very carefully kept confidential.





O lady, even if someone inquires, you should not disclose this fact to anyone. That which is very confidential is successful if kept secret.





TEXT 21



śrī-śuka uvāca

etāvad uktvā bhagavāṁs

tatraivāntaradhīyata

aditir durlabhaṁ labdhvā

harer janmātmani prabhoḥ

upādhāvat patiṁ bhaktyā

parayā kṛta-kṛtyavat

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; etāvat-in this way; uktvā-saying (to her); bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tatra eva-in that very spot; antaḥ-adhīyata-disappeared; aditiḥ-Aditi; durlabham-a very rare achievement; labdhvā-getting; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; janma-birth; ātmani-in herself; prabhoḥ-of the Lord; upādhāvat-immediately went; patim-unto her husband; bhaktyā-with devotion; parayā-great; kṛta-kṛtya-vat-thinking herself very successful.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After speaking in this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead disappeared from that very spot. Aditi, having received the extremely valuable benediction that the Lord would appear as her son, considered herself very successful, and with great devotion she approached her husband.





TEXT 22



sa vai samādhi-yogena

kaśyapas tad abudhyata

praviṣṭam ātmani harer

aṁśaṁ hy avitathekṣaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; vai-indeed; samādhi-yogena-by mystic meditation; kaśyapaḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; tat-then; abudhyata-could understand; praviṣṭam-entered; ātmani-within himself; hareḥ-of the Supreme Lord; aṁśam-a plenary portion; hi-indeed; avitatha-īkṣaṇaḥ-whose vision is never mistaken.





Being situated in a meditational trance, Kaśyapa Muni, whose vision is never mistaken, could see that a plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead had entered within him.





TEXT 23



so 'dityāṁ vīryam ādhatta

tapasā cira-sambhṛtam

samāhita-manā rājan

dāruṇy agniṁ yathānilaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Kaśyapa; adityām-unto Aditi; vīryam-semen; ādhatta-placed; tapasā-by austerity; cira-sambhṛtam-restrained for long, long years; samāhita-manāḥ-being fully in trance upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājan-O King; dāruṇi-as in firewood; agnim-fire; yathā-as; anilaḥ-wind.





O King, as the wind promotes friction between two pieces of wood and thus gives rise to fire, Kaśyapa Muni, whose transcendental position was fully absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, transferred his potency into the womb of Aditi.





A forest fire begins when two pieces of wood rub against one another, being agitated by the wind. Actually, however, fire belongs neither to the wood nor to the wind; it is always different from both. Similarly, here it is to be understood that the union of Kaśyapa Muni and Aditi was not like the sexual intercourse of ordinary human beings. The Supreme Personality of Godhead has nothing to do with the human secretions of sexual intercourse. He is always completely aloof from such material combinations.



The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.29), samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu: "I am equal toward all living entities." Nonetheless, to protect the devotees and kill the demons, who were a disturbing element, the Lord entered the womb of Aditi. Therefore this is a transcendental pastime of the Lord. This should not be misunderstood. One should not think that the Lord became the son of Aditi the way an ordinary child is born because of sexual intercourse between man and woman.



Here it may also be appropriate to explain, in these days of controversy, the origin of life. The life force of the living entity-the soul-is different from the ovum and semen of the human being. Although the conditioned soul has nothing to do with the reproductive cells of man and woman, he is placed into the proper situation because of his work (karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa). Life is not, however, a product of two secretions, but is independent of all material elements. As fully described in Bhagavad-gītā, the living entity is not subject to any material reactions. He can neither be burnt by fire, cut by sharp weapons, moistened by water, nor dried by the air. He is completely different from the physical elements, but by a superior arrangement he is put into these material elements. He is always aloof from material contact (asaṅgo hy ayaṁ puruṣaḥ) but because he is placed in a material condition, he suffers the reactions of the material modes of nature.



puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi

bhuṅkte prakṛtijān guṇān

kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya

sad-asad-yoni-janmasu





"The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various species." (Bg. 13.22) Although the living entity is aloof from the material elements, he is put into material conditions, and thus he must suffer the reactions of material activities.





TEXT 24



aditer dhiṣṭhitaṁ garbhaṁ

bhagavantaṁ sanātanam

hiraṇyagarbho vijñāya

samīḍe guhya-nāmabhiḥ

SYNONYMS



aditeḥ-into the womb of Aditi; dhiṣṭhitam-being established; garbham-pregnancy; bhagavantam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sanātanam-who is eternal; hiraṇyagarbhaḥ-Lord Brahmā; vijñāya-knowing this; samīḍe-offered prayers; guhya-nāmabhiḥ-with transcendental names.





When Lord Brahmā understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead was now within the womb of Aditi, he began to offer prayers to the Lord by reciting transcendental names.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead exists everywhere (aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham). Therefore when one chants His transcendental names-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare-the Supreme Personality of Godhead is automatically pleased by such saṅkīrtana. It is not that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is absent; He is present there. And when a devotee utters the transcendental name, it is not a material sound. Therefore, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is naturally pleased. A devotee knows that the Lord is present everywhere and that one can please Him simply by chanting His holy name.





TEXT 25



śrī-brahmovāca

jayorugāya bhagavann

urukrama namo 'stu te

namo brahmaṇya-devāya

tri-guṇāya namo namaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-brahmā uvāca-Lord Brahmā offered prayers; jaya-all glories; urugāya-unto the Lord, who is constantly glorified; bhagavan-O my Lord; urukrama-whose activities are very glorious; namaḥ astu te-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; namaḥ-my respectful obeisances; brahmaṇya-devāya-unto the Lord of the transcendentalists; tri-guṇāya-the controller of the three modes of nature; namaḥ namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.





Lord Brahmā said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all glories unto You, who are glorified by all and whose activities are all uncommon. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, O Lord of the transcendentalists, controller of the three modes of nature. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.





TEXT 26



namas te pṛśni-garbhāya

veda-garbhāya vedhase

tri-nābhāya tri-pṛṣṭhāya

śipi-viṣṭāya viṣṇave

SYNONYMS



namaḥ te-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; pṛśni-garbhāya-who formerly lived within the womb of Pṛśni (Aditi in her previous birth); veda-garbhāya-who always remain within Vedic knowledge; vedhase-who are full of knowledge; tri-nābhāya-within the stem growing from whose navel live all the three worlds; tri-pṛṣṭhāya-who are transcendental to the three worlds; śipi-viṣṭāya-who are within the cores of the hearts of all living entities; viṣṇave-unto the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the all-pervading Lord Viṣṇu, who have entered the cores of the hearts of all living entities. All the three worlds reside within Your navel, yet You are above the three worlds. Formerly You appeared as the son of Pṛśni. To You, the supreme creator, who are understood only through Vedic knowledge, I offer my respectful obeisances.





TEXT 27



tvam ādir anto bhuvanasya madhyam

ananta-śaktiṁ puruṣaṁ yam āhuḥ

kālo bhavān ākṣipatīśa viśvaṁ

sroto yathāntaḥ patitaṁ gabhīram

SYNONYMS



tvam-Your Lordship; ādiḥ-the original cause; antaḥ-the cause of dissolution; bhuvanasya-of the universe; madhyam-maintenance of the present manifestation; ananta-śaktim-the reservoir of unlimited potencies; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; yam-whom; āhuḥ-they say; kālaḥ-the principle of eternal time; bhavān-Your Lordship; ākṣipati-attracting; īśa-the Supreme Lord; viśvam-the whole universe; srotaḥ-waves; yathā-as; antaḥ patitam-fallen within the water; gabhīram-very deep.





O my Lord, You are the beginning, the manifestation and the ultimate dissolution of the three worlds, and You are celebrated in the Vedas as the reservoir of unlimited potencies, the Supreme Person. O my Lord, as waves attract branches and leaves that have fallen into deep water, You, the supreme eternal time factor, attract everything in this universe.





The time factor is sometimes described as kāla-strota, waves of time. Everything in this material world is within the time factor and is being carried away by waves of attraction, which represent the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 28



tvaṁ vai prajānāṁ sthira-jaṅgamānāṁ

prajāpatīnām asi sambhaviṣṇuḥ

divaukasāṁ deva divaś cyutānāṁ

parāyaṇaṁ naur iva majjato 'psu

SYNONYMS



tvam-Your Lordship; vai-indeed; prajānām-of all living entities; sthira-jaṅgamānām-either stationary or moving; prajāpatīnām-of all the Prajāpatis; asi-You are; sambhaviṣṇuḥ-the generator of everyone; diva-okasām-of the inhabitants of the upper planetary system; deva-O Supreme Lord; divaḥ cyutānām-of the demigods, who have now fallen from their residential quarters; parāyaṇam-the supreme shelter; nauḥ-boat; iva-like; majjataḥ-of one drowning; apsu-in the water.





My Lord, You are the original generator of all living entities, stationary or moving, and You are also the generator of the Prajāpatis. O my Lord, as a boat is the only hope for a person drowning in the water, You are the only shelter for the demigods, who are now bereft of their heavenly position.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Supreme Lord Agrees to Become Aditi's Son."



Chapter Eighteen



Lord Vāmanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation





This chapter describes how Lord Vāmanadeva appeared and how He went to the sacrificial arena of Mahārāja Bali, who received Him well and fulfilled His desire by offering Him benedictions.





Lord Vāmanadeva appeared in this world from the womb of Aditi completely equipped with conchshell, disc, club and lotus. His bodily hue was blackish, and He was dressed in yellow garments. Lord Viṣṇu appeared at an auspicious moment on Śravaṇa-dvādaśī when the Abhijit star had arisen. At that time, in all the three worlds (including the higher planetary system, outer space and this earth), all the demigods, the cows, the brāhmaṇas and even the seasons were happy because of God's appearance. Therefore this auspicious day is called Vijayā. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has a sac-cid-ānanda body, appeared as the son of Kaśyapa and Aditi, both of His parents were very astonished. After His appearance, the Lord assumed the form of a dwarf (Vāmana). All the great sages expressed their jubilation, and with Kaśyapa Muni before them they performed the birthday ceremony of Lord Vāmana. At the time of Lord Vāmanadeva's sacred thread ceremony, He was honored by the sun-god, Bṛhaspati, the goddess presiding over the planet earth, the deity of the heavenly planets, His mother, Lord Brahmā, Kuvera, the seven ṛṣis and others. Lord Vāmanadeva then visited the sacrificial arena on the northern side of the Narmadā River, at the field known as Bhṛgukaccha, where brāhmaṇas of the Bhṛgu dynasty were performing yajñas. Wearing a belt made of muñja straw, an upper garment of deerskin and a sacred thread and carrying in His hands a daṇḍa, an umbrella and a waterpot (kamaṇḍalu), Lord Vāmanadeva appeared in the sacrificial arena of Mahārāja Bali. Because of His transcendentally effulgent presence, all the priests were diminished in their prowess, and thus they all stood from their seats and offered prayers to Lord Vāmanadeva. Even Lord Śiva accepts on his head the Ganges water generated from the toe of Lord Vāmanadeva. Therefore, after washing the Lord's feet, Bali Mahārāja immediately accepted the water from the Lord's feet on his head and felt that he and his predecessors had certainly been glorified. Then Bali Mahārāja inquired of Lord Vāmanadeva's welfare and requested the Lord to ask him for money, jewels or anything He might desire.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

itthaṁ viriñca-stuta-karma-vīryaḥ

prādurbabhūvāmṛta-bhūr adityām

catur-bhujaḥ śaṅkha-gadābja-cakraḥ

piśaṅga-vāsā nalināyatekṣaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ittham-in this way; viriñca-stuta-karma-vīryaḥ-the Personality of Godhead, whose activities and prowess are always praised by Lord Brahmā; prādurbabhūva-became manifested; amṛta-bhūḥ-whose appearance is always deathless; adityām-from the womb of Aditi; catuḥ-bhujaḥ-having four arms; śaṅkha-gadā-abja-cakraḥ-decorated with conchshell, club, lotus and disc; piśaṅga-vāsāḥ-dressed in yellow garments; nalina-āyata-īkṣaṇaḥ-having blooming eyes like the petals of a lotus.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After Lord Brahmā had thus spoken, glorifying the Supreme Lord's activities and prowess, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never subject to death like an ordinary living being, appeared from the womb of Aditi. His four hands were decorated with a conchshell, club, lotus and disc, He was dressed in yellow garments, and His eyes appeared like the petals of a blooming lotus.





The word amṛta-bhūḥ is significant in this verse. The Lord sometimes appears like an ordinary child taking birth, but this does not mean that He is subject to birth, death or old age. One must be very intelligent to understand the appearance and activities of the Supreme Lord in His incarnations. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9): janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ. One should try to understand that the Lord's appearance and disappearance and His activities are all divyam, or transcendental. The Lord has nothing to do with material activities. One who understands the appearance, disappearance and activities of the Lord is immediately liberated. After giving up his body, he never again has to accept a material body, but is transferred to the spiritual world (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]).





TEXT 2



śyāmāvadāto jhaṣa-rāja-kuṇḍala-

tviṣollasac-chrī-vadanāmbujaḥ pumān

śrīvatsa-vakṣā balayāṅgadollasat-

kirīṭa-kāñcī-guṇa-cāru-nūpuraḥ

SYNONYMS



śyāma-avadātaḥ-whose body is blackish and free from inebriety; jhaṣa-rāja-kuṇḍala-of the two earrings, made in the shape of sharks; tviṣā-by the luster; ullasat-dazzling; śrī-vadana-ambujaḥ-having a beautiful lotus face; pumān-the Supreme Person; śrīvatsa-vakṣāḥ-with the mark of Śrīvatsa on His bosom; balaya-bracelets; aṅgada-arm bands; ullasat-dazzling; kirīṭa-helmet; kāñcī-belt; guṇa-sacred thread; cāru-beautiful; nūpuraḥ-ankle bells.





The body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, blackish in complexion, was free from all inebrieties. His lotus face, decorated with earrings resembling sharks, appeared very beautiful, and on His bosom was the mark of Śrīvatsa. He wore bangles on His wrists, armlets on His arms, a helmet on His head, a belt on His waist, a sacred thread across His chest, and ankle bells decorating His lotus feet.





TEXT 3



madhu-vrata-vrāta-vighuṣṭayā svayā

virājitaḥ śrī-vanamālayā hariḥ

prajāpater veśma-tamaḥ svarociṣā

vināśayan kaṇṭha-niviṣṭa-kaustubhaḥ

SYNONYMS



madhu-vrata-of bees always hankering for honey; vrāta-with a bunch; vighuṣṭayā-resounding; svayā-uncommon; virājitaḥ-situated; śrī-beautiful; vana-mālayā-with a flower garland; hariḥ-the Supreme Lord; prajāpateḥ-of Kaśyapa Muni, the Prajāpati; veśma-tamaḥ-the darkness of the house; sva-rociṣā-by His own effulgence; vināśayan-vanquishing; kaṇṭha-on the neck; niviṣṭa-worn; kaustubhaḥ-the Kaustubha gem.





An uncommonly beautiful garland of flowers decorated His bosom, and because the flowers were extremely fragrant, a large group of bees, making their natural humming sounds, invaded them for honey. When the Lord appeared, wearing the Kaustubha gem on His neck, His effulgence vanquished the darkness in the home of the Prajāpati Kaśyapa.





TEXT 4



diśaḥ praseduḥ salilāśayās tadā

prajāḥ prahṛṣṭā ṛtavo guṇānvitāḥ

dyaur antarīkṣaṁ kṣitir agni-jihvā

gāvo dvijāḥ sañjahṛṣur nagāś ca

SYNONYMS



diśaḥ-all directions; praseduḥ-became happy; salila-of water; āśayāḥ-the reservoirs; tadā-at that time; prajāḥ-all living entities; prahṛṣṭāḥ-very happy; ṛtavaḥ-the seasons; guṇa-anvitāḥ-full of their respective qualities; dyauḥ-the upper planetary system; antarīkṣam-outer space; kṣitiḥ-the surface of the earth; agni-jihvāḥ-the demigods; gāvaḥ-the cows; dvijāḥ-the brāhmaṇas; sañjahṛṣuḥ-all became happy; nagāḥ ca-and the mountains.





At that time, there was happiness in all directions, in the reservoirs of water like the rivers and oceans, and in the core of everyone's heart. The various seasons displayed their respective qualities, and all living entities in the upper planetary system, in outer space and on the surface of the earth were jubilant. The demigods, the cows, the brāhmaṇas and the hills and mountains were all filled with joy.





TEXT 5



śroṇāyāṁ śravaṇa-dvādaśyāṁ

muhūrte 'bhijiti prabhuḥ

sarve nakṣatra-tārādyāś

cakrus taj-janma dakṣiṇam

SYNONYMS



śroṇāyām-when the moon was situated in the Śravaṇa lunar mansion; śravaṇa-dvādaśyām-on the twelfth lunar day of the bright fortnight in the month of Bhādra, the day famous as the Śravaṇa-dvādaśī; muhūrte-in the auspicious moment; abhijiti-in the first portion of the Śravaṇa lunar mansion known as the Abhijit-nakṣatra and in the Abhijit-muhūrta (occurring at midday); prabhuḥ-the Lord; sarve-all; nakṣatra-stars; tārā-planets; ādyāḥ-beginning with the sun and followed by the other planets; cakruḥ-made; tat-janma-the birthday of the Lord; dakṣiṇam-very munificent.





On the day of Śravaṇa-dvādaśī [the twelfth day of the bright fortnight in the month of Bhādra], when the moon came into the lunar mansion Śravaṇa, at the auspicious moment of Abhijit, the Lord appeared in this universe. Considering the Lord's appearance very auspicious, all the stars and planets, from the sun to Saturn, were munificently charitable.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, an expert astrologer, explains the word nakṣatra-tārādyāḥ. The word nakṣatra means "the stars," the word tāra in this context refers to the planets, and ādyāḥ means "the first one specifically mentioned." Among the planets, the first is Sūrya, the sun, not the moon. Therefore, according to the Vedic version, the modern astronomer's proposition that the moon is nearest to the earth should not be accepted. The chronological order in which people all over the world refer to the days of the week-Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday-corresponds to the Vedic order of the planets and thus circumstantiates the Vedic version. Apart from this, when the Lord appeared the planets and stars became situated very auspiciously, according to astrological calculations, to celebrate the birth of the Lord.





TEXT 6



dvādaśyāṁ savitātiṣṭhan

madhyandina-gato nṛpa

vijayā-nāma sā proktā

yasyāṁ janma vidur hareḥ

SYNONYMS



dvādaśyām-on the twelfth day of the moon; savitā-the sun; atiṣṭhat-was staying; madhyam-dina-gataḥ-on the meridian; nṛpa-O King; vijayā-nāma-by the name Vijayā; sā-that day; proktā-is called; yasyām-on which; janma-the appearance; viduḥ-they know; hareḥ-of Lord Hari.





O King, when the Lord appeared-on dvādaśī, the twelfth day of the moon-the sun was at the meridian, as every learned scholar knows. This dvādaśī is called Vijayā.





TEXT 7



śaṅkha-dundubhayo nedur

mṛdaṅga-paṇavānakāḥ

citra-vāditra-tūryāṇāṁ

nirghoṣas tumulo 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



śaṅkha-conchshells; dundubhayaḥ-kettledrums; neduḥ-vibrated; mṛdaṅga-drums; paṇava-ānakāḥ-drums named paṇavas and ānakas; citra-various; vāditra-of these vibrations of musical sound; tūryāṇām-and of other instruments; nirghoṣaḥ-the loud sound; tumulaḥ-tumultuous; abhavat-became.





Conchshells, kettledrums, drums, paṇavas and ānakas vibrated in concert. The sound of these and various other instruments was tumultuous.





TEXT 8



prītāś cāpsaraso 'nṛtyan

gandharva-pravarā jaguḥ

tuṣṭuvur munayo devā

manavaḥ pitaro 'gnayaḥ

SYNONYMS



prītāḥ-being very pleased; ca-also; apsarasaḥ-the celestial dancing girls; anṛtyan-danced; gandharva-pravarāḥ-the best of the Gandharvas; jaguḥ-sang; tuṣṭuvuḥ-satisfied the Lord by offering prayers; munayaḥ-the great sages; devāḥ-the demigods; manavaḥ-the Manus; pitaraḥ-the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; agnayaḥ-the fire-gods.





Being very pleased, the celestial dancing girls [Apsarās] danced in jubilation, the best of the Gandharvas sang songs, and the great sages, demigods, Manus, Pitās and fire-gods offered prayers to satisfy the Lord.





TEXTS 9–10



siddha-vidyādhara-gaṇāḥ

sakimpuruṣa-kinnarāḥ

cāraṇā yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi

suparṇā bhujagottamāḥ

gāyanto 'tipraśaṁsanto



nṛtyanto vibudhānugāḥ

adityā āśrama-padaṁ

kusumaiḥ samavākiran

SYNONYMS



siddha-the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; vidyādhara-gaṇāḥ-the inhabitants of Vidyādhara-loka; sa-with; kimpuruṣa-the inhabitants of Kimpuruṣa-loka; kinnarāḥ-the inhabitants of Kinnaraloka; cāraṇāḥ-the inhabitants of Cāraṇaloka; yakṣa-the Yakṣas; rakṣāṁsi-the Rākṣasas; suparṇāḥ-the Suparṇas; bhujaga-uttamāḥ-the best of the inhabitants of the serpent loka; gāyantaḥ-glorifying the Lord; ati-praśaṁsantaḥ-praising the Lord; nṛtyantaḥ-dancing; vibudhānugāḥ-the followers of the demigods; adityāḥ-of Aditi; āśrama-padam-the place of residence; kusumaiḥ-by flowers; samavākiran-covered.





The Siddhas, Vidyādharas, Kimpuruṣas, Kinnaras, Cāraṇas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Suparṇas, the best of serpents, and the followers of the demigods all showered flowers on Aditi's residence, covering the entire house, while glorifying and praising the Lord and dancing.





TEXT 11



dṛṣṭvāditis taṁ nija-garbha-sambhavaṁ

paraṁ pumāṁsaṁ mudam āpa vismitā

gṛhīta-dehaṁ nija-yoga-māyayā

prajāpatiś cāha jayeti vismitaḥ

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭvā-seeing; aditiḥ-mother Aditi; tam-Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nija-garbha-sambhavam-born of her own womb; param-the Supreme; pumāṁsam-the Personality of Godhead; mudam-great happiness; āpa-conceived; vismitā-being very much astonished; gṛhīta-accepted; deham-body, or transcendental form; nija-yoga-māyayā-by His own spiritual potency; prajāpatiḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; ca-also; āha-said; jaya-all glories; iti-thus; vismitaḥ-being astonished.





When Aditi saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had appeared from her own womb, having accepted a transcendental body by His own spiritual potency, she was struck with wonder and was very happy. Upon seeing the child, Prajāpati Kaśyapa exclaimed, "Jaya! Jaya!" in great happiness and wonder.





TEXT 12



yat tad vapur bhāti vibhūṣaṇāyudhair

avyakta-cid-vyaktam adhārayad dhariḥ

babhūva tenaiva sa vāmano vaṭuḥ

sampaśyator divya-gatir yathā naṭaḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-which; tat-that; vapuḥ-transcendental body; bhāti-manifests; vibhūṣaṇa-with regular ornaments; āyudhaiḥ-and with weapons; avyakta-unmanifested; cit-vyaktam-spiritually manifested; adhārayat-assumed; hariḥ-the Lord; babhūva-immediately became; tena-with that; eva-certainly; saḥ-He (the Lord); vāmanaḥ-dwarf; vaṭuḥ-a brāhmaṇa brahmacārī; sampaśyatoḥ-while both His father and mother were seeing; divya-gatiḥ-whose movements are wonderful; yathā-as; naṭaḥ-a theatrical actor.





The Lord appeared in His original form, with ornaments and weapons in His hands. Although this ever-existing form is not visible in the material world, He nonetheless appeared in this form. Then, in the presence of His father and mother, He assumed the form of Vāmana, a brāhmaṇa-dwarf, a brahmacārī, just like a theatrical actor.





The word naṭaḥ is significant. An actor changes dress to play different parts, but is always the same man. Similarly, as described in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.33, 39), the Lord assumes many thousands and millions of forms (advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣam). He is always present with innumerable incarnations (rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu [Bs. 5.39]). Nonetheless, although He appears in various incarnations, they are not different from one another. He is the same person, with the same potency, the same eternity and the same spiritual existence, but He can simultaneously assume various forms. When Vāmanadeva appeared from the womb of His mother, He appeared in the form of Nārāyaṇa, with four hands equipped with the necessary symbolic weapons, and then immediately transformed Himself into a brahmacārī (vaṭu). This means that His body is not material. One who thinks that the Supreme Lord assumes a material body is not intelligent. He has to learn more about the Lord's position. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9), janma karma ca me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ. One has to understand the transcendental appearance of the Lord in His original transcendental body (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]).





TEXT 13



taṁ vaṭuṁ vāmanaṁ dṛṣṭvā

modamānā maharṣayaḥ

karmāṇi kārayām āsuḥ

puraskṛtya prajāpatim

SYNONYMS



tam-Him; vaṭum-the brahmacārī; vāmanam-dwarf; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; modamānāḥ-in a happy mood; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ-the great saintly persons; karmāṇi-ritualistic ceremonies; kārayām āsuḥ-performed; puraskṛtya-keeping in front; prajāpatim-Kaśyapa Muni, the Prajāpati.





When the great sages saw the Lord as the brahmacārī-dwarf Vāmana, they were certainly very pleased. Thus they placed before them Kaśyapa Muni, the Prajāpati, and performed all the ritualistic ceremonies, such as the birthday ceremony.





According to Vedic civilization, when a child is born in the family of a brāhmaṇa, the birthday ceremony, known as jāta-karma, is first performed, and then other ceremonies are also gradually performed. But when this vāmana-rūpa appeared in the form of a vaṭu, or brahmacārī, His sacred thread ceremony was also performed immediately.





TEXT 14



tasyopanīyamānasya

sāvitrīṁ savitābravīt

bṛhaspatir brahma-sūtraṁ

mekhalāṁ kaśyapo 'dadāt

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Lord Vāmanadeva; upanīyamānasya-at the time of His being offered the sacred thread ceremony; sāvitrīm-the Gāyatrī mantra; savitā-the sun-god; abravīt-chanted; bṛhaspatiḥ-Bṛhaspati, the guru of the demigods; brahma-sūtram-the sacred thread; mekhalām-the belt of straw; kaśyapaḥ-Kaśyapa Muni; adadāt-offered.





At the sacred thread ceremony of Vāmanadeva, the sun-god personally uttered the Gāyatrī mantra, Bṛhaspati offered the sacred thread, and Kaśyapa Muni offered a straw belt.





TEXT 15



dadau kṛṣṇājinaṁ bhūmir

daṇḍaṁ somo vanaspatiḥ

kaupīnācchādanaṁ mātā

dyauś chatraṁ jagataḥ pateḥ

SYNONYMS



dadau-gave, offered; kṛṣṇa-ajinam-the skin of a deer; bhūmiḥ-mother earth; daṇḍam-a brahmacārī's rod; somaḥ-the moon-god; vanaḥ-patiḥ-the king of the forest; kaupīna-the underwear; ācchādanam-covering the body; mātā-His mother, Aditi; dyauḥ-the heavenly kingdom; chatram-an umbrella; jagataḥ-of the whole universe; pateḥ-of the master.





Mother earth gave Him a deerskin, and the demigod of the moon, who is the king of the forest, gave Him a brahma-daṇḍa [the rod of a brahmacārī]. His mother, Aditi, gave Him cloth for underwear, and the deity presiding over the heavenly kingdom offered Him an umbrella.





TEXT 16



kamaṇḍaluṁ veda-garbhaḥ

kuśān saptarṣayo daduḥ

akṣa-mālāṁ mahārāja

sarasvaty avyayātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



kamaṇḍalum-a waterpot; veda-garbhaḥ-Lord Brahmā; kuśān-kuśa grass; sapta-ṛṣayaḥ-the seven sages; daduḥ-offered; akṣa-mālām-a string of Rudrākṣa beads; mahārāja-O King; sarasvatī-the goddess Sarasvatī; avyaya-ātmanaḥ-to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





O King, Lord Brahmā offered a waterpot to the inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead, the seven sages offered Him kuśa grass, and mother Sarasvatī gave Him a string of Rudrākṣa beads.





TEXT 17



tasmā ity upanītāya

yakṣa-rāṭ pātrikām adāt

bhikṣāṁ bhagavatī sākṣād

umādād ambikā satī

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto Him (Lord Vāmanadeva); iti-in this way; upanītāya-who had undergone His sacred thread ceremony; yakṣa-rāṭ-Kuvera, the treasurer of heaven and King of the Yakṣas; pātrikām-a pot for begging alms; adāt-delivered; bhikṣām-alms; bhagavatī-mother Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva; sākṣāt-directly; umā-Umā; adāt-gave; ambikā-the mother of the universe; satī-the chaste.





When Vāmanadeva had thus been given the sacred thread, Kuvera, King of the Yakṣas, gave Him a pot for begging alms, and mother Bhagavatī, the wife of Lord Śiva and most chaste mother of the entire universe, gave Him His first alms.





TEXT 18



sa brahma-varcasenaivaṁ

sabhāṁ sambhāvito vaṭuḥ

brahmarṣi-gaṇa-sañjuṣṭām

atyarocata māriṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-He (Vāmanadeva); brahma-varcasena-by His Brahman effulgence; evam-in this way; sabhām-the assembly; sambhāvitaḥ-having been welcomed by everyone; vaṭuḥ-the brahmacārī; brahma-ṛṣi-gaṇa-sañjuṣṭām-filled with great brāhmaṇa sages; ati-arocata-surpassing, appeared beautiful; māriṣaḥ-the best of the brahmacārīs.





Having thus been welcomed by everyone, Lord Vāmanadeva, the best of the brahmacārīs, exhibited His Brahman effulgence. Thus He surpassed in beauty that entire assembly, which was filled with great saintly brāhmaṇas.





TEXT 19



samiddham āhitaṁ vahniṁ

kṛtvā parisamūhanam

paristīrya samabhyarcya

samidbhir ajuhod dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



samiddham-blazing; āhitam-being situated; vahnim-the fire; kṛtvā-after making; parisamūhanam-properly; paristīrya-surpassing; samabhyarcya-after offering worship; samidbhiḥ-with sacrificial offerings; ajuhot-completed the fire sacrifice; dvijaḥ-the best of the brāhmaṇas.





After Lord Śrī Vāmanadeva set a sacrificial fire, He offered worship and performed a fire sacrifice on the sacrificial field.





TEXT 20



śrutvāśvamedhair yajamānam ūrjitaṁ

baliṁ bhṛgūṇām upakalpitais tataḥ

jagāma tatrākhila-sāra-sambhṛto

bhāreṇa gāṁ sannamayan pade pade

SYNONYMS



śrutvā-after hearing; aśvamedhaiḥ-by aśvamedha sacrifices; yajamānam-the performer; ūrjitam-very glorious; balim-Bali Mahārāja; bhṛgūṇām-under the guidance of the brāhmaṇas born in the Bhṛgu dynasty; upakalpitaiḥ-performed; tataḥ-from that place; jagāma-went; tatra-there; akhila-sāra-sambhṛtaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the essence of all creation; bhāreṇa-with the weight; gām-the earth; sannamayan-depressing; pade pade-at every step.





When the Lord heard that Bali Mahārāja was performing aśvamedha sacrifices under the patronage of brāhmaṇas belonging to the Bhṛgu dynasty, the Supreme Lord, who is full in every respect, proceeded there to show His mercy to Bali Mahārāja. By His weight, He pushed down the earth with every step.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is akhila-sāra-sambhṛta. In other words, He is the proprietor of everything essential in this material world. Thus although the Lord was going to Bali Mahārāja to beg something, He is always complete and has nothing to beg from anyone. Indeed, He is so powerful that in His full opulence He pressed down the surface of the earth at every step.





TEXT 21



taṁ narmadāyās taṭa uttare baler

ya ṛtvijas te bhṛgukaccha-saṁjñake

pravartayanto bhṛgavaḥ kratūttamaṁ

vyacakṣatārād uditaṁ yathā ravim

SYNONYMS



tam-Him (Vāmanadeva); narmadāyāḥ-of the River Narmadā; taṭe-on the bank; uttare-northern; baleḥ-of Mahārāja Bali; ye-who; ṛtvijaḥ-the priests engaged in ritualistic ceremonies; te-all of them; bhṛgukaccha-saṁjñake-in the field named Bhṛgukaccha; pravartayantaḥ-performing; bhṛgavaḥ-all the descendants of Bhṛgu; kratu-uttamam-the most important sacrifice, named aśvamedha; vyacakṣata-they observed; ārāt-nearby; uditam-risen; yathā-like; ravim-the sun.





While engaged in performing the sacrifice in the field known as Bhṛgukaccha, on the northern bank of the Narmadā River, the brahminical priests, the descendants of Bhṛgu, saw Vāmanadeva to be like the sun rising nearby.





TEXT 22



te ṛtvijo yajamānaḥ sadasyā

hata-tviṣo vāmana-tejasā nṛpa

sūryaḥ kilāyāty uta vā vibhāvasuḥ

sanat-kumāro 'tha didṛkṣayā kratoḥ

SYNONYMS



te-all of them; ṛtvijaḥ-the priests; yajamānaḥ-as well as Bali Mahārāja, who had engaged them in performing the yajña; sadasyāḥ-all the members of the assembly; hata-tviṣaḥ-decreased in their bodily effulgence; vāmana-tejasā-by the brilliant effulgence of Lord Vāmana; nṛpa-O King; sūryaḥ-the sun; kila-whether; āyāti-is coming; uta vā-either; vibhāvasuḥ-the fire-god; sanat-kumāraḥ-the Kumāra known as Sanat-kumāra; atha-either; didṛkṣayā-with a desire to observe; kratoḥ-the sacrificial ceremony.





O King, because of Vāmanadeva's bright effulgence, the priests, along with Bali Mahārāja and all the members of the assembly, were robbed of their splendor. Thus they began to ask one another whether the sun-god himself, Sanat-kumāra or the fire-god had personally come to see the sacrificial ceremony.





TEXT 23



itthaṁ saśiṣyeṣu bhṛguṣv anekadhā

vitarkyamāṇo bhagavān sa vāmanaḥ

chatraṁ sadaṇḍaṁ sajalaṁ kamaṇḍaluṁ

viveśa bibhrad dhayamedha-vāṭam

SYNONYMS



ittham-in this way; sa-śiṣyeṣu-with their disciples; bhṛguṣu-among the Bhṛgus; anekadhā-in many ways; vitarkyamāṇaḥ-being talked and argued about; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saḥ-that; vāmanaḥ-Lord Vāmana; chatram-umbrella; sadaṇḍam-with the rod; sa-jalam-filled with water; kamaṇḍalum-waterpot; viveśa-entered; bibhrat-taking in hand; hayamedha-of the aśvamedha sacrifice; vāṭam-the arena.





While the priests of the Bhṛgu dynasty and their disciples talked and argued in various ways, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāmanadeva, holding in His hands the rod, the umbrella and a waterpot full of water, entered the arena of the aśvamedha sacrifice.





TEXTS 24–25



mauñjyā mekhalayā vītam

upavītājinottaram

jaṭilaṁ vāmanaṁ vipraṁ

māyā-māṇavakaṁ harim

praviṣṭaṁ vīkṣya bhṛgavaḥ



saśiṣyās te sahāgnibhiḥ

pratyagṛhṇan samutthāya

saṅkṣiptās tasya tejasā

SYNONYMS



mauñjyā-made of muñja straw; mekhalayā-with a belt; vītam-circled; upavīta-sacred thread; ajina-uttaram-wearing a deerskin upper garment; jaṭilam-having matted locks of hair; vāmanam-Lord Vāmana; vipram-a brāhmaṇa; māyā-māṇavakam-the illusory son of a human being; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; praviṣṭam-entered; vīkṣya-seeing; bhṛgavaḥ-the priests who were descendants of Bhṛgu; sa-śiṣyāḥ-with their disciples; te-all of them; saha-agnibhiḥ-with the fire sacrifice; pratyagṛhṇan-properly welcomed; samutthāya-standing up; saṅkṣiptāḥ-being diminished; tasya-His; tejasā-by brilliance.





Appearing as a brāhmaṇa boy, wearing a belt of straw, a sacred thread, an upper garment of deerskin, and matted locks of hair, Lord Vāmanadeva entered the arena of sacrifice. His brilliant effulgence diminished the brilliance of all the priests and their disciples, who thus stood from their seats and welcomed the Lord properly by offering obeisances.





TEXT 26



yajamānaḥ pramudito

darśanīyaṁ manoramam

rūpānurūpāvayavaṁ

tasmā āsanam āharat

SYNONYMS



yajamānaḥ-Bali Mahārāja, who had engaged all the priests in performing the sacrifice; pramuditaḥ-being very jubilant; darśanīyam-pleasing to see; manoramam-so beautiful; rūpa-with beauty; anurūpa-equal to His bodily beauty; avayavam-all the different parts of the body; tasmai-unto Him; āsanam-a sitting place; āharat-offered.





Bali Mahārāja, jubilant at seeing Lord Vāmanadeva, whose beautiful limbs contributed equally to the beauty of His entire body, offered Him a seat with great satisfaction.





TEXT 27



svāgatenābhinandyātha

pādau bhagavato baliḥ

avanijyārcayām āsa

mukta-saṅga-manoramam

SYNONYMS



su-āgatena-by words of welcome; abhinandya-welcoming; atha-thus; pādau-the two lotus feet; bhagavataḥ-of the Lord; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; avanijya-washing; arcayām āsa-worshiped; mukta-saṅga-manoramam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beautiful to the liberated souls.





Thus offering a proper reception to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always beautiful to the liberated souls, Bali Mahārāja worshiped Him by washing His lotus feet.





TEXT 28



tat-pāda-śaucaṁ jana-kalmaṣāpahaṁ

sa dharma-vin mūrdhny adadhāt sumaṅgalam

yad deva-devo giriśaś candra-maulir

dadhāra mūrdhnā parayā ca bhaktyā

SYNONYMS



tat-pāda-śaucam-the water that washed the lotus feet of the Lord; jana-kalmaṣa-apaham-which washes away all the sinful reactions of the people in general; saḥ-he (Bali Mahārāja); dharma-vit-completely aware of religious principles; mūrdhni-on the head; adadhāt-carried; su-maṅgalam-all-auspicious; yat-which; deva-devaḥ-the best of the demigods; giriśaḥ-Lord Śiva; candra-mauliḥ-who carries on his forehead the emblem of the moon; dadhāra-carried; mūrdhnā-on the head; parayā-supreme; ca-also; bhaktyā-with devotion.





Lord Śiva, the best of demigods, who carries on his forehead the emblem of the moon, receives on his head with great devotion the Ganges water emanating from the toe of Viṣṇu. Being aware of religious principles, Bali Mahārāja knew this. Consequently, following in the footsteps of Lord Śiva, he also placed on his head the water that had washed the Lord's lotus feet.





Lord Śiva is known as Gaṅgā-dhara, or one who carries the water of the Ganges on his head. On Lord Śiva's forehead is the emblem of the half-moon, yet to give supreme respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śiva placed the water of the Ganges above this emblem. This example should be followed by everyone, or at least by every devotee, because Lord Śiva is one of the mahājanas. Similarly, Mahārāja Bali also later became a mahājana. One mahājana follows another mahājana, and by following the paramparā system of mahājana activities one can become advanced in spiritual consciousness. The water of the Ganges is sanctified because it emanates from the toe of Lord Viṣṇu. Bali Mahārāja washed the lotus feet of Vāmanadeva, and the water with which he did so became equal to the Ganges. Bali Mahārāja, who perfectly knew all religious principles, therefore took that water on his head, following in the footsteps of Lord Śiva.





TEXT 29



śrī-balir uvāca

svāgataṁ te namas tubhyaṁ

brahman kiṁ karavāma te

brahmarṣīṇāṁ tapaḥ sākṣān

manye tvārya vapur-dharam

SYNONYMS



śrī-baliḥ uvāca-Bali Mahārāja said; su-āgatam-all welcome; te-unto You; namaḥ tubhyam-I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; kim-what; karavāma-can we do; te-for You; brahma-ṛṣīṇām-of the great brāhmaṇa sages; tapaḥ-austerity; sākṣāt-directly; manye-I think; tvā-You; ārya-O noble one; vapuḥ-dharam-personified.





Bali Mahārāja then said to Lord Vāmanadeva: O brāhmaṇa, I offer You my hearty welcome and my respectful obeisances. Please let us know what we may do for You. We think of You as the personified austerity of the great brāhmaṇa-sages.





TEXT 30



adya naḥ pitaras tṛptā

adya naḥ pāvitaṁ kulam

adya sviṣṭaḥ kratur ayaṁ

yad bhavān āgato gṛhān

SYNONYMS



adya-today; naḥ-our; pitaraḥ-forefathers; tṛptāḥ-satisfied; adya-today; naḥ-our; pāvitam-purified; kulam-the whole family; adya-today; su-iṣṭaḥ-properly executed; kratuḥ-the sacrifice; ayam-this; yat-because; bhavān-Your Lordship; āgataḥ-arrived; gṛhān-at our residence.





O my Lord, because You have kindly arrived at our home, all my forefathers are satisfied, our family and entire dynasty have been sanctified, and the sacrifice we are performing is now complete because of Your presence.





TEXT 31



adyāgnayo me suhutā yathā-vidhi

dvijātmaja tvac-caraṇāvanejanaiḥ

hatāṁhaso vārbhir iyaṁ ca bhūr aho

tathā punītā tanubhiḥ padais tava

SYNONYMS



adya-today; agnayaḥ-the sacrificial fires; me-executed by me; su-hutāḥ-properly offered oblations; yathā-vidhi-in terms of the śāstric injunction; dvija-ātmaja-O son of a brāhmaṇa; tvat-caraṇa-avanejanaiḥ-which washed Your lotus feet; hata-aṁhasaḥ-who have become cleansed of all sinful reactions; vārbhiḥ-by the water; iyam-this; ca-also; bhūḥ-the surface of the globe; aho-oh; tathā-as well; punītā-sanctified; tanubhiḥ-small; padaiḥ-by the touch of the lotus feet; tava-Your.





O son of a brāhmaṇa, today the fire of sacrifice is ablaze according to the injunction of the śāstra, and I have been freed from all the sinful reactions of my life by the water that has washed Your lotus feet. O my Lord, by the touch of Your small lotus feet the entire surface of the world has been sanctified.





TEXT 32



yad yad vaṭo vāñchasi tat pratīccha me

tvām arthinaṁ vipra-sutānutarkaye

gāṁ kāñcanaṁ guṇavad dhāma mṛṣṭaṁ

tathānna-peyam uta vā vipra-kanyām

grāmān samṛddhāṁs turagān gajān vā

rathāṁs tathārhattama sampratīccha

SYNONYMS



yat yat-whatever; vaṭo-O brahmacārī; vāñchasi-You desire; tat-that; pratīccha-You may take; me-from me; tvām-You; arthinam-desiring something; vipra-suta-O son of a brāhmaṇa; anutarkaye-I consider; gām-a cow; kāñcanam-gold; guṇavat dhāma-a furnished residence; mṛṣṭam-palatable; tathā-as well as; anna-food grains; peyam-drink; uta-indeed; vā-either; vipra-kanyām-the daughter of a brāhmaṇa; grāmān-villages; samṛddhān-prosperous; turagān-horses; gajān-elephants; vā-either; rathān-chariots; tathā-as well as; arhat-tama-O best of those who are worshipable; sampratīccha-You may take.





O son of a brāhmaṇa, it appears that You have come here to ask me for something. Therefore, whatever You want You may take from me. O best of those who are worshipable. You may take from me a cow, gold, a furnished house, palatable food and drink, the daughter of a brāhmaṇa for Your wife, prosperous villages, horses, elephants, chariots or whatever You desire.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Lord Vāmanadeva, the Dwarf Incarnation."



Chapter Nineteen



Lord Vāmanadeva Begs Charity from Bali Mahārāja





This Nineteenth Chapter describes how Lord Vāmanadeva asked for three paces of land in charity, how Bali Mahārāja agreed to His proposal, and how Śukrācārya forbade Bali Mahārāja to fulfill Lord Vāmanadeva's request.





When Bali Mahārāja, thinking Vāmanadeva to be the son of a brāhmaṇa, told Him to ask for anything He liked, Lord Vāmanadeva praised Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa for their heroic activities, and after thus praising the family in which Bali Mahārāja had been born, He begged the King for three paces of land. Bali Mahārāja agreed to give this land in charity, since this was very insignificant, but Śukrācārya, who could understand that Vāmanadeva was Viṣṇu, the friend of the demigods, forbade Bali Mahārāja to give this land. Śukrācārya advised Bali Mahārāja to withdraw his promise. He explained that in subduing others, in joking, in responding to danger, in acting for the welfare of others, and so on, one could refuse to fulfill one's promise, and there would be no fault. By this philosophy, Śukrācārya tried to dissuade Bali Mahārāja from giving land to Lord Vāmanadeva.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti vairocaner vākyaṁ

dharma-yuktaṁ sa sūnṛtam

niśamya bhagavān prītaḥ

pratinandyedam abravīt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; vairocaneḥ-of the son of Virocana; vākyam-the words; dharma-yuktam-in terms of religious principles; saḥ-He; sū-nṛtam-very pleasing; niśamya-hearing; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prītaḥ-completely pleased; pratinandya-congratulating him; idam-the following words; abravīt-said.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāmanadeva, heard Bali Mahārāja speaking in this pleasing way, He was very satisfied, for Bali Mahārāja had spoken in terms of religious principles. Thus the Lord began to praise him.





TEXT 2



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

vacas tavaitaj jana-deva sūnṛtaṁ

kulocitaṁ dharma-yutaṁ yaśas-karam

yasya pramāṇaṁ bhṛgavaḥ sāmparāye

pitāmahaḥ kula-vṛddhaḥ praśāntaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; vacaḥ-words; tava-your; etat-this kind of; jana-deva-O King of the people; sū-nṛtam-very true; kula-ucitam-exactly befitting your dynasty; dharma-yutam-completely in accord with the principles of religion; yaśaḥ-karam-fit for spreading your reputation; yasya-of whom; pramāṇam-the evidence; bhṛgavaḥ-the brāhmaṇas of the Bhṛgu dynasty; sāmparāye-in the next world; pitāmahaḥ-your grandfather; kula-vṛddhaḥ-the oldest in the family; praśāntaḥ-very peaceful (Prahlāda Mahārāja).





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, you are indeed exalted because your present advisors are the brāhmaṇas who are descendants of Bhṛgu and because your instructor for your future life is your grandfather, the peaceful and venerable Prahlāda Mahārāja. Your statements are very true, and they completely agree with religious etiquette. They are in keeping with the behavior of your family, and they enhance your reputation.





Prahlāda Mahārāja is a vivid example of a pure devotee. Someone might argue that since Prahlāda Mahārāja, even though very old, was attached to his family, and specifically to his grandson Bali Mahārāja, how could he be an ideal example? Therefore this verse uses the word praśāntaḥ. A devotee is always sober. He is never disturbed by any conditions. Even if a devotee remains in gṛhastha life and does not renounce material possessions, he should still be understood to be praśānta, sober, because of his pure devotion to the Lord. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore said:



kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei 'guru' haya





"Whether one is a brāhmaṇa, a sannyāsī or a śūdra-regardless of what he is-he can become a spiritual master if he knows the science of Kṛṣṇa." (Cc. Madhya 8.128) Anyone completely aware of the science of Kṛṣṇa, regardless of his status in life, is a guru. Thus Prahlāda Mahārāja is a guru in all circumstances.



Here His Lordship Vāmanadeva also teaches sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs that one should not ask more than necessary. He wanted only three paces of land, although Bali Mahārāja wanted to give Him anything He wanted.





TEXT 3



na hy etasmin kule kaścin

niḥsattvaḥ kṛpaṇaḥ pumān

pratyākhyātā pratiśrutya

yo vādātā dvijātaye

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; etasmin-in this; kule-in the dynasty or family; kaścit-anyone; niḥsattvaḥ-poor-minded; kṛpaṇaḥ-miser; pumān-any person; pratyākhyātā-refuses; pratiśrutya-after promising to give; yaḥ vā-either; adātā-not being charitable; dvijātaye-unto the brāhmaṇas.





I know that even until now, no one taking birth in your family has been poor-minded or miserly. No one has refused to give charity to brāhmaṇas, nor after promising to give charity has anyone failed to fulfill his promise.





TEXT 4



na santi tīrthe yudhi cārthinārthitāḥ

parāṅmukhā ye tv amanasvino nṛpa

yuṣmat-kule yad yaśasāmalena

prahrāda udbhāti yathoḍupaḥ khe

SYNONYMS



na-not; santi-there are; tīrthe-in holy places (where charity is given); yudhi-in the battlefield; ca-also; arthinā-by a brāhmaṇa or a kṣatriya; arthitāḥ-who have been asked; parāṅmukhāḥ-who refused their prayers; ye-such persons; tu-indeed; amanasvinaḥ-such low-minded, low-grade kings; nṛpa-O King (Bali Mahārāja); yuṣmat-kule-in your dynasty; yat-therein; yaśasā amalena-by impeccable reputation; prahrādaḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja; udbhāti-arises; yathā-as; uḍupaḥ-the moon; khe-in the sky.





O King Bali, never in your dynasty has the low-minded King been born who upon being requested has refused charity to brāhmaṇas in holy places or a fight to kṣatriyas on a battlefield. And your dynasty is even more glorious due to the presence of Prahlāda Mahārāja, who is like the beautiful moon in the sky.





The symptoms of a kṣatriya are given in Bhagavad-gītā. One of the qualifications is the willingness to give charity (dāna). A kṣatriya does not refuse to give charity when requested by a brāhmaṇa, nor can he refuse to fight another kṣatriya. A king who does refuse is called low-minded. In the dynasty of Bali Mahārāja there were no such low-minded kings.





TEXT 5



yato jāto hiraṇyākṣaś

carann eka imāṁ mahīm

prativīraṁ dig-vijaye

nāvindata gadāyudhaḥ

SYNONYMS



yataḥ-in which dynasty; jātaḥ-was born; hiraṇyākṣaḥ-the king named Hiraṇyākṣa; caran-wandering; ekaḥ-alone; imām-this; mahīm-surface of the globe; prativīram-a rival hero; dik-vijaye-for conquering all directions; na avindata-could not get; gadā-āyudhaḥ-bearing his own club.





It was in your dynasty that Hiraṇyākṣa was born. Carrying only his own club, he wandered the globe alone, without assistance, to conquer all directions, and no hero he met could rival him.





TEXT 6



yaṁ vinirjitya kṛcchreṇa

viṣṇuḥ kṣmoddhāra āgatam

ātmānaṁ jayinaṁ mene

tad-vīryaṁ bhūry anusmaran

SYNONYMS



yam-whom; vinirjitya-after conquering; kṛcchreṇa-with great difficulty; viṣṇuḥ-Lord Viṣṇu in His incarnation as a boar; kṣmā-uddhāre-at the time when the earth was delivered; āgatam-appeared before Him; ātmānam-personally, Himself; jayinam-victorious; mene-considered; tat-vīryam-the prowess of Hiraṇyākṣa; bhūri-constantly, or more and more; anusmaran-thinking about.





When delivering the earth from the Garbhodaka Sea, Lord Viṣṇu, in His incarnation as a boar, killed Hiraṇyākṣa, who had appeared before Him. The fight was severe, and the Lord killed Hiraṇyākṣa with great difficulty. Later, as the Lord thought about the uncommon prowess of Hiraṇyākṣa, He felt Himself victorious indeed.





TEXT 7



niśamya tad-vadhaṁ bhrātā

hiraṇyakaśipuḥ purā

hantuṁ bhrātṛ-haṇaṁ kruddho

jagāma nilayaṁ hareḥ

SYNONYMS



niśamya-after hearing; tat-vadham-the killing of Hiraṇyākṣa; bhrātā-the brother; hiraṇyakaśipuḥ-Hiraṇyakaśipu; purā-formerly; hantum-just to kill; bhrātṛ-haṇam-the killer of his brother; kruddhaḥ-very angry; jagāma-went; nilayam-to the residence; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





When Hiraṇyakaśipu heard the news of his brother's being killed, with great anger he went to the residence of Viṣṇu, the killer of his brother, wanting to kill Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 8



tam āyāntaṁ samālokya

śūla-pāṇiṁ kṛtāntavat

cintayām āsa kāla-jño

viṣṇur māyāvināṁ varaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Hiraṇyakaśipu); āyāntam-coming forward; samālokya-observing minutely; śūla-pāṇim-with a trident in his hand; kṛtānta-vat-just like death personified; cintayām āsa-thought; kāla-jñaḥ-who knows the progress of time; viṣṇuḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; māyāvinām-of all kinds of mystics; varaḥ-the chief.





Seeing Hiraṇyakaśipu coming forward bearing a trident in his hand like personified death, Lord Viṣṇu, the best of all mystics and the knower of the progress of time, thought as follows.





TEXT 9



yato yato 'haṁ tatrāsau

mṛtyuḥ prāṇa-bhṛtām iva

ato 'ham asya hṛdayaṁ

pravekṣyāmi parāg-dṛśaḥ

SYNONYMS



yataḥ yataḥ-wheresoever; aham-I; tatra-there indeed; asau-this Hiraṇyakaśipu; mṛtyuḥ-death; prāṇa-bhṛtām-of all living entities; iva-just like; ataḥ-therefore; aham-I; asya-of him; hṛdayam-within the core of the heart; pravekṣyāmi-shall enter; parāk-dṛśaḥ-of a person who has only external vision.





Wheresoever I go, Hiraṇyakaśipu will follow Me, as death follows all living entities. Therefore it is better for Me to enter the core of his heart, for then, because of his power to see only externally, he will not see Me.





TEXT 10



evaṁ sa niścitya ripoḥ śarīram

ādhāvato nirviviśe 'surendra

śvāsānilāntarhita-sūkṣma-dehas

tat-prāṇa-randhreṇa vivigna-cetāḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; saḥ-He (Lord Viṣṇu); niścitya-deciding; ripoḥ-of the enemy; śarīram-the body; ādhāvataḥ-who was running after Him with great force; nirviviśe-entered; asura-indra-O King of the demons (Mahārāja Bali); śvāsa-anila-through the breathing; antarhita-invisible; sūkṣma-dehaḥ-in his finer body; tat-prāṇa-randhreṇa-through the hole of the nostril; vivigna-cetāḥ-being very anxious.





Lord Vāmanadeva continued: O King of the demons, after Lord Viṣṇu made this decision, He entered the body of His enemy Hiraṇyakaśipu, who was running after Him with great force. In a subtle body inconceivable to Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord Viṣṇu, who was in great anxiety, entered Hiraṇyakaśipu's nostril along with his breath.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is already in the core of everyone's heart. Īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati (Bg. 18.61). Logically, therefore, it was not at all difficult for Lord Viṣṇu to enter Hiraṇyakaśipu's body. The word vivigna-cetāḥ, "very anxious," is significant. It is not that Lord Viṣṇu was afraid of Hiraṇyakaśipu; rather, because of compassion, Lord Viṣṇu was in anxiety about how to act for his welfare.





TEXT 11



sa tan-niketaṁ parimṛśya śūnyam

apaśyamānaḥ kupito nanāda

kṣmāṁ dyāṁ diśaḥ khaṁ vivarān samudrān

viṣṇuṁ vicinvan na dadarśa vīraḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that Hiraṇyakaśipu; tat-niketam-the residence of Lord Viṣṇu; parimṛśya-searching; śūnyam-vacant; apaśyamānaḥ-not seeing Lord Viṣṇu; kupitaḥ-being very angry; nanāda-cried very loudly; kṣmām-on the surface of the earth; dyām-in outer space; diśaḥ-in all directions; kham-in the sky; vivarān-in all the caves; samudrān-all the oceans; viṣṇum-Lord Viṣṇu; vicinvan-searching for; na-not; dadarśa-did see; vīraḥ-although he was very powerful.





Upon seeing that the residence of Lord Viṣṇu was vacant, Hiraṇyakaśipu began searching for Lord Viṣṇu everywhere. Angry at not seeing Him, Hiraṇyakaśipu screamed loudly and searched the entire universe, including the surface of the earth, the higher planetary systems, all directions and all the caves and oceans. But Hiraṇyakaśipu, the greatest hero, did not see Viṣṇu anywhere.





TEXT 12



apaśyann iti hovāca

mayānviṣṭam idaṁ jagat

bhrātṛ-hā me gato nūnaṁ

yato nāvartate pumān

SYNONYMS



apaśyan-not seeing Him; iti-in this way; ha uvāca-uttered; mayā-by me; anviṣṭam-has been sought; idam-the whole; jagat-universe; bhrātṛ-hā-Lord Viṣṇu, who killed the brother; me-my; gataḥ-must have gone; nūnam-indeed; yataḥ-from where; na-not; āvartate-comes back; pumān-a person.





Unable to see Him, Hiraṇyakaśipu said, "I have searched the entire universe, but I could not find Viṣṇu, who has killed my brother. Therefore, He must certainly have gone to that place from which no one returns. [In other words, He must now be dead.]"





Atheists generally follow the Bauddha philosophical conclusion that at death everything is finished. Hiraṇyakaśipu, being an atheist, thought this way. Because Lord Viṣṇu was not visible to him, he thought that the Lord was dead. Even today, many people follow the philosophy that God is dead. But God is never dead. Even the living entity, who is part of God, never dies. Na jāyate mriyate vā kadācit: "For the soul there is never birth or death." This is the statement of Bhagavad-gītā (2.20). Even the ordinary living entity never takes birth or dies. What then is to be said of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the chief of all living entities? He certainly never takes birth or dies. Ajo'pi sann avyayātmā (Bg. 4.6). Both the Lord and the living entity exist as unborn and inexhaustible personalities. Thus Hiraṇyakaśipu's conclusion that Viṣṇu was dead was wrong.



As indicated by the words yato nāvartate pumān, there is certainly a spiritual kingdom, and if the living entity goes there, he never returns to this material world. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9): tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so'rjuna. Materially speaking, every living entity dies; death is inevitable. But those who are karmīs, jñānīs and yogīs return to this material world after death, whereas bhaktas do not. Of course, if a bhakta is not completely perfect he takes birth in the material world again, but in a very exalted position, either in a rich family or a family of the purest brāhmaṇas (śucīnām śrīmatāṁ gehe), just to finish his development in spiritual consciousness. Those who have completed the course of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and are free from material desire return to the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama [Bg. 15.6]). Here the same fact is stated: yato nāvartate pumān. Any person who goes back home, back to Godhead, does not return to this material world.





TEXT 13



vairānubandha etāvān

āmṛtyor iha dehinām

ajñāna-prabhavo manyur

ahaṁ-mānopabṛṁhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



vaira-anubandhaḥ-enmity; etāvān-so great; āmṛtyoḥ-up to the point of death; iha-in this; dehinām-of persons too involved in the bodily concept of life; ajñāna-prabhavaḥ-because of the great influence of ignorance; manyuḥ-anger; aham-māna-by egotism; upabṛṁhitaḥ-expanded.





Hiraṇyakaśipu's anger against Lord Viṣṇu persisted until his death. Other people in the bodily concept of life maintain anger only because of false ego and the great influence of ignorance.





Generally speaking, even though the conditioned soul is angry, his anger is not perpetual but temporary. It is due to the influence of ignorance. Hiraṇyakaśipu, however, maintained his enmity and his anger against Lord Viṣṇu until the point of death. He never forgot his vengeful attitude toward Viṣṇu for having killed his brother, Hiraṇyākṣa. Others in the bodily concept of life are angry at their enemies but not at Lord Viṣṇu. Hiraṇyakaśipu, however, was everlastingly angry. He was angry not only because of false prestige but also because of continuous enmity toward Viṣṇu.





TEXT 14



pitā prahrāda-putras te

tad-vidvān dvija-vatsalaḥ

svam āyur dvija-liṅgebhyo

devebhyo 'dāt sa yācitaḥ

SYNONYMS



pitā-father; prahrāda-putraḥ-the son of Mahārāja Prahlāda; te-your; tat-vidvān-although it was known to him; dvija-vatsalaḥ-still, because of his affinity for brāhmaṇas; svam-his own; āyuḥ-duration of life; dvija-liṅgebhyaḥ-who were dressed like brāhmaṇas; devebhyaḥ-unto the demigods; adāt-delivered; saḥ-he; yācitaḥ-being so requested.





Your father, Virocana, the son of Mahārāja Prahlāda, was very affectionate toward brāhmaṇas. Although he knew very well that it was the demigods who had come to him in the dress of brāhmaṇas, at their request he delivered to them the duration of his life.





Mahārāja Virocana, Bali's father, was so pleased with the brāhmaṇa community that even though he knew that those approaching him for charity were the demigods in the dress of brāhmaṇas, he nonetheless agreed to give it.





TEXT 15



bhavān ācaritān dharmān

āsthito gṛhamedhibhiḥ

brāhmaṇaiḥ pūrvajaiḥ śūrair

anyaiś coddāma-kīrtibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



bhavān-your good self; ācaritān-executed; dharmān-religious principles; āsthitaḥ-being situated; gṛhamedhibhiḥ-by persons in household life; brāhmaṇaiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; pūrva-jaiḥ-by your forefathers; śūraiḥ-by great heroes; anyaiḥ ca-and others also; uddāma-kīrtibhiḥ-very highly elevated and famous.





You also have observed the principles followed by great personalities who are householder brāhmaṇas, by your forefathers and by great heroes who are extremely famous for their exalted activities.





TEXT 16



tasmāt tvatto mahīm īṣad

vṛṇe 'haṁ varadarṣabhāt

padāni trīṇi daityendra

sammitāni padā mama

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from such a person; tvattaḥ-from Your Majesty; mahīm-land; īṣat-very little; vṛṇe-am asking for; aham-I; varada-ṛṣabhāt-from the personality who can give charity munificently; padāni-footsteps; trīṇi-three; daitya-indra-O King of the Daityas; sammitāni-to the measurement of; padā-by a foot; mama-My.





O King of the Daityas, from Your Majesty, who come from such a noble family and who are able to give charity munificently, I ask only three paces of land, to the measurement of My steps.





Lord Vāmanadeva wanted three paces of land according to the measurement of His footsteps. He did not want more than necessary. But although He pretended to be an ordinary human child, He actually wanted the land comprising the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. This was just to show the prowess of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 17



nānyat te kāmaye rājan

vadānyāj jagad-īśvarāt

nainaḥ prāpnoti vai vidvān

yāvad-artha-pratigrahaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; anyat-anything else; te-from you; kāmaye-I beg; rājan-O King; vadānyāt-who are so munificent; jagat-īśvarāt-who are the king of the entire universe; na-not; enaḥ-distress; prāpnoti-gets; vai-indeed; vidvān-one who is learned; yāvat-artha-as much as one needs; pratigrahaḥ-taking charity from others.





O King, controller of the entire universe, although you are very munificent and are able to give Me as much land as I want, I do not want anything from you that is unnecessary. If a learned brāhmaṇa takes charity from others only according to his needs, he does not become entangled in sinful activities.





A brāhmaṇa or sannyāsī is qualified to ask charity from others, but if he takes more than necessary he is punishable. No one can use more of the Supreme Lord's property than necessary. Lord Vāmanadeva indirectly indicated to Bali Mahārāja that he was occupying more land than he needed. In the material world, all distresses are due to extravagance. One acquires money extravagantly and also spends it extravagantly. Such activities are sinful. All property belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all living beings, who are sons of the Supreme Lord, have the right to use the Supreme Father's property, but one cannot take more than necessary. This principle should especially be followed by brāhmaṇas and sannyāsīs who live at the cost of others. Thus Vāmanadeva was an ideal beggar, for He asked only three paces of land. Of course, there is a difference between His footsteps and those of an ordinary human being. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His inconceivable prowess, can occupy the entire universe, including the upper, lower and middle planetary systems, by the unlimited measurement of His footsteps.





TEXT 18



śrī-balir uvāca

aho brāhmaṇa-dāyāda

vācas te vṛddha-sammatāḥ

tvaṁ bālo bāliśa-matiḥ

svārthaṁ praty abudho yathā

SYNONYMS



śrī-baliḥ uvāca-Bali Mahārāja said; aho-alas; brāhmaṇa-dāyāda-O son of a brāhmaṇa; vācaḥ-the words; te-of You; vṛddha-sammatāḥ-are certainly acceptable to learned and elderly persons; tvam-You; bālaḥ-a boy; bāliśa-matiḥ-without sufficient knowledge; sva-artham-self-interest; prati-toward; abudhaḥ-not knowing sufficiently; yathā-as it should have been.





Bali Mahārāja said: O son of a brāhmaṇa, Your instructions are as good as those of learned and elderly persons. Nonetheless, You are a boy, and Your intelligence is insufficient. Thus You are not very prudent in regard to Your self-interest.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being full in Himself, actually has nothing to want for His self-interest. Lord Vāmanadeva, therefore, had not gone to Bali Mahārāja for His own self-interest. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (5.29), bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram. The Lord is the proprietor of all planets, in both the material and spiritual worlds. Why should He be in want of land? Bali Mahārāja rightly said that Lord Vāmanadeva was not at all prudent in regard to His own personal interests. Lord Vāmanadeva had approached Bali not for His personal welfare but for the welfare of His devotees. Devotees sacrifice all personal interests to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and similarly the Supreme Lord, although having no personal interests, can do anything for the interests of His devotees. One who is full in himself has no personal interests.





TEXT 19



māṁ vacobhiḥ samārādhya

lokānām ekam īśvaram

pada-trayaṁ vṛṇīte yo

'buddhimān dvīpa-dāśuṣam

SYNONYMS



mām-me; vacobhiḥ-by sweet words; samārādhya-after sufficiently pleasing; lokānām-of all the planets in this universe; ekam-the one and only; īśvaram-master, controller; pada-trayam-three feet; vṛṇīte-is asking for; yaḥ-He who; abuddhimān-not very intelligent; dvīpa-dāśuṣam-because I can give You an entire island.





I am able to give You an entire island because I am the proprietor of the three divisions of the universe. You have come to take something from me and have pleased me by Your sweet words, but You are asking only three paces of land. Therefore You are not very intelligent.





According to Vedic understanding, the entire universe is regarded as an ocean of space. In that ocean there are innumerable planets, and each planet is called a dvīpa, or island. When approached by Lord Vāmanadeva, Bali Mahārāja was actually in possession of all the dvīpas, or islands in space. Bali Mahārāja was very pleased to see the features of Vāmanadeva and was ready to give Him as much land as He could ask, but because Lord Vāmanadeva asked only three paces of land, Bali Mahārāja considered Him not very intelligent.





TEXT 20



na pumān mām upavrajya

bhūyo yācitum arhati

tasmād vṛttikarīṁ bhūmiṁ

vaṭo kāmaṁ pratīccha me

SYNONYMS



na-not; pumān-any person; mām-unto me; upavrajya-after approaching; bhūyaḥ-again; yācitum-to beg; arhati-deserves; tasmāt-therefore; vṛtti-karīm-suitable to maintain Yourself; bhūmim-such land; vaṭo-O small brahmacārī; kāmam-according to the necessities of life; pratīccha-take; me-from me.





O small boy, one who approaches me to beg something should not have to ask anything more, anywhere. Therefore, if You wish, You may ask from me as much land as will suffice to maintain You according to Your needs.





TEXT 21



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

yāvanto viṣayāḥ preṣṭhās

tri-lokyām ajitendriyam

na śaknuvanti te sarve

pratipūrayituṁ nṛpa

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yāvantaḥ-as far as possible; viṣayāḥ-the objects of sense enjoyment; preṣṭhāḥ-pleasing to anyone; tri-lokyām-within these three worlds; ajita-indriyam-a person who is not self-controlled; na śaknuvanti-are unable; te-all those; sarve-taken together; pratipūrayitum-to satisfy; nṛpa-O King.





The Personality of Godhead said: O my dear King, even the entirety of whatever there may be within the three worlds to satisfy one's senses cannot satisfy a person whose senses are uncontrolled.





The material world is an illusory energy to deviate the living entities from the path of self-realization. Anyone who is in this material world is extremely anxious to get more and more things for sense gratification. Actually, however, the purpose of life is not sense gratification but self-realization. Therefore, those who are too addicted to sense gratification are advised to practice the mystic yoga system, or aṣṭāṅga-yoga system, consisting of yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma, pratyāhāra and so on. In this way, one can control the senses. The purpose of controlling the senses is to stop one's implication in the cycle of birth and death. As stated by Ṛṣabhadeva:



nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma

yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti

na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ

[SB 5.5.4]





"When a person considers sense gratification the aim of life, he certainly becomes mad after materialistic living and engages in all kinds of sinful activity. He does not know that due to his past misdeeds he has already received a body which, although temporary, is the cause of his misery. Actually the living entity should not have taken on a material body, but he has been awarded the material body for sense gratification. Therefore I think it not befitting an intelligent man to involve himself again in the activities of sense gratification, by which he perpetually gets material bodies one after another." (Bhāg. 5.5.4) Thus according to Ṛṣabhadeva the human beings in this material world are just like madmen engaged in activities which they should not perform but which they do perform only for sense gratification. Such activities are not good because in this way one creates another body for his next life, as punishment for his nefarious activities. And as soon as he gets another material body, he is put into repeated suffering in material existence. Therefore the Vedic culture or brahminical culture teaches one how to be satisfied with possessing the minimum necessities in life.



To teach this highest culture, varṇāśrama-dharma is recommended. The aim of the varṇāśrama divisions-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa-is to train one to control the senses and be content with the bare necessities. Here Lord Vāmanadeva, as an ideal brahmacārī, refuses Bali Mahārāja's offer to give Him anything He might want. He says that without contentment one could not be happy even if he possessed the property of the entire world or the entire universe. In human society, therefore, the brahminical culture, kṣatriya culture and vaiśya culture must be maintained, and people must be taught how to be satisfied with only what they need. In modern civilization there is no such education; everyone tries to possess more and more, and everyone is dissatisfied and unhappy. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore establishing various farms, especially in America, to show how to be happy and content with minimum necessities of life and to save time for self-realization, which one can very easily achieve by chanting the mahā-mantra-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.





TEXT 22



tribhiḥ kramair asantuṣṭo

dvīpenāpi na pūryate

nava-varṣa-sametena

sapta-dvīpa-varecchayā

SYNONYMS



tribhiḥ-three; kramaiḥ-by steps; asantuṣṭaḥ-one who is dissatisfied; dvīpena-by a complete island; api-although; na pūryate-cannot be satisfied; nava-varṣa-sametena-even by possessing nine varṣas; sapta-dvīpa-vara-icchayā-by the desire to take possession of seven islands.





If I were not satisfied with three paces of land, then surely I would not be satisfied even with possessing one of the seven islands, consisting of nine varṣas. Even if I possessed one island, I would hope to get others.





TEXT 23



sapta-dvīpādhipatayo

nṛpā vaiṇya-gayādayaḥ

arthaiḥ kāmair gatā nāntaṁ

tṛṣṇāyā iti naḥ śrutam

SYNONYMS



sapta-dvīpa-adhipatayaḥ-those who are proprietors of the seven islands; nṛpāḥ-such kings; vaiṇya-gaya-ādayaḥ-Mahārāja Pṛthu, Mahārāja Gaya and others; arthaiḥ-for fulfillment of ambition; kāmaiḥ-for satisfying one's desires; gatāḥ na-could not reach; antam-the end; tṛṣṇāyāḥ-of their ambitions; iti-thus; naḥ-by Us; śrutam-has been heard.





We have heard that although powerful kings like Mahārāja Pṛthu and Mahārāja Gaya achieved proprietorship over the seven dvīpas, they could not achieve satisfaction or find the end of their ambitions.





TEXT 24



yadṛcchayopapannena

santuṣṭo vartate sukham

nāsantuṣṭas tribhir lokair

ajitātmopasāditaiḥ

SYNONYMS



yadṛcchayā-as offered by the supreme authority according to one's karma; upapannena-by whatever is obtained; santuṣṭaḥ-one should be satisfied; vartate-there is; sukham-happiness; na-not; asantuṣṭaḥ-one who is dissatisfied; tribhiḥ lokaiḥ-even by possessing the three worlds; ajita-ātmā-one who cannot control his senses; upasāditaiḥ-even though obtained.





One should be satisfied with whatever he achieves by his previous destiny, for discontent can never bring happiness. A person who is not self-controlled will not be happy even with possessing the three worlds.





If happiness is the ultimate goal of life, one must be satisfied with the position in which he is placed by providence. This instruction is also given by Prahlāda Mahārāja:



sukham aindriyakaṁ daityā

deha-yogena dehinām

sarvatra labhyate daivād

yathā duḥkham ayatnataḥ





"My dear friends born of demoniac families, the happiness perceived with reference to the sense objects by contact with the body can be obtained in any form of life, according to one's past fruitive activities. Such happiness is automatically obtained without endeavor, just as we obtain distress." (Bhāg. 7.6.3) This philosophy is perfect in regard to obtaining happiness.



Real happiness is described in Bhagavad-gītā (6.21):



sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad

buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyam

vetti yatra na caivāyaṁ

sthitaś calati tattvataḥ





"In the spiritually joyous state, one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness and enjoys himself through transcendental senses. Established thus, one never departs from the truth." One has to perceive happiness by the supersenses. The supersenses are not the senses of the material elements. Every one of us is a spiritual being (ahaṁ brahmāsmi), and every one of us is an individual person. Our senses are now covered by material elements, and because of ignorance we consider the material senses that cover us to be our real senses. The real senses, however, are within the material covering. Dehino'smin yathā dehe: [Bg. 2.13] within the covering of the material elements are the spiritual senses. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] when the spiritual senses are uncovered, by these senses we can be happy. Satisfaction of the spiritual senses is thus described: hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate. When the senses are engaged in devotional service to Hṛṣīkeśa, then the senses are completely satisfied. Without this superior knowledge of sense gratification, one may try to satisfy his material senses, but happiness will never be possible. One may increase his ambition for sense gratification and even achieve what he desires for the gratification of his senses, but because this is on the material platform, he will never achieve satisfaction and contentment.



According to brahminical culture, one should be content with whatever he obtains without special endeavor and should cultivate spiritual consciousness. Then he will be happy. The purpose of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is to spread this understanding. People who do not have scientific spiritual knowledge mistakenly think that the members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement are escapists trying to avoid material activities. In fact, however, we are engaged in real activities for obtaining the ultimate happiness in life. If one is not trained to satisfy the spiritual senses and continues in material sense gratification, he will never obtain happiness that is eternal and blissful. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.1) therefore recommends:



tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ

śuddhyed yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam





One must practice austerity so that his existential position will be purified and he will achieve unlimited blissful life.





TEXT 25



puṁso 'yaṁ saṁsṛter hetur

asantoṣo 'rtha-kāmayoḥ

yadṛcchayopapannena

santoṣo muktaye smṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



puṁsaḥ-of the living entity; ayam-this; saṁsṛteḥ-of the continuation of material existence; hetuḥ-the cause; asantoṣaḥ-dissatisfaction with his destined achievement; artha-kāmayoḥ-for the sake of lusty desires and getting more and more money; yadṛcchayā-with the gift of destiny; upapannena-which has been achieved; santoṣaḥ-satisfaction; muktaye-for liberation; smṛtaḥ-is considered fit.





Material existence causes discontent in regard to fulfilling one's lusty desires and achieving more and more money. This is the cause for the continuation of material life, which is full of repeated birth and death. But one who is satisfied by that which is obtained by destiny is fit for liberation from this material existence.





TEXT 26



yadṛcchā-lābha-tuṣṭasya

tejo viprasya vardhate

tat praśāmyaty asantoṣād

ambhasevāśuśukṣaṇiḥ

SYNONYMS



yadṛcchā-lābha-tuṣṭasya-who is satisfied by things obtained by the grace of God; tejaḥ-the brilliant effulgence; viprasya-of a brāhmaṇa; vardhate-increases; tat-that (effulgence); praśāmyati-is diminished; asantoṣāt-because of dissatisfaction; ambhasā-by pouring of water; iva-as; āśuśukṣaṇiḥ-a fire.





A brāhmaṇa who is satisfied with whatever is providentially obtained is increasingly enlightened with spiritual power, but the spiritual potency of a dissatisfied brāhmaṇa decreases, as fire diminishes in potency when water is sprinkled upon it.





TEXT 27



tasmāt trīṇi padāny eva

vṛṇe tvad varadarṣabhāt

etāvataiva siddho 'haṁ

vittaṁ yāvat prayojanam

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-because of being satisfied by things easily obtained; trīṇi-three; padāni-steps; eva-indeed; vṛṇe-I ask; tvat-from your good self; varada-ṛṣabhāt-who are a munificent benedictor; etāvatā eva-merely by such an endowment; siddhaḥ aham-I shall feel full satisfaction; vittam-achievement; yāvat-as far as; prayojanam-is needed.





Therefore, O King, from you, the best of those who give charity, I ask only three paces of land. By such a gift I shall be very pleased, for the way of happiness is to be fully satisfied to receive that which is absolutely needed.





TEXT 28



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity uktaḥ sa hasann āha

vāñchātaḥ pratigṛhyatām

vāmanāya mahīṁ dātuṁ

jagrāha jala-bhājanam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti uktaḥ-thus being addressed; saḥ-he (Bali Mahārāja); hasan-smiling; āha-said; vāñchātaḥ-as You have desired; pratigṛhyatām-now take from me; vāmanāya-unto Lord Vāmana; mahīm-land; dātum-to give; jagrāha-took; jala-bhājanam-the waterpot.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the Supreme Personality of Godhead had thus spoken to Bali Mahārāja, Bali smiled and told Him, "All right. Take whatever You like." To confirm his promise to give Vāmanadeva the desired land, he then took up his waterpot.





TEXT 29



viṣṇave kṣmāṁ pradāsyantam

uśanā asureśvaram

jānaṁś cikīrṣitaṁ viṣṇoḥ

śiṣyaṁ prāha vidāṁ varaḥ

SYNONYMS



viṣṇave-unto Lord Viṣṇu (Vāmanadeva); kṣmām-the land; pradāsyantam-who was ready to deliver; uśanāḥ-Śukrācārya; asura-īśvaram-unto the King of the demons (Bali Mahārāja); jānan-knowing well; cikīrṣitam-what was the plan; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; śiṣyam-unto his disciple; prāha-said; vidām varaḥ-the best of the knowers of everything.





Understanding Lord Viṣṇu's purpose, Śukrācārya, the best of the learned, immediately spoke as follows to his disciple, who was about to offer everything to Lord Vāmanadeva.





TEXT 30



śrī-śukra uvāca

eṣa vairocane sākṣād

bhagavān viṣṇur avyayaḥ

kaśyapād aditer jāto

devānāṁ kārya-sādhakaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukraḥ uvāca-Śukrācārya said; eṣaḥ-this (boy in the form of a dwarf); vairocane-O son of Virocana; sākṣāt-directly; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇuḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; avyayaḥ-without deterioration; kaśyapāt-from His father, Kaśyapa; aditeḥ-in the womb of His mother, Aditi; jātaḥ-was born; devānām-of the demigods; kārya-sādhakaḥ-working in the interest.





Śukrācārya said: O son of Virocana, this brahmacārī in the form of a dwarf is directly the imperishable Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. Accepting Kaśyapa Muni as His father and Aditi as His mother, He has now appeared in order to fulfill the interests of the demigods.





TEXT 31



pratiśrutaṁ tvayaitasmai

yad anartham ajānatā

na sādhu manye daityānāṁ

mahān upagato 'nayaḥ

SYNONYMS



pratiśrutam-promised; tvayā-by you; etasmai-unto Him; yat anartham-which is repugnant; ajānatā-by you who have no knowledge; na-not; sādhu-very good; manye-I think; daityānām-of the demons; mahān-great; upagataḥ-has been achieved; anayaḥ-inauspiciousness.





You do not know what a dangerous position you have accepted by promising to give Him land. I do not think that this promise is good for you. It will bring great harm to the demons.





TEXT 32



eṣa te sthānam aiśvaryaṁ

śriyaṁ tejo yaśaḥ śrutam

dāsyaty ācchidya śakrāya

māyā-māṇavako hariḥ

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this person falsely appearing as a brahmacārī; te-of you; sthānam-the land in possession; aiśvaryam-the riches; śriyam-the material beauty; tejaḥ-the material power; yaśaḥ-the reputation; śrutam-the education; dāsyati-will give; ācchidya-taking from you; śakrāya-unto your enemy, Lord Indra; māyā-falsely appearing; māṇavakaḥ-a brahmacārī son of a living being; hariḥ-He is actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari.





This person falsely appearing as a brahmacārī is actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who has come in this form to take away all your land, wealth, beauty, power, fame and education. After taking everything from you, He will deliver it to Indra, your enemy.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains in this regard that the very word hariḥ means "one who takes away." If one connects himself with Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord takes away all his miseries, and in the beginning the Lord also superficially appears to take away all his material possessions, reputation, education and beauty. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.88.8), yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ. The Lord said to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, "The first installment of My mercy toward a devotee is that I take away all his possessions, especially his material opulence, his money." This is the special favor of the Lord toward a sincere devotee. If a sincere devotee wants Kṛṣṇa above everything but at the same time is attached to material possessions, which hinder his advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, by tactics the Lord takes away all his possessions. Here Śukrācārya says that this dwarf brahmacārī would take away everything. Thus he indicates that the Lord will take away all one's material possessions and also one's mind. If one delivers his mind to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ), one can naturally sacrifice everything to satisfy Him. Although Bali Mahārāja was a devotee, he was attached to material possessions, and therefore the Lord, being very kind to him, showed him special favor by appearing as Lord Vāmana to take away all his material possessions, and his mind as well.





TEXT 33



tribhiḥ kramair imāl lokān

viśva-kāyaḥ kramiṣyati

sarvasvaṁ viṣṇave dattvā

mūḍha vartiṣyase katham

SYNONYMS



tribhiḥ-three; kramaiḥ-by steps; imān-all these; lokān-three planetary systems; viśva-kāyaḥ-becoming the universal form; kramiṣyati-gradually He will expand; sarvasvam-everything; viṣṇave-unto Lord Viṣṇu; dattvā-after giving charity; mūḍha-O you rascal; vartiṣyase-you will execute your means of livelihood; katham-how.





You have promised to give Him three steps of land in charity, but when you give it He will occupy the three worlds. You are a rascal! You do not know what a great mistake you have made. After giving everything to Lord Viṣṇu, you will have no means of livelihood. How then shall you live?





Bali Mahārāja might argue that he had promised only three steps of land. But Śukrācārya, being a very learned brāhmaṇa, immediately understood that this was a plan of Hari, who had falsely appeared there as a brahmacārī. The words mūḍha vartiṣyase katham reveal that Śukrācārya was a brāhmaṇa of the priestly class. Such priestly brāhmaṇas are mostly interested in receiving remuneration from their disciples. Therefore when Śukrācārya saw that Bali Mahārāja had risked all of his possessions, he understood that this would cause havoc not only to the King but also to the family of Śukrācārya, who was dependent on Mahārāja Bali's mercy. This is the difference between a Vaiṣṇava and a smārta-brāhmaṇa. A smārta-brāhmaṇa is always interested in material profit, whereas a Vaiṣṇava is interested only in satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. From the statement of Śukrācārya, it appears that he was in all respects a smārta-brāhmaṇa interested only in personal gain.





TEXT 34



kramato gāṁ padaikena

dvitīyena divaṁ vibhoḥ

khaṁ ca kāyena mahatā

tārtīyasya kuto gatiḥ

SYNONYMS



kramataḥ-gradually; gām-the surface of the land; padā ekena-by one step; dvitīyena-by the second step; divam-the whole of outer space; vibhoḥ-of the universal form; kham ca-the sky also; kāyena-by the expansion of His transcendental body; mahatā-by the universal form; tārtīyasya-as far as the third step is concerned; kutaḥ-where is; gatiḥ-to keep His step.





Vāmanadeva will first occupy the three worlds with one step, then He will take His second step and occupy everything in outer space, and then He will expand His universal body to occupy everything. Where will you offer Him the third step?





Śukrācārya wanted to tell Bali Mahārāja how he would be cheated by Lord Vāmana. "You have promised three steps," he said. "But with only two steps, all your possessions will be finished. How then will you give Him a place for His third step?" Śukrācārya did not know how the Lord protects His devotee. The devotee must risk everything in his possession for the service of the Lord, but he is always protected and never defeated. By materialistic calculations, Śukrācārya thought that Bali Mahārāja would under no circumstances be able to keep his promise to the brahmacārī, Lord Vāmanadeva.





TEXT 35



niṣṭhāṁ te narake manye

hy apradātuḥ pratiśrutam

pratiśrutasya yo 'nīśaḥ

pratipādayituṁ bhavān

SYNONYMS



niṣṭhām-perpetual residence; te-of you; narake-in hell; manye-I think; hi-indeed; apradātuḥ-of a person who cannot fulfill; pratiśrutam-what has been promised; pratiśrutasya-of the promise one has made; yaḥ anīśaḥ-one who is unable; pratipādayitum-to fulfill properly; bhavān-you are that person.





You will certainly be unable to fulfill your promise, and I think that because of this inability your eternal residence will be in hell.





TEXT 36



na tad dānaṁ praśaṁsanti

yena vṛttir vipadyate

dānaṁ yajñas tapaḥ karma

loke vṛttimato yataḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; tat-that; dānam-charity; praśaṁsanti-the saintly persons praise; yena-by which; vṛttiḥ-one's livelihood; vipadyate-becomes endangered; dānam-charity; yajñaḥ-sacrifice; tapaḥ-austerity; karma-fruitive activities; loke-in this world; vṛttimataḥ-according to one's means of livelihood; yataḥ-as it is so.





Learned scholars do not praise that charity which endangers one's own livelihood. Charity, sacrifice, austerity and fruitive activities are possible for one who is competent to earn his livelihood properly. [They are not possible for one who cannot maintain himself.]





TEXT 37



dharmāya yaśase 'rthāya

kāmāya sva-janāya ca

pañcadhā vibhajan vittam

ihāmutra ca modate

SYNONYMS



dharmāya-for religion; yaśase-for one's reputation; arthāya-for increasing one's opulence; kāmāya-for increasing sense gratification; sva-janāya ca-and for maintaining one's family members; pañcadhā-for these five different objectives; vibhajan-dividing; vittam-his accumulated wealth; iha-in this world; amutra-the next world; ca-and; modate-he enjoys.





Therefore one who is in full knowledge should divide his accumulated wealth in five parts-for religion, for reputation, for opulence, for sense gratification and for the maintenance of his family members. Such a person is happy in this world and in the next.





The śāstras enjoin that if one has money one should divide all that he has accumulated into five divisions-one part for religion, one part for reputation, one part for opulence, one part for sense gratification and one part to maintain the members of his family. At the present, however, because people are bereft of all knowledge, they spend all their money for the satisfaction of their family. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī taught us by his own example by using fifty percent of his accumulated wealth for Kṛṣṇa, twenty-five percent for his own self, and twenty-five percent for the members of his family. One's main purpose should be to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This will include dharma, artha and kāma. However, because one's family members expect some profit, one should also satisfy them by giving them a portion of one's accumulated wealth. This is a śāstric injunction.





TEXT 38



atrāpi bahvṛcair gītaṁ

śṛṇu me 'sura-sattama

satyam om iti yat proktaṁ

yan nety āhānṛtaṁ hi tat

SYNONYMS



atra api-in this regard also (in deciding what is truth and what is not truth); bahu-ṛcaiḥ-by the śruti-mantras known as Bahvṛca-śruti, which are evidence from the Vedas; gītam-what has been spoken; śṛṇu-just hear; me-from me; asura-sattama-O best of the asuras; satyam-the truth is; om iti-preceded by the word oṁ; yat-that which; proktam-has been spoken; yat-that which is; na-not preceded by oṁ; iti-thus; āha-it is said; anṛtam-untruth; hi-indeed; tat-that.





One might argue that since you have already promised, how can you refuse? O best of the demons, just take from me the evidence of the Bahvṛca-śruti, which says that a promise is truthful preceded by the word oṁ and untruthful if not.





TEXT 39



satyaṁ puṣpa-phalaṁ vidyād

ātma-vṛkṣasya gīyate

vṛkṣe 'jīvati tan na syād

anṛtaṁ mūlam ātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



satyam-the factual truth; puṣpa-phalam-the flower and the fruit; vidyāt-one should understand; ātma-vṛkṣasya-of the tree of the body; gīyate-as described in the Vedas; vṛkṣe ajīvati-if the tree is not living; tat-that (puṣpa-phalam); na-not; syāt-is possible; anṛtam-untruth; mūlam-the root; ātmanaḥ-of the body.





The Vedas enjoin that the factual result of the tree of the body is the good fruits and flowers derived from it. But if the bodily tree does not exist, there is no possibility of factual fruits and flowers. Even if the body is based on untruth, there cannot be factual fruits and flowers without the help of the bodily tree.





This śloka explains that in relation to the material body even the factual truth cannot exist without a touch of untruth. The Māyāvādīs say, brahma satyaṁ jagan mithyā: "The spirit soul is truth, and the external energy is untruth." The Vaiṣṇava philosophers, however, do not agree with the Māyāvāda philosophy. Even if for the sake of argument the material world is accepted as untruth, the living entity entangled in the illusory energy cannot come out of it without the help of the body. Without the help of the body, one cannot follow a system of religion, nor can one speculate on philosophical perfection. Therefore, the flower and fruit (puṣpa-phalam) have to be obtained as a result of the body. Without the help of the body, that fruit cannot be gained. The Vaiṣṇava philosophy therefore recommends yukta-vairāgya. It is not that all attention should be diverted for the maintenance of the body, but at the same time one's bodily maintenance should not be neglected. As long as the body exists one can thoroughly study the Vedic instructions, and thus at the end of life one can achieve perfection. This is explained in Bhagavad-gītā [Bg. 8.6]: yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram. Everything is examined at the time of death. Therefore, although the body is temporary, not eternal, one can take from it the best service and make one's life perfect.





TEXT 40



tad yathā vṛkṣa unmūlaḥ

śuṣyaty udvartate 'cirāt

evaṁ naṣṭānṛtaḥ sadya

ātmā śuṣyen na saṁśayaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; yathā-as; vṛkṣaḥ-a tree; unmūlaḥ-being uprooted; śuṣyati-dries up; udvartate-falls down; acirāt-very soon; evam-in this way; naṣṭa-lost; anṛtaḥ-the temporary body; sadyaḥ-immediately; ātmā-the body; śuṣyet-dries up; na-not; saṁśayaḥ-any doubt.





When a tree is uprooted it immediately falls down and begins to dry up. Similarly, if one doesn't take care of the body, which is supposed to be untruth-in other words, if the untruth is uprooted-the body undoubtedly becomes dry.





In this regard, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī says:



prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate





"One who rejects things without knowledge of their relationship to Kṛṣṇa is incomplete in his renunciation." (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.66) When the body is engaged in the service of the Lord, one should not consider the body material. Sometimes the spiritual body of the spiritual master is misunderstood. But Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī instructs, prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ. The body fully engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service should not be neglected as material. One who does neglect it is false in his renunciation. If the body is not properly maintained, it falls down and dries up like an uprooted tree, from which flowers and fruit can no longer be obtained. The Vedas therefore enjoin:



om iti satyaṁ nety anṛtaṁ tad etat-puṣpaṁ phalaṁ vāco yat satyaṁ saheśvaro yaśasvī kalyāṇa-kīrtir bhavitā; puṣpaṁ hi phalaṁ vācaḥ satyaṁ vadaty athaitan-mūlaṁ vāco yad anṛtaṁ yad yathā vṛkṣa āvirmūlaḥ śuṣyati, sa udvartata evam evānṛtaṁ vadann āvirmūlam ātmanāṁ karoti, sa śuṣyati sa udvartate, tasmād anṛtaṁ na vaded dayeta tv etena.

The purport is that activities performed with the help of the body for the satisfaction of the Absolute Truth (oṁ tat sat) are never temporary, although performed by the temporary body. Indeed, such activities are everlasting. Therefore, the body should be properly cared for. Because the body is temporary, not permanent, one cannot expose the body to being devoured by a tiger or killed by an enemy. All precautions should be taken to protect the body.





TEXT 41



parāg riktam apūrṇaṁ vā

akṣaraṁ yat tad om iti

yat kiñcid om iti brūyāt

tena ricyeta vai pumān

bhikṣave sarvam oṁ kurvan

nālaṁ kāmena cātmane

SYNONYMS



parāk-that which separates; riktam-that which makes one free from attachment; apūrṇam-that which is insufficient; vā-either; akṣaram-this syllable; yat-that; tat-which; om-oṁkāra; iti-thus stated; yat-which; kiñcit-whatever; oṁ-this word oṁ; iti-thus; brūyāt-if you say; tena-by such an utterance; ricyeta-one becomes free; vai-indeed; pumān-a person; bhikṣave-unto a beggar; sarvam-everything; oṁ kurvan-giving charity by uttering the word oṁ; na-not; alam-sufficiently; kāmena-for sense gratification; ca-also; ātmane-for self-realization.





The utterance of the word oṁ signifies separation from one's monetary assets. In other words, by uttering this word one becomes free from attachment to money because his money is taken away from him. To be without money is not very satisfactory, for in that position one cannot fulfill one's desires. In other words, by using the word oṁ one becomes poverty-stricken. Especially when one gives charity to a poor man or beggar, one remains unfulfilled in self-realization and in sense gratification.





Mahārāja Bali wanted to give everything to Vāmanadeva, who had appeared as a beggar, but Śukrācārya, being Mahārāja Bali's familial spiritual master in the line of seminal succession, could not appreciate Mahārāja Bali's promise. Śukrācārya gave Vedic evidence that one should not give everything to a poor man. Rather, when a poor man comes for charity one should untruthfully say, "Whatever I have I have given you. I have no more." It is not that one should give everything to him. Actually the word oṁ is meant for oṁ tat sat, the Absolute Truth. Oṁkāra is meant for freedom from all attachment to money because money should be spent for the purpose of the Supreme. The tendency of modern civilization is to give money in charity to the poor. Such charity has no spiritual value because we actually see that although there are so many hospitals and other foundations and institutions for the poor, according to the three modes of material nature a class of poor men is always destined to continue. Even though there are so many charitable institutions, poverty has not been driven from human society. Therefore it is recommended here, bhikṣave sarvam oṁ kurvan nālaṁ kāmena cātmane. One should not give everything to the beggars among the poor.



The best solution is that of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. This movement is always kind to the poor, not only because it feeds them but also because it gives them enlightenment by teaching them how to become Kṛṣṇa conscious. We are therefore opening hundreds and thousands of centers for those who are poor, both in money and in knowledge, to enlighten them in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and reform their character by teaching them how to avoid illicit sex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling, which are the most sinful activities and which cause people to suffer, life after life. The best way to use money is to open such a center, where all may come live and reform their character. They may live very comfortably, without denial of any of the body's necessities, but they live under spiritual control, and thus they live happily and save time for advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If one has money, it should not be squandered away on nothing. It should be used to push forward the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement so that all of human society will become happy, prosperous and hopeful of being promoted back home, back to Godhead. The Vedic mantra in this regard reads as follows:



parāg vā etad riktam akṣaraṁ yad etad om iti tad yat kiñcid om iti āhātraivāsmai tad ricyate; sa yat sarvam oṁ kuryād ricyād ātmānaṁ sa kāmebhyo nālaṁ syāt.



TEXT 42



athaitat pūrṇam abhyātmaṁ

yac ca nety anṛtaṁ vacaḥ

sarvaṁ nety anṛtaṁ brūyāt

sa duṣkīrtiḥ śvasan mṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; etat-that; pūrṇam-completely; abhyātmam-drawing the compassion of others by presenting oneself as always poverty-stricken; yat-that; ca-also; na-not; iti-thus; anṛtam-false; vacaḥ-words; sarvam-completely; na-not; iti-thus; anṛtam-falsity; brūyāt-who should say; saḥ-such a person; duṣkīrtiḥ-infamous; śvasan-while breathing or while alive; mṛtaḥ-is dead or should be killed.





Therefore, the safe course is to say no. Although it is a falsehood, it protects one completely, it draws the compassion of others toward oneself, and it gives one full facility to collect money from others for oneself. Nonetheless, if one always pleads that he has nothing, he is condemned, for he is a dead body while living, or while still breathing he should be killed.





Beggars always present themselves as possessing nothing, and this may be very good for them because in this way they are assured of not losing their money and of always drawing the attention and compassion of others for the sake of collection. But this is also condemned. If one purposely continues this professional begging, he is supposed to be dead while breathing, or, according to another interpretation, such a man of falsity should be killed while still breathing. The Vedic injunction in this regard is as follows: athaitat pūrṇam abhyātmaṁ yan neti sa yat sarvaṁ neti brūyāt pāpikāsya kīrtir jāyate. sainaṁ tatraiva hanyāt. If one continuously poses himself as possessing nothing and collects money by begging, he should be killed (sainaṁ tatraiva hanyāt).





TEXT 43



strīṣu narma-vivāhe ca

vṛtty-arthe prāṇa-saṅkaṭe

go-brāhmaṇārthe hiṁsāyāṁ

nānṛtaṁ syāj jugupsitam

SYNONYMS



strīṣu-to encourage a woman and bring her under control; narma-vivāhe-in joking or in a marriage ceremony; ca-also; vṛtti-arthe-for earning one's livelihood, as in business; prāṇa-saṅkaṭe-or in time of danger; go-brāhmaṇa-arthe-for the sake of cow protection and brahminical culture; hiṁsāyām-for any person who is going to be killed because of enmity; na-not; anṛtam-falsity; syāt-becomes; jugupsitam-abominable.





In flattering a woman to bring her under control, in joking, in a marriage ceremony, in earning one's livelihood, when one's life is in danger, in protecting cows and brahminical culture, or in protecting a person from an enemy's hand, falsity is never condemned.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled, "Lord Vāmanadeva Begs Charity from Bali Mahārāja."



Chapter Twenty



Bali Mahārāja Surrenders the Universe





The summary of this Twentieth Chapter is as follows. Despite his knowledge that Lord Vāmanadeva was cheating him, Bali Mahārāja gave everything to the Lord in charity, and thus the Lord extended His body and assumed a gigantic form as Lord Viṣṇu.





After hearing the instructive advice of Śukrācārya, Bali Mahārāja became contemplative. Because it is the duty of a householder to maintain the principles of religion, economic development and sense gratification, Bali Mahārāja thought it improper to withdraw his promise to the brahmacārī. To lie or fail to honor a promise given to a brahmacārī is never proper, for lying is the most sinful activity. Everyone should be afraid of the sinful reactions to lying, for mother earth cannot even bear the weight of a sinful liar. The spreading of a kingdom or empire is temporary; if there is no benefit for the general public, such expansion has no value. Previously, all the great kings and emperors expanded their kingdoms with a regard for the welfare of the people in general. Indeed, while engaged in such activities for the benefit of the general public, eminent men sometimes even sacrificed their lives. It is said that one who is glorious in his activities is always living and never dies. Therefore, fame should be the aim of life, and even if one becomes poverty-stricken for the sake of a good reputation, that is not a loss. Bali Mahārāja thought that even if this brahmacārī, Vāmanadeva, were Lord Viṣṇu, if the Lord accepted his charity and then again arrested him, Bali Mahārāja would not envy Him. Considering all these points, Bali Mahārāja finally gave in charity everything he possessed.





Lord Vāmanadeva then immediately extended Himself into a universal body. By the mercy of Lord Vāmanadeva, Bali Mahārāja could see that the Lord is all-pervading and that everything rests in His body. Bali Mahārāja could see Lord Vāmanadeva as the supreme Viṣṇu, wearing a helmet, yellow garments, the mark of Śrīvatsa, the Kaustubha jewel, a flower garland, and ornaments decorating His entire body. The Lord gradually covered the entire surface of the world, and by extending His body He covered the entire sky. With His hands He covered all directions, and with His second footstep He covered the entire upper planetary system. Therefore there was no vacant place where He could take His third footstep.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

balir evaṁ gṛha-patiḥ

kulācāryeṇa bhāṣitaḥ

tūṣṇīṁ bhūtvā kṣaṇaṁ rājann

uvācāvahito gurum

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; evam-thus; gṛha-patiḥ-the master of the household affairs, although guided by the priests; kula-ācāryeṇa-by the family ācārya or guide; bhāṣitaḥ-being thus addressed; tūṣṇīm-silent; bhūtvā-becoming; kṣaṇam-for a moment; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); uvāca-said; avahitaḥ-after full deliberation; gurum-unto his spiritual master.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, when Bali Mahārāja was thus advised by his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, his family priest, he remained silent for some time, and then, after full deliberation, he replied to his spiritual master as follows.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that Bali Mahārāja remained silent at a critical point. How could he disobey the instruction of Śukrācārya, his spiritual master? It is the duty of such a sober personality as Bali Mahārāja to abide by the orders of his spiritual master immediately, as his spiritual master had advised. But Bali Mahārāja also considered that Śukrācārya was no longer to be accepted as a spiritual master, for he had deviated from the duty of a spiritual master. According to śāstra, the duty of the guru is to take the disciple back home, back to Godhead. If he is unable to do so and instead hinders the disciple in going back to Godhead, he should not be a guru. Gurur na sa syāt (Bhāg. 5.5.18). One should not become a guru if he cannot enable his disciple to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The goal of life is to become a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa so that one may be freed from the bondage of material existence (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). The spiritual master helps the disciple attain this stage by developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Now Śukrācārya has advised Bali Mahārāja to deny the promise to Vāmanadeva. Under the circumstances, therefore, Bali Mahārāja thought that there would be no fault if he disobeyed the order of his spiritual master. He deliberated on this point-should he refuse to accept the advise of his spiritual master, or should he independently do everything to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead? He took some time. Therefore it is said, tūṣṇīṁ bhūtvā kṣaṇaṁ rajann uvācāvahito gurum. After deliberating on this point, he decided that Lord Viṣṇu should be pleased in all circumstances, even at the risk of ignoring the guru's advice to the contrary.



Anyone who is supposed to be a guru but who goes against the principle of viṣṇu-bhakti cannot be accepted as guru. If one has falsely accepted such a guru, one should reject him. Such a guru is described as follows (Mahābhārata, Udyoga 179.25):



guror apy avaliptasya

kāryākāryam ajānataḥ

utpatha-pratipannasya

parityāgo vidhīyate





Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has advised that such a useless guru, a family priest acting as guru, should be given up, and that the proper, bona-fide guru should be accepted.



ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śvapaco guruḥ





"A scholarly brāhmaṇa expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge is unfit to become a spiritual master without being a Vaiṣṇava, but if a person born in a family of a lower caste is a Vaiṣṇava, he can become a spiritual master." (Padma Purāṇa)





TEXT 2



śrī-balir uvāca

satyaṁ bhagavatā proktaṁ

dharmo 'yaṁ gṛhamedhinām

arthaṁ kāmaṁ yaśo vṛttiṁ

yo na bādheta karhicit

SYNONYMS



śrī-baliḥ uvāca-Bali Mahārāja said; satyam-it is truth; bhagavatā-by Your Greatness; proktam-what has already been spoken; dharmaḥ-a religious principle; ayam-that is; gṛhamedhinām-especially for the householders; artham-economic development; kāmam-sense gratification; yaśaḥ vṛttim-reputation and means of livelihood; yaḥ-which religious principle; na-not; bādheta-hinders; karhicit-at any time.





Bali Mahārāja said: As you have already stated, the principle of religion that does not hinder one's economic development, sense gratification, fame and means of livelihood is the real occupational duty of the householder. I also think that this religious principle is correct.





Bali Mahārāja's grave answer to Śukrācārya is meaningful. Śukrācārya stressed that one's material means of livelihood and one's material reputation, sense gratification and economic development must continue properly. To see to this is the first duty of a man who is a householder, especially one who is interested in material affairs. If a religious principle does not affect one's material condition, it is to be accepted. At the present time, in this age of Kali, this idea is extremely prominent. No one is prepared to accept any religious principle if it hampers material prosperity. Śukrācārya, being a person of this material world, did not know the principles of a devotee. A devotee is determined to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead to His full satisfaction. Anything that hampers such determination should certainly be rejected. This is the principle of bhakti. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanam (Cc. Madhya 22.100). To perform devotional service, one must accept only that which is favorable and reject that which is unfavorable. Bali Mahārāja had the opportunity to contribute everything he possessed to the lotus feet of Lord Vāmanadeva, but Śukrācārya was putting forward a material argument to hamper this process of devotional service. Under the circumstances, Bali Mahārāja decided that such hindrances should certainly be avoided. In other words, he decided immediately to reject the advice of Śukrācārya and go on with his duty. Thus he gave all his possessions to Lord Vāmanadeva.





TEXT 3



sa cāhaṁ vitta-lobhena

pratyācakṣe kathaṁ dvijam

pratiśrutya dadāmīti

prāhrādiḥ kitavo yathā

SYNONYMS



saḥ-such a person as I am; ca-also; aham-I am; vitta-lobhena-for being allured by greed for money; pratyācakṣe-I shall cheat or say no when I have already said yes; katham-how; dvijam-especially to a brāhmaṇa; pratiśrutya-after already having promised; dadāmi-that I shall give; iti-thus; prāhrādiḥ-I who am famous as the grandson of Mahārāja Prahlāda; kitavaḥ-an ordinary cheater; yathā-just like.





I am the grandson of Mahārāja Prahlāda. How can I withdraw my promise because of greed for money when I have already said that I shall give this land? How can I behave like an ordinary cheater, especially toward a brāhmaṇa?





Bali Mahārāja had already been blessed by his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja. Therefore, he was a pure devotee, although born in a family of demons. There are two kinds of highly elevated devotees, called sādhana-siddha and kṛpā-siddha. Sādhana-siddha refers to one who has become a devotee by regular execution of the regulative principles mentioned in the śāstras, as ordered and directed by the spiritual master. If one regularly executes such devotional service, he will certainly attain perfection in due course of time. But there are other devotees, who may not have undergone all the required details of devotional service but who, by the special mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa-the spiritual master and the Supreme Personality of Godhead-have immediately attained the perfection of pure devotional service. Examples of such devotees are the yajña-patnīs, Mahārāja Bali and Śukadeva Gosvāmī. The yajña-patnīs were the wives of ordinary brāhmaṇas engaged in fruitive activities. Although the brāhmaṇas were very learned and advanced in Vedic knowledge, they could not achieve the mercy of Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma, whereas their wives achieved complete perfection in devotional service, despite their being women. Similarly, Vairocani, Bali Mahārāja, received the mercy of Prahlāda Mahārāja, and by Prahlāda Mahārāja's mercy he also received the mercy of Lord Viṣṇu, who appeared before him as a brahmacārī beggar. Thus Bali Mahārāja became a kṛpā-siddha because of the special mercy of both guru and Kṛṣṇa. Caitanya Mahāprabhu confirms this favor: guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja (Cc. Madhya 19.151). Bali Mahārāja, by the grace of Prahlāda Mahārāja, got the seed of devotional service, and when that seed developed, he achieved the ultimate fruit of that service, namely love of Godhead (premā pum-artho mahān), immediately upon the appearance of Lord Vāmanadeva. Bali Mahārāja regularly maintained devotion for the Lord, and because he was purified, the Lord appeared before him. Because of unalloyed love for the Lord, he then immediately decided, "I shall give this little dwarf brāhmaṇa whatever He asks from me." This is a sign of love. Thus Bali Mahārāja is understood to be one who received the highest perfection of devotional service by special mercy.





TEXT 4



na hy asatyāt paro 'dharma

iti hovāca bhūr iyam

sarvaṁ soḍhum alaṁ manye

ṛte 'līka-paraṁ naram

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; asatyāt-than compulsion to untruthfulness; paraḥ-more; adharmaḥ-irreligion; iti-thus; ha uvāca-indeed had spoken; bhūḥ-mother earth; iyam-this; sarvam-everything; soḍhum-to bear; alam-I am able; manye-although I think; ṛte-except; alīka-param-the most heinous liar; naram-a human being.





There is nothing more sinful than untruthfulness. Because of this, mother earth once said, "I can bear any heavy thing except a person who is a liar."





On the surface of the earth there are many great mountains and oceans that are very heavy, and mother earth has no difficulty carrying them. But she feels very much overburdened when she carries even one person who is a liar. It is said that in Kali-yuga lying is a common affair: māyaiva vyāvahārike (Bhāg. 12.2.3). Even in the most common dealings, people are accustomed to speaking so many lies. No one is free from the sinful reactions of speaking lies. Under the circumstances, one can just imagine how this has overburdened the earth, and indeed the entire universe.





TEXT 5



nāhaṁ bibhemi nirayān

nādhanyād asukhārṇavāt

na sthāna-cyavanān mṛtyor

yathā vipra-pralambhanāt

SYNONYMS



na-not; aham-I; bibhemi-am afraid of; nirayāt-from a hellish condition of life; na-nor; adhanyāt-from a poverty-stricken condition; asukha-arṇavāt-nor from an ocean of distresses; na-nor; sthāna-cyavanāt-from falling from a position; mṛtyoḥ-nor from death; yathā-as; vipra-pralambhanāt-from the cheating of a brāhmaṇa.





I do not fear hell, poverty, an ocean of distress, falldown from my position or even death itself as much as I fear cheating a brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 6



yad yad dhāsyati loke 'smin

samparetaṁ dhanādikam

tasya tyāge nimittaṁ kiṁ

vipras tuṣyen na tena cet

SYNONYMS



yat yat-whatsoever; hāsyati-will leave; loke-in the world; asmin-in this; samparetam-one who is already dead; dhana-ādikam-his wealth and riches; tasya-of such wealth; tyāge-in renunciation; nimittam-the purpose; kim-what is; vipraḥ-the brāhmaṇa who is confidentially Lord Viṣṇu; tuṣyet-must be pleased; na-is not; tena-by such (riches); cet-if there is a possibility.





My lord, you can also see that all the material opulences of this world are certainly separated from their possessor at death. Therefore, if the brāhmaṇa Vāmanadeva is not satisfied by whatever gifts one has given, why not please Him with the riches one is destined to lose at death?





The word vipra means brāhmaṇa, and at the same time "confidential." Bali Mahārāja had confidentially decided to give the gift to Lord Vāmanadeva without discussion, but because such a decision would hurt the hearts of the asuras and his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, he spoke equivocally. Bali Mahārāja, as a pure devotee, had already decided to give all the land to Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 7



śreyaḥ kurvanti bhūtānāṁ

sādhavo dustyajāsubhiḥ

dadhyaṅ-śibi-prabhṛtayaḥ

ko vikalpo dharādiṣu

SYNONYMS



śreyaḥ-activities of the utmost importance; kurvanti-execute; bhūtānām-of the general mass of people; sādhavaḥ-the saintly persons; dustyaja-which are extremely hard to give up; asubhiḥ-by their lives; dadhyaṅ-Mahārāja Dadhīci; śibi-Mahārāja Śibi; prabhṛtayaḥ-and similar great personalities; kaḥ-what; vikalpaḥ-consideration; dharā-ādiṣu-in giving the land to the brāhmaṇa.





Dadhīci, Śibi and many other great personalities were willing to sacrifice even their lives for the benefit of the people in general. This is the evidence of history. So why not give up this insignificant land? What is the serious consideration against it?





Bali Mahārāja was prepared to give everything to Lord Viṣṇu, and Śukrācārya, being a professional priest, might have been anxiously waiting, doubting whether there had been any such instance in history in which one had given everything in charity. Bali Mahārāja, however, cited the tangible examples of Mahārāja Śibi and Mahārāja Dadhīci, who had given up their lives for the benefit of the general public. Certainly one has attachment for everything material, especially one's land, but land and other possessions are forcibly taken away at the time of death, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham). The Lord personally appeared to Bali Mahārāja to take away everything he had, and thus he was so fortunate that he could see the Lord face to face. Nondevotees, however, cannot see the Lord face to face; to such persons the Lord appears as death and takes away all their possessions by force. Under the circumstances, why should we not part with our possessions and deliver them to Lord Viṣṇu for His satisfaction? Śrī Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says in this regard, san-nimitte varaṁ tyāgo vināśe niyate sati (Cāṇakya-śloka 36). Since our money and possessions do not last but will somehow or other be taken away, as long as they are in our possession it is better to use them for charity to a noble cause. Therefore Bali Mahārāja defied the order of his so-called spiritual master.





TEXT 8



yair iyaṁ bubhuje brahman

daityendrair anivartibhiḥ

teṣāṁ kālo 'grasīl lokān

na yaśo 'dhigataṁ bhuvi

SYNONYMS



yaiḥ-by whom; iyam-this world; bubhuje-was enjoyed; brahman-O best of the brāhmaṇas; daitya-indraiḥ-by great heroes and kings born in demoniac families; anivartibhiḥ-by those who were determined to fight, either to lay down their lives or to win victory; teṣām-of such persons; kālaḥ-the time factor; agrasīt-took away; lokān-all possessions, all objects of enjoyment; na-not; yaśaḥ-the reputation; adhigatam-achieved; bhuvi-in this world.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, certainly the great demoniac kings who were never reluctant to fight enjoyed this world, but in due course of time everything they had was taken away, except their reputation, by which they continue to exist. In other words, one should try to achieve a good reputation instead of anything else.





In this regard, Cāṇakya Paṇḍita (Cāṇakya-śloka 34) also says, āyuṣaḥ kṣaṇa eko 'pi na labhya svarṇa-koṭibhiḥ. The duration of one's life is extremely short, but if in that short lifetime one can do something that enhances his good reputation, that may continue to exist for many millions of years. Bali Mahārāja therefore decided not to follow his spiritual master's instruction that he deny his promise to Vāmanadeva; instead, he decided to give the land according to the promise and be everlastingly celebrated as one of the twelve mahājanas (balir vaiyāsakir vayam).





TEXT 9



sulabhā yudhi viprarṣe

hy anivṛttās tanu-tyajaḥ

na tathā tīrtha āyāte

śraddhayā ye dhana-tyajaḥ

SYNONYMS



su-labhāḥ-very easily obtained; yudhi-in the battlefield; vipra-ṛṣe-O best of the brāhmaṇas; hi-indeed; anivṛttāḥ-not being afraid of fighting; tanu-tyajaḥ-and thus lay down their lives; na-not; tathā-as; tīrthe āyāte-on the arrival of a saintly person who creates holy places; śraddhayā-with faith and devotion; ye-those who; dhana-tyajaḥ-can give up their accumulated wealth.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, many men have laid down their lives on the battlefield, being unafraid of fighting, but rarely has one gotten the chance to give his accumulated wealth faithfully to a saintly person who creates holy places.





Many kṣatriyas have laid down their lives on the battlefield for their nations, but hardly a person can be found who has given up all his property and his accumulated wealth in charity to a person worthy of the gift. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (17.20):



dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ

dīyate 'nupakāriṇe

deśe kāle ca pātre ca

tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam





"That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to a worthy person, and without expectation of return is considered to be charity in the mode of goodness." Thus charity given in the proper place is called sāttvika. And above this charity in goodness is transcendental charity, in which everything is sacrificed for the sake of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vāmanadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, had come to Bali Mahārāja for alms. How could one get such an opportunity to give charity? Therefore, Bali Mahārāja decided without hesitation to give the Lord whatever He wanted. One may get various opportunities to lay down his life on the battlefield, but such an opportunity as this is hardly ever obtained.





TEXT 10



manasvinaḥ kāruṇikasya śobhanaṁ

yad arthi-kāmopanayena durgatiḥ

kutaḥ punar brahma-vidāṁ bhavādṛśāṁ

tato vaṭor asya dadāmi vāñchitam

SYNONYMS



manasvinaḥ-of persons who are greatly munificent; kāruṇikasya-of persons celebrated as very merciful; śobhanam-very auspicious; yat-that; arthi-of persons in need of money; kāma-upanayena-by satisfying; durgatiḥ-becoming poverty-stricken; kutaḥ-what; punaḥ-again (is to be said); brahma-vidām-of persons well versed in transcendental science (brahma-vidyā); bhavādṛśām-like your good self; tataḥ-therefore; vaṭoḥ-of the brahmacārī; asya-of this Vāmanadeva; dadāmi-I shall give; vāñchitam-whatever He wants.





By giving charity, a benevolent and merciful person undoubtedly becomes even more auspicious, especially when he gives charity to a person like your good self. Under the circumstances, I must give this little brahmacārī whatever charity He wants from me.





If one accepts a poverty-stricken position because of losing money in business, gambling, prostitution or intoxication, no one will praise him, but if one becomes poverty-stricken by giving all of his possessions in charity, he becomes adored all over the world. Aside from this, if a benevolent and merciful person exhibits his pride in becoming poverty-stricken by giving his possessions in charity for good causes, his poverty is a welcome and auspicious sign of a great personality. Bali Mahārāja decided that even though he would become poverty-stricken by giving everything to Vāmanadeva, this is what he would prefer.





TEXT 11



yajanti yajñaṁ kratubhir yam ādṛtā

bhavanta āmnāya-vidhāna-kovidāḥ

sa eva viṣṇur varado 'stu vā paro

dāsyāmy amuṣmai kṣitim īpsitāṁ mune

SYNONYMS



yajanti-worship; yajñam-who is the enjoyer of sacrifice; kratubhiḥ-by the different paraphernalia for sacrifice; yam-unto the Supreme Person; ādṛtāḥ-very respectfully; bhavantaḥ-all of you; āmnāya-vidhāna-kovidāḥ-great saintly persons fully aware of the Vedic principles of performing sacrifice; saḥ-that; eva-indeed; viṣṇuḥ-is Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; varadaḥ-either He is prepared to give benedictions; astu-He becomes; vā-or; paraḥ-comes as an enemy; dāsyāmi-I shall give; amuṣmai-unto Him (unto Lord Viṣṇu, Vāmanadeva); kṣitim-the tract of land; īpsitām-whatever He has desired; mune-O great sage.





O great sage, great saintly persons like you, being completely aware of the Vedic principles for performing ritualistic ceremonies and yajñas, worship Lord Viṣṇu in all circumstances. Therefore, whether that same Lord Viṣṇu has come here to give me all benedictions or to punish me as an enemy, I must carry out His order and give Him the requested tract of land without hesitation.





As stated by Lord Śiva:



ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ

viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi

tadīyānāṁ samarcanam





(Padma Purāṇa)



Although in the Vedas there are recommendations for worshiping many demigods, Lord Viṣṇu is the Supreme Person, and worship of Viṣṇu is the ultimate goal of life. The Vedic principles of the varṇāśrama institution are meant to organize society to prepare everyone to worship Lord Viṣṇu.



varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, is worshiped by the proper execution of prescribed duties in the system of varṇa and āśrama. There is no other way to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead." (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 3.8.9) One must ultimately worship Lord Viṣṇu, and for that purpose the varṇāśrama system organizes society into brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdras, brahmacārīs, gṛhasthas, vānaprasthas and sannyāsīs. Bali Mahārāja, having been perfectly educated in devotional service by his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja, knew how things are to be done. He was never to be misguided by anyone, even by a person who happened to be his so-called spiritual master. This is the sign of full surrender. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said:



mārabi rākhabi--yo icchā tohārā

nitya-dāsa-prati tuyā adhikārā





When one surrenders to Lord Viṣṇu, one must be prepared to abide by His orders in all circumstances, whether He kills one or gives one protection. Lord Viṣṇu must be worshiped in all circumstances.





TEXT 12



yadyapy asāv adharmeṇa

māṁ badhnīyād anāgasam

tathāpy enaṁ na hiṁsiṣye

bhītaṁ brahma-tanuṁ ripum

SYNONYMS



yadyapi-although; asau-Lord Viṣṇu; adharmeṇa-crookedly, without reference to the straight way; mām-me; badhnīyāt-kills; anāgasam-although I am not sinful; tathāpi-still; enam-against Him; na-not; hiṁsiṣye-I shall take any retaliation; bhītam-because He is afraid; brahma-tanum-having assumed the form of a brāhmaṇa-brahmacārī; ripum-even though He is my enemy.





Although He is Viṣṇu Himself, out of fear He has covered Himself in the form of a brāhmaṇa to come to me begging. Under the circumstances, because He has assumed the form of a brāhmaṇa, even if He irreligiously arrests me or even kills me, I shall not retaliate, although He is my enemy.





If Lord Viṣṇu as He is had come to Bali Mahārāja and asked him to do something, Bali Mahārāja certainly would not have refused His request. But to enjoy a little humor between Himself and His devotee, the Lord covered Himself as a brāhmaṇa-brahmacārī and thus came to Bali Mahārāja to beg for only three feet of land.





TEXT 13



eṣa vā uttamaśloko

na jihāsati yad yaśaḥ

hatvā maināṁ hared yuddhe

śayīta nihato mayā

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this (brahmacārī); vā-either; uttama-ślokaḥ-is Lord Viṣṇu, who is worshiped by Vedic prayers; na-not; jihāsati-desires to give up; yat-because; yaśaḥ-perpetual fame; hatvā-after killing; mā-me; enām-all this land; haret-will take away; yuddhe-in the fight; śayīta-will lie down; nihataḥ-being killed; mayā-by me.





If this brāhmaṇa really is Lord Viṣṇu, who is worshiped by Vedic hymns, He would never give up His widespread reputation; either He would lie down having been killed by me, or He would kill me in a fight.





Bali Mahārāja's statement that Viṣṇu would lie down having been killed is not the direct meaning, for Viṣṇu cannot be killed by anyone. Lord Viṣṇu can kill everyone, but He cannot be killed. Thus the real meaning of the words "lie down" is that Lord Viṣṇu would reside within the core of Bali Mahārāja's heart. Lord Viṣṇu is defeated by a devotee through devotional service; otherwise, no one can defeat Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 14



śrī-śuka uvāca

evam aśraddhitaṁ śiṣyam

anādeśakaraṁ guruḥ

śaśāpa daiva-prahitaḥ

satya-sandhaṁ manasvinam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; aśraddhitam-who was not very respectful to the instruction of the spiritual master; śiṣyam-unto such a disciple; anādeśa-karam-who was not prepared to carry out the order of his spiritual master; guruḥ-the spiritual master (Śukrācārya); śaśāpa-cursed; daiva-prahitaḥ-being inspired by the Supreme Lord; satya-sandham-one who was fixed in his truthfulness; manasvinam-who was of a highly elevated character.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thereafter, the spiritual master, Śukrācārya, being inspired by the Supreme Lord, cursed his exalted disciple Bali Mahārāja, who was so magnanimous and fixed in truthfulness that instead of respecting his spiritual master's instructions, he wanted to disobey his order.





The difference between the behavior of Bali Mahārāja and that of his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, was that Bali Mahārāja had already developed love of Godhead, whereas Śukrācārya, being merely a priest of routine rituals, had not. Thus Śukrācārya was never inspired by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to develop in devotional service. As stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (10.10):



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te





"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me."



Devotees who actually engage in devotional service with faith and love are inspired by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vaiṣṇavas are never concerned with ritualistic smārta-brāhmaṇas. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has therefore compiled Hari-bhakti-vilāsa to guide the Vaiṣṇavas, who never follow the smārta-viddhi. Although the Supreme Lord is situated in the core of everyone's heart, unless one is a Vaiṣṇava, unless one is engaged in devotional service, one does not get sound advice by which to return home, back to Godhead. Such instructions are meant only for devotees. Therefore in this verse the word daiva-prahitaḥ, "being inspired by the Supreme Lord," is important. Śukrācārya should have encouraged Bali Mahārāja to give everything to Lord Viṣṇu. This would have been a sign of love for the Supreme Lord. But he did not do so. On the contrary, he wanted to punish his devoted disciple by cursing him.





TEXT 15



dṛḍhaṁ paṇḍita-māny ajñaḥ

stabdho 'sy asmad-upekṣayā

mac-chāsanātigo yas tvam

acirād bhraśyase śriyaḥ

SYNONYMS



dṛḍham-so firmly convinced or fixed in your decision; paṇḍita-mānī-considering yourself very learned; ajñaḥ-at the same time foolish; stabdhaḥ-impudent; asi-you have become; asmat-of us; upekṣayā-by disregarding; mat-śāsana-atigaḥ-surpassing the jurisdiction of my administration; yaḥ-such a person (as you); tvam-yourself; acirāt-very soon; bhraśyase-will fall down; śriyaḥ-from all opulence.





Although you have no knowledge, you have become a so-called learned person, and therefore you dare be so impudent as to disobey my order. Because of disobeying me, you shall very soon be bereft of all your opulence.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that Bali Mahārāja was not paṇḍita-mānī, or one who falsely assumes himself learned; rather, he was paṇḍita-mānya-jñaḥ, one who is so learned that all other learned persons worship him. Aid because he was so learned, he could disobey the order of his so-called spiritual master. He had no fear of any condition of material existence. Anyone cared for by Lord Viṣṇu does not need to care about anyone else. Thus Bali Mahārāja could never be bereft of all opulences. The opulences offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead are not to be compared to the opulences obtained by karma-kāṇḍa. In other words, if a devotee becomes very opulent, it is to be understood that his opulence is a gift of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such opulence will never be vanquished, whereas the opulence achieved by one's fruitive activity may be vanquished at any moment.





TEXT 16



evaṁ śaptaḥ sva-guruṇā

satyān na calito mahān

vāmanāya dadāv enām

arcitvodaka-pūrvakam

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; śaptaḥ-being cursed; sva-guruṇā-by his own spiritual master; satyāt-from truthfulness; na-not; calitaḥ-who moved; mahān-the great personality; vāmanāya-unto Lord Vāmanadeva; dadau-gave in charity; enām-all the land; arcitvā-after worshiping; udaka-pūrvakam-preceded by offering of water.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Even after being cursed in this way by his own spiritual master, Bali Mahārāja, being a great personality, never deviated from his determination. Therefore, according to custom, he first offered water to Vāmanadeva and then offered Him the gift of land he had promised.





TEXT 17



vindhyāvalis tadāgatya

patnī jālaka-mālinī

āninye kalaśaṁ haimam

avanejany-apāṁ bhṛtam

SYNONYMS



vindhyāvaliḥ-Vindhyāvali; tadā-at that time; āgatya-coming there; patnī-the wife of Mahārāja Bali; jālaka-mālinī-decorated with a necklace of pearls; āninye-caused to be brought; kalaśam-a waterpot; haimam-made of gold; avanejani-apām-with water for the sake of washing the Lord's feet; bhṛtam-filled.





Bali Mahārāja's wife, known as Vindhyāvali, who was decorated with a necklace of pearls, immediately came and had a large golden waterpot brought there, full of water with which to worship the Lord by washing His feet.





TEXT 18



yajamānaḥ svayaṁ tasya

śrīmat pāda-yugaṁ mudā

avanijyāvahan mūrdhni

tad apo viśva-pāvanīḥ

SYNONYMS



yajamānaḥ-the worshiper (Bali Mahārāja); svayam-personally; tasya-of Lord Vāmanadeva; śrīmat pāda-yugam-the most auspicious and beautiful pair of lotus feet; mudā-with great jubilation; avanijya-properly washing; avahat-took; mūrdhni-on his head; tat-that; apaḥ-water; viśva-pāvanīḥ-which gives liberation to the whole universe.





Bali Mahārāja, the worshiper of Lord Vāmanadeva, jubilantly washed the Lord's lotus feet and then took the water on his head, for that water delivers the entire universe.





TEXT 19



tadāsurendraṁ divi devatā-gaṇā

gandharva-vidyādhara-siddha-cāraṇāḥ

tat karma sarve 'pi gṛṇanta ārjavaṁ

prasūna-varṣair vavṛṣur mudānvitāḥ

SYNONYMS



tadā-at that time; asura-indram-unto the King of the demons, Bali Mahārāja; divi-in the higher planetary system; devatā-gaṇāḥ-the residents known as the demigods; gandharva-the Gandharvas; vidyādhara-the Vidyādharas; siddha-the residents of Siddhaloka; cāraṇāḥ-the residents of Cāraṇaloka; tat-that; karma-action; sarve api-all of them; gṛṇantaḥ-declaring; ārjavam-plain and simple; prasūna-varṣaiḥ-with a shower of flowers; vavṛṣuḥ-released; mudā-anvitāḥ-being very pleased with him.





At that time, the residents of the higher planetary system, namely the demigods, the Gandharvas, the Vidyādharas, the Siddhas and the Cāraṇas, all being very pleased by Bali Mahārāja's simple, nonduplicitous act, praised his qualities and showered upon him millions of flowers.





Ārjavam-simplicity or freedom from duplicity-is a qualification of a brāhmaṇa and a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava automatically acquires all the qualities of a brāhmaṇa.



yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ





(Bhāg. 5.18.12)



A Vaiṣṇava should possess the brahminical qualities such as satya, śama, dama, titikṣā and ārjava. There cannot be any duplicity in the character of a Vaiṣṇava. When Bali Mahārāja acted with unflinching faith and devotion unto the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu, this was very much appreciated by all the residents of the higher planetary system.





TEXT 20



nedur muhur dundubhayaḥ sahasraśo

gandharva-kimpūruṣa-kinnarā jaguḥ

manasvinānena kṛtaṁ suduṣkaraṁ

vidvān adād yad ripave jagat-trayam

SYNONYMS



neduḥ-began to beat; muhuḥ-again and again; dundubhayaḥ-trumpets and kettledrums; sahasraśaḥ-by thousands and thousands; gandharva-the residents of Gandharvaloka; kimpūruṣa-the residents of Kimpuruṣaloka; kinnarāḥ-and the residents of Kinnaraloka; jaguḥ-began to sing and declare; manasvinā-by the most exalted personality; anena-by Bali Mahārāja; kṛtam-was done; su-duṣkaram-an extremely difficult task; vidvān-because of his being the most learned person; adāt-gave Him a gift; yat-that; ripave-unto the enemy, Lord Viṣṇu, who was siding with Bali Mahārāja's enemies, the demigods; jagat-trayam-the three worlds.





The Gandharvas, the Kimpuruṣas and the Kinnaras sounded thousands and thousands of kettledrums and trumpets again and again, and they sang in great jubilation, declaring, "How exalted a person is Bali Mahārāja, and what a difficult task he has performed! Even though he knew that Lord Viṣṇu was on the side of his enemies, he nonetheless gave the Lord the entire three worlds in charity."





TEXT 21



tad vāmanaṁ rūpam avardhatādbhutaṁ

harer anantasya guṇa-trayātmakam

bhūḥ khaṁ diśo dyaur vivarāḥ payodhayas

tiryaṅ-nṛ-devā ṛṣayo yad-āsata

SYNONYMS



tat-that; vāmanam-incarnation of Lord Vāmana; rūpam-form; avardhata-began to increase more and more; adbhutam-certainly very wonderful; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantasya-of the unlimited; guṇa-traya-ātmakam-whose body is expanded by the material energy, consisting of three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance); bhūḥ-the land; kham-the sky; diśaḥ-all directions; dyauḥ-the planetary systems; vivarāḥ-different holes of the universe; payodhayaḥ-great seas and oceans; tiryak-lower animals, birds and beasts; nṛ-human beings; devāḥ-demigods; ṛṣayaḥ-great saintly persons; yat-wherein; āsata-lived.





The unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of Vāmana, then began increasing in size, acting in terms of the material energy, until everything in the universe was within His body, including the earth, the planetary systems, the sky, the directions, the various holes in the universe, the seas, the oceans, the birds, beasts, human beings, the demigods and the great saintly persons.





Bali Mahārāja wanted to give charity to Vāmanadeva, but the Lord expanded His body in such a way that He showed Bali Mahārāja that everything in the universe is already in His body. Actually, no one can give anything to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for He is full in everything. Sometimes we see a devotee offering Ganges water to the Ganges. After taking his bath in the Ganges, a devotee takes a palmful of water and offers it back to the Ganges. Actually, when one takes a palmful of water from the Ganges, the Ganges does not lose anything, and similarly if a devotee offers a palmful of water to the Ganges, the Ganges does not increase in any way. But by such an offering, the devotee becomes celebrated as a devotee of mother Ganges. Similarly, when we offer anything with devotion and faith, what we offer does not belong to us, nor does it enrich the opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But if one offers whatever he has in his possession, he becomes a recognized devotee. In this regard, the example is given that when one's face is decorated with a garland and sandalwood pulp, the reflection of one's face in a mirror automatically becomes beautiful. The original source of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is our original source also. Therefore when the Supreme Personality of Godhead is decorated, the devotees and all living entities are decorated automatically.





TEXT 22



kāye balis tasya mahā-vibhūteḥ

sahartvig-ācārya-sadasya etat

dadarśa viśvaṁ tri-guṇaṁ guṇātmake

bhūtendriyārthāśaya-jīva-yuktam

SYNONYMS



kāye-in the body; baliḥ-Mahārāja Bali; tasya-of the Personality of Godhead; mahā-vibhūteḥ-of that person who is equipped with all wonderful opulences; saha-ṛtvik-ācārya-sadasyaḥ-with all the priests, ācāryas and members of the holy assembly; etat-this; dadarśa-saw; viśvam-the whole universe; tri-guṇam-made of three modes of material nature; guṇa-ātmake-in that which is the source of all such qualities; bhūta-with all the gross material elements; indriya-with the senses; artha-with the sense objects; āśaya-with mind, intelligence and false ego; jīva-yuktam-with all the living entities.





Bali Mahārāja, along with all the priests, ācāryas and members of the assembly, observed the Supreme Personality of Godhead's universal body, which was full of six opulences. That body contained everything within the universe, including all the gross material elements, the senses, the sense objects, the mind, intelligence and false ego, the various kinds of living entities, and the actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature.





In Bhagavad-gītā, the Supreme Personality of Godhead says, ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate: [Bg. 10.8] Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything. Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti: [Bg. 7.19] Kṛṣṇa is everything. Mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ: everything rests in the body of the Lord, yet the Lord is not everywhere. Māyāvādī philosophers think that since the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, has become everything, He has no separate existence. Their philosophy is called advaita-vāda. Actually, however, their philosophy is not correct. Here, Bali Mahārāja was the seer of the Personality of Godhead's universal body, and that body was that which was seen. Thus there is dvaita-vāda; there are always two entities-the seer and the seen. The seer is a part of the whole, but he is not equal to the whole. The part of the whole, the seer, is also one with the whole, but since he is but a part, he cannot be the complete whole at any time. This acintya-bhedābheda-simultaneous oneness and difference-is the perfect philosophy propounded by Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.





TEXT 23



rasām acaṣṭāṅghri-tale 'tha pādayor

mahīṁ mahīdhrān puruṣasya jaṅghayoḥ

patattriṇo jānuni viśva-mūrter

ūrvor gaṇaṁ mārutam indrasenaḥ

SYNONYMS



rasām-the lower planetary system; acaṣṭa-observed; aṅghri-tale-beneath the feet, or on the sole; atha-thereafter; pādayoḥ-on the feet; mahīm-the surface of the land; mahīdhrān-the mountains; puruṣasya-of the giant Personality of Godhead; jaṅghayoḥ-on the calves; patattriṇaḥ-the flying living entities; jānuni-on the knees; viśva-mūrteḥ-of the form of the gigantic Lord; ūrvoḥ-on the thighs; gaṇam mārutam-varieties of air; indra-senaḥ-Bali Mahārāja, who had obtained the soldiers of King Indra and who was situated in the post of Indra.





Thereafter, Bali Mahārāja, who was occupying the seat of King Indra, could see the lower planetary systems, such as Rasātala, on the soles of the feet of the Lord's universal form. He saw on the Lord's feet the surface of the globe, on the surface of His calves all the mountains, on His knees the various birds, and on His thighs the varieties of air.





The universal situation is described herein in regard to the complete constitution of the Lord's gigantic universal form. The study of this universal form begins from the sole. Above the soles are the feet, above the feet are the calves, above the calves are the knees, and above the knees are the thighs. Thus the parts of the universal body, one after another, are described herein. The knees are the place of birds, and above that are varieties of air. The birds can fly over the mountains, and above the birds are varieties of air.





TEXT 24



sandhyāṁ vibhor vāsasi guhya aikṣat

prajāpatīñ jaghane ātma-mukhyān

nābhyāṁ nabhaḥ kukṣiṣu sapta-sindhūn

urukramasyorasi carkṣa-mālām

SYNONYMS



sandhyām-the evening twilight; vibhoḥ-of the Supreme; vāsasi-in the garment; guhye-on the private parts; aikṣat-he saw; prajāpatīn-the various Prajāpatis, who had given birth to all living entities; jaghane-on the hips; ātma-mukhyān-the confidential ministers of Bali Mahārāja; nābhyām-on the navel; nabhaḥ-the whole sky; kukṣiṣu-on the waist; sapta-seven; sindhūn-oceans; urukramasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was acting wonderfully; urasi-on the bosom; ca-also; ṛkṣa-mālām-the clusters of stars.





Bali Mahārāja saw beneath the garments of the Lord, who acts wonderfully, the evening twilight. In the Lord's private parts he saw the Prajāpatis, and in the round portion of the waist he saw himself with his confidential associates. In the Lord's navel he saw the sky, on the Lord's waist he saw the seven oceans, and on the Lord's bosom he saw all the clusters of stars.





TEXTS 25–29



hṛdy aṅga dharmaṁ stanayor murārer

ṛtaṁ ca satyaṁ ca manasy athendum

śriyaṁ ca vakṣasy aravinda-hastāṁ

kaṇṭhe ca sāmāni samasta-rephān

indra-pradhānān amarān bhujeṣu



tat-karṇayoḥ kakubho dyauś ca mūrdhni

keśeṣu meghāñ chvasanaṁ nāsikāyām

akṣṇoś ca sūryaṁ vadane ca vahnim

vāṇyāṁ ca chandāṁsi rase jaleśaṁ



bhruvor niṣedhaṁ ca vidhiṁ ca pakṣmasu

ahaś ca rātriṁ ca parasya puṁso

manyuṁ lalāṭe 'dhara eva lobham

sparśe ca kāmaṁ nṛpa retasāmbhaḥ



pṛṣṭhe tv adharmaṁ kramaṇeṣu yajñam

chāyāsu mṛtyuṁ hasite ca māyāṁ

tanū-ruheṣv oṣadhi-jātayaś ca

nadīś ca nāḍīṣu śilā nakheṣu



buddhāv ajaṁ deva-gaṇān ṛṣīṁś ca

prāṇeṣu gātre sthira-jaṅgamāni

sarvāṇi bhūtāni dadarśa vīraḥ

SYNONYMS



hṛdi-within the heart; aṅga-my dear King Parīkṣit; dharmam-religion; stanayoḥ-on the bosom; murāreḥ-of Murāri, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛtam-very pleasing words; ca-also; satyam-truthfulness; ca-also; manasi-in the mind; atha-thereafter; indum-the moon; śriyam-the goddess of fortune; ca-also; vakṣasi-on the chest; aravinda-hastām-who always carries a lotus flower in her hand; kaṇṭhe-on the neck; ca-also; sāmāni-all the Vedas (Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva); samasta-rephān-all sound vibrations; indra-pradhānān-headed by King Indra; amarān-all the demigods; bhujeṣu-on the arms; tat-karṇayoḥ-on the ears; kakubhaḥ-all the directions; dyauḥ ca-the luminaries; mūrdhni-on the top of the head; keśeṣu-within the hair; meghān-the clouds; śvasanam-breathing air; nāsikāyām-on the nostrils; akṣṇoḥ ca-in the eyes; sūryam-the sun; vadane-in the mouth; ca-also; vahnim-fire; vāṇyām-in His speech; ca-also; chandāṁsi-the Vedic hymns; rase-in the tongue; jala-īśam-the demigod of the water; bhruvoḥ-on the eyebrows; niṣedham-warnings; ca-also; vidhim-regulative principles; ca-also; pakṣmasu-in the eyelids; ahaḥ ca-daytime; rātrim-night; ca-also; parasya-of the supreme; puṁsaḥ-of the person; manyum-anger; lalāṭe-on the forehead; adhare-on the lips; eva-indeed; lobham-greed; sparśe-in His touch; ca-also; kāmam-lusty desires; nṛpa-O King; retasā-by semen; ambhaḥ-water; pṛṣṭhe-on the back; tu-but; adharmam-irreligion; kramaṇeṣu-in the wonderful activities; yajñam-fire sacrifice; chāyāsu-in the shadows; mṛtyum-death; hasite-in His smiling; ca-also; māyām-the illusory energy; tanū-ruheṣu-in the hair on the body; oṣadhi-jātayaḥ-all species of drugs, herbs and plants; ca-and; nadīḥ-the rivers; ca-also; nāḍīṣu-in the veins; śilāḥ-stones; nakheṣu-in the nails; buddhau-in the intelligence; ajam-Lord Brahmā; deva-gaṇān-the demigods; ṛṣīn ca-and the great sages; prāṇeṣu-in the senses; gātre-in the body; sthira-jaṅgamāni-moving and stationary; sarvāṇi-all of them; bhūtāni-living entities; dadarśa-saw; vīraḥ-Bali Mahārāja.





My dear King, on the heart of Lord Murāri he saw religion; on the chest, both pleasing words and truthfulness; in the mind, the moon; on the bosom, the goddess of fortune, with a lotus flower in her hand; on the neck, all the Vedas and all sound vibrations; on the arms, all the demigods, headed by King Indra; in both ears, all the directions; on the head, the upper planetary systems; on the hair, the clouds; in the nostrils, the wind; on the eyes, the sun; and in the mouth, fire. From His words came all the Vedic mantras, on His tongue was the demigod of water, Varuṇadeva, on His eyebrows were the regulative principles, and on His eyelids were day and night. [When His eyes were open it was daytime, and when they were closed it was night.] On His forehead was anger, and on His lips was greed. O King, in His touch were lusty desires, in His semen were all the waters, on His back was irreligion, and in His wonderful activities or steps was the fire of sacrifice. On His shadow was death, in His smile was the illusory energy, and on the hairs of His body were all the drugs and herbs. In His veins were all the rivers, on His nails were all the stones, in His intelligence were Lord Brahmā, the demigods and the great saintly persons, and throughout His entire body and senses were all living entities, moving and stationary. Bali Mahārāja thus saw everything in the gigantic body of the Lord.





TEXT 30



sarvātmanīdaṁ bhuvanaṁ nirīkṣya

sarve 'surāḥ kaśmalam āpur aṅga

sudarśanaṁ cakram asahya-tejo

dhanuś ca śārṅgaṁ stanayitnu-ghoṣam

SYNONYMS



sarva-ātmani-in the supreme whole, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; idam-this universe; bhuvanam-the three worlds; nirīkṣya-by observing; sarve-all; asurāḥ-the demons, the associates of Bali Mahārāja; kaśmalam-lamentation; āpuḥ-received; aṅga-O King; sudarśanam-named Sudarśana; cakram-the disc; asahya-unbearable; tejaḥ-the heat of which; dhanuḥ ca-and the bow; śārṅgam-named Śārṅga; stanayitnu-the resounding of assembled clouds; ghoṣam-sounding like.





O King, when all the demons, the followers of Mahārāja Bali, saw the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who held everything within His body, when they saw in the Lord's hand His disc, known as the Sudarśana cakra, which generates intolerable heat, and when they heard the tumultuous sound of His bow, all of these caused lamentation within their hearts.





TEXT 31



parjanya-ghoṣo jalajaḥ pāñcajanyaḥ

kaumodakī viṣṇu-gadā tarasvinī

vidyādharo 'siḥ śata-candra-yuktas

tūṇottamāv akṣayasāyakau ca

SYNONYMS



parjanya-ghoṣaḥ-having a sound vibration like that of the clouds; jalajaḥ-the Lord's conchshell; pāñcajanyaḥ-which is known as Pāñcajanya; kaumodakī-known by the name Kaumodakī; viṣṇu-gadā-the club of Lord Viṣṇu; tarasvinī-with great force; vidyādharaḥ-named Vidyādhara; asiḥ-the sword; śata-candra-yuktaḥ-with a shield decorated with hundreds of moons; tūṇa-uttamau-the best of quivers; akṣayasāyakau-named Akṣayasāyaka; ca-also.





The Lord's conchshell, named Pāñcajanya, which made sounds like that of a cloud; the very forceful club named Kaumodakī; the sword named Vidyādhara, with a shield decorated with hundreds of moonlike spots; and also Akṣayasāyaka, the best of quivers-all of these appeared together to offer prayers to the Lord.





TEXTS 32–33



sunanda-mukhyā upatasthur īśaṁ

pārṣada-mukhyāḥ saha-loka-pālāḥ

sphurat-kirīṭāṅgada-mīna-kuṇḍalaḥ

śrīvatsa-ratnottama-mekhalāmbaraiḥ

madhuvrata-srag-vanamālayāvṛto



rarāja rājan bhagavān urukramaḥ

kṣitiṁ padaikena baler vicakrame

nabhaḥ śarīreṇa diśaś ca bāhubhiḥ

SYNONYMS



sunanda-mukhyāḥ-the associates of the Lord headed by Sunanda; upatasthuḥ-began to offer prayers; īśam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pārṣada-mukhyāḥ-other chiefs of the associates; saha-loka-pālāḥ-with the predominant deities of all the planets; sphurat-kirīṭa-with a brilliant helmet; aṅgada-bracelets; mīna-kuṇḍalaḥ-and earrings in the shape of fish; śrīvatsa-the hair named Śrīvatsa on His bosom; ratna-uttama-the best of jewels (Kaustubha); mekhalā-belt; ambaraiḥ-with yellow garments; madhu-vrata-of bees; srak-in which there was a garland; vanamālayā-by a flower garland; āvṛtaḥ-covered; rarāja-predominantly manifested; rājan-O King; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; urukramaḥ-who is prominent by His wonderful activities; kṣitim-the whole surface of the world; padā ekena-by one footstep; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; vicakrame-covered; nabhaḥ-the sky; śarīreṇa-by His body; diśaḥ ca-and all directions; bāhubhiḥ-by His arms.





These associates, headed by Sunanda and other chief associates and accompanied by all the predominating deities of the various planets, offered prayers to the Lord, who wore a brilliant helmet, bracelets, and glittering earrings that resembled fish. On the Lord's bosom were the lock of hair called Śrīvatsa and the transcendental jewel named Kaustubha. He wore a yellow garment, covered by a belt, and He was decorated by a flower garland, surrounded by bees. Manifesting Himself in this way, O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities are wonderful, covered the entire surface of the earth with one footstep, the sky with His body, and all directions with His arms.





One might argue, "Since Bali Mahārāja promised Vāmanadeva only the land occupied by His steps, why did Lord Vāmanadeva occupy the sky also?" In this regard, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that the steps include everything, downward and upward. When one stands up, he certainly occupies certain parts of the sky and certain portions of the earth below his feet. Thus there was nothing uncommon for the Supreme Personality of Godhead when He occupied the entire sky with His body.





TEXT 34



padaṁ dvitīyaṁ kramatas triviṣṭapaṁ

na vai tṛtīyāya tadīyam aṇv api

urukramasyāṅghrir upary upary atho

mahar-janābhyāṁ tapasaḥ paraṁ gataḥ

SYNONYMS



padam-step; dvitīyam-second; kramataḥ-advancing; tri-viṣṭapam-all of the heavenly planets; na-not; vai-indeed; tṛtīyāya-for the third step; tadīyam-of the Lord; aṇu api-only a spot of land remained; urukramasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who performs uncommon activities; aṅghriḥ-steps occupying above and below; upari upari-higher and higher; atho-now; mahaḥ-janābhyām-than Maharloka and Janaloka; tapasaḥ-that Tapoloka; param-beyond that; gataḥ-approached.





As the Lord took His second step, He covered the heavenly planets. And not even a spot remained for the third step, for the Lord's foot extended higher and higher, beyond Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and even Satyaloka.





When the Lord's footstep exceeded the height of all the lokas, including Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, His nails certainly pierced the covering of the universe. The universe is covered by the five material elements (bhūmir āpo 'nalo vāyuḥ kham). As stated in the śāstra, these elements are in layers, each ten times thicker than the previous one. Nonetheless, the nails of the Lord pierced through all these layers and made a hole penetrating into the spiritual world. From this hole, the water of the Ganges infiltrated into this material world, and therefore it is said, pada-nakha-nīra janita jana-pāvana (Daśāvatāra-stotra 5). Because the Lord kicked a hole in the covering of the universe, the water of the Ganges came into this material world to deliver all the fallen souls.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Bali Mahārāja Surrenders the Universe."



Chapter Twenty-one



Bali Mahārāja Arrested by the Lord





This chapter describes how Lord Viṣṇu, desiring to advertise the glories of Bali Mahārāja, arrested him for not fulfilling his promise in regard to the Lord's third step.





With the second step the Supreme Personality of Godhead reached the topmost planet of the universe, Brahmaloka, which He diminished in beauty by the effulgence of His toenails. Thus Lord Brahmā, accompanied by great sages like Marīci and the predominating deities of all the higher planets, offered humble prayers and worship to the Lord. They washed the Lord's feet and worshiped Him with all paraphernalia. Ṛkṣarāja, Jāmbavān, played his bugle to vibrate the glories of the Lord. When Bali Mahārāja was deprived of all his possessions, the demons were very angry. Although Bali Mahārāja warned them not to do so, they took up weapons against Lord Viṣṇu. All of them were defeated, however, by Lord Viṣṇu's eternal associates, and, in accordance with Bali Mahārāja's order, they all entered the lower planets of the universe. Understanding Lord Viṣṇu's purpose, Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, immediately arrested Bali Mahārāja with the ropes of Varuṇa. When Bali Mahārāja was thus reduced to a helpless position, Lord Viṣṇu asked him for the third step of land. Because Lord Viṣṇu appreciated Bali Mahārāja's determination and integrity, when Bali Mahārāja was unable to fulfill his promise, Lord Viṣṇu ascertained that the place for him would be the planet Sutala, which is better than the planets of heaven.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

satyaṁ samīkṣyābja-bhavo nakhendubhir

hata-svadhāma-dyutir āvṛto 'bhyagāt

marīci-miśrā ṛṣayo bṛhad-vratāḥ

sanandanādyā nara-deva yoginaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; satyam-the planet Satyaloka; samīkṣya-by observing; abja-bhavaḥ-Lord Brahmā, who appeared on the lotus flower; nakha-indubhiḥ-by the effulgence of the nails; hata-having been reduced; sva-dhāma-dyutiḥ-the illumination of his own residence; āvṛtaḥ-being covered; abhyagāt-came; marīci-miśrāḥ-with sages like Marīci; ṛṣayaḥ-great saintly persons; bṛhat-vratāḥ-all of them absolutely brahmacārī; sanandana-ādyāḥ-like Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumāra; nara-deva-O King; yoginaḥ-greatly powerful mystics.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When Lord Brahmā, who was born of a lotus flower, saw that the effulgence of his residence, Brahmaloka, had been reduced by the glaring effulgence from the toenails of Lord Vāmanadeva, he approached the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Brahmā was accompanied by all the great sages, headed by Marīci, and by yogīs like Sanandana, but in the presence of that glaring effulgence, O King, even Lord Brahmā and his associates seemed insignificant.





TEXTS 2–3



vedopavedā niyamā yamānvitās

tarketihāsāṅga-purāṇa-saṁhitāḥ

ye cāpare yoga-samīra-dīpita-

jñānāgninā randhita-karma-kalmaṣāḥ

vavandire yat-smaraṇānubhāvataḥ



svāyambhuvaṁ dhāma gatā akarmakam

athāṅghraye pronnamitāya viṣṇor

upāharat padma-bhavo 'rhaṇodakam

samarcya bhaktyābhyagṛṇāc chuci-śravā

yan-nābhi-paṅkeruha-sambhavaḥ svayam

SYNONYMS



veda-the four Vedas (Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva), the original knowledge given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upavedāḥ-the complementary and supplementary Vedic knowledge, like Āyur-veda and Dhanur-veda; niyamāḥ-regulative principles; yama-controlling processes; anvitāḥ-fully expert in such matters; tarka-logic; itihāsa-history; aṅga-Vedic education; purāṇa-old history recorded in the stories of the purāṇas; saṁhitāḥ-Vedic complementary studies like the Brahma-saṁhitā; ye-others; ca-also; apare-other than Lord Brahmā and his associates; yoga-samīra-dīpita-ignited by the air of mystic yoga practice; jñāna-agninā-by the fire of knowledge; randhita-karma-kalmaṣāḥ-those for whom all pollution of fruitive activities has been stopped; vavandire-offered their prayers; yat-smaraṇa-anubhāvataḥ-simply by meditating on whom; svāyambhuvam-of Lord Brahmā; dhāma-the residence; gatāḥ-had achieved; akarmakam-which cannot be achieved by fruitive activities; atha-thereupon; aṅghraye-unto the lotus feet; pronnamitāya-offered obeisances; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; upāharat-offered worship; padma-bhavaḥ-Lord Brahmā, who appeared from the lotus flower; arhaṇa-udakam-oblation by water; samarcya-worshiping; bhaktyā-in devotional service; abhyagṛṇāt-pleased him; śuci-śravāḥ-the most celebrated Vedic authority; yat-nābhi-paṅkeruha-sambhavaḥ svayam-Lord Brahmā, who personally appeared from the lotus in the navel of whom (the Personality of Godhead).





Among the great personalities who came to worship the lotus feet of the Lord were those who had attained perfection in self-control and regulative principles, as well as experts in logic, history, general education and the Vedic literature known as kalpe [dealing with old historical incidents]. Others were experts in the Vedic corollaries like Brahma-saṁhitā, all the other knowledge of the Vedas [Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva], and also the supplementary Vedic knowledge [Āyur-veda, Dhanur-veda, etc.]. Others were those who had been freed of the reactions to fruitive activities by transcendental knowledge awakened by practice of yoga. And still others were those who had attained residence in Brahmaloka not by ordinary karma but by advanced Vedic knowledge. After devotedly worshiping the upraised lotus feet of the Supreme Lord with oblations of water, Lord Brahmā, who was born of the lotus emanating from Lord Viṣṇu's navel, offered prayers to the Lord.





TEXT 4



dhātuḥ kamaṇḍalu-jalaṁ tad urukramasya

pādāvanejana-pavitratayā narendra

svardhuny abhūn nabhasi sā patatī nimārṣṭi

loka-trayaṁ bhagavato viśadeva kīrtiḥ

SYNONYMS



dhātuḥ-of Lord Brahmā; kamaṇḍalu-jalam-water from the kamaṇḍalu; tat-that; urukramasya-of Lord Viṣṇu; pāda-avanejana-pavitratayā-because of washing the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu and thus being transcendentally pure; nara-indra-O King; svardhunī-the river named Svardhunī of the celestial world; abhūt-so became; nabhasi-in outer space; sā-that water; patatī-flowing down; nimārṣṭi-purifying; loka-trayam-the three worlds; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viśadā-so purified; iva-just like; kīrtiḥ-the fame or the glorious activities.





O King, the water from Lord Brahmā's kamaṇḍalu washed the lotus feet of Lord Vāmanadeva, who is known as Urukrama, the wonderful actor. Thus that water became so pure that it was transformed into the water of the Ganges, which went flowing down from the sky, purifying the three worlds like the pure fame of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Here we understand that the Ganges began when the water from Lord Brahmā's kamaṇḍalu washed the lotus feet of Lord Vāmanadeva. But in the Fifth Canto it is stated that the Ganges began when Vāmanadeva's left foot pierced the covering of the universe so that the transcendental water of the Causal Ocean leaked through. And elsewhere it is also stated that Lord Nārāyaṇa appeared as the water of the Ganges. The water of the Ganges, therefore, is a combination of three transcendental waters, and thus the Ganges is able to purify the three worlds. This is the description given by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.





TEXT 5



brahmādayo loka-nāthāḥ

sva-nāthāya samādṛtāḥ

sānugā balim ājahruḥ

saṅkṣiptātma-vibhūtaye

SYNONYMS



brahma-ādayaḥ-great personalities, headed by Lord Brahmā; loka-nāthāḥ-the predominating deities of various planets; sva-nāthāya-unto their supreme master; samādṛtāḥ-with great respect; sa-anugāḥ-with their respective followers; balim-different paraphernalia of worship; ājahruḥ-collected; saṅkṣipta-ātma-vibhūtaye-unto the Lord, who had expanded His personal opulence but had now reduced His size to the Vāmana form.





Lord Brahmā and all the predominating deities of the various planetary systems began to worship Lord Vāmanadeva, their supreme master, who had reduced Himself from His all-pervading form to His original form. They collected all the ingredients and paraphernalia for this worship.





Vāmanadeva first expanded Himself to the universal form and then reduced Himself to the original Vāmana-rūpa. Thus He acted exactly like Lord Kṛṣṇa, who, at the request of Arjuna, first showed His universal form and later resumed His original form as Kṛṣṇa. The Lord can assume any form He likes, but His original form is that of Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam). According to the capacity of the devotee, the Lord assumes various forms so that the devotee can handle Him. This is His causeless mercy. When Lord Vāmanadeva resumed His original form, Lord Brahmā and his associates collected various paraphernalia for worship with which to please Him.





TEXTS 6–7



toyaiḥ samarhaṇaiḥ sragbhir

divya-gandhānulepanaiḥ

dhūpair dīpaiḥ surabhibhir

lājākṣata-phalāṅkuraiḥ

stavanair jaya-śabdaiś ca



tad-vīrya-mahimāṅkitaiḥ

nṛtya-vāditra-gītaiś ca

śaṅkha-dundubhi-niḥsvanaiḥ

SYNONYMS



toyaiḥ-by water required for washing the lotus feet and bathing; samarhaṇaiḥ-by pādya, arghya and other such items for worshiping the Lord; sragbhiḥ-by flower garlands; divya-gandha-anulepanaiḥ-by many kinds of pulp, like sandalwood and aguru, to smear upon the body of Lord Vāmanadeva; dhūpaiḥ-by incense; dīpaiḥ-by lamps; surabhibhiḥ-all of them extremely fragrant; lāja-by fried paddies; akṣata-by unbroken grains; phala-by fruits; aṅkuraiḥ-by roots and sprouts; stavanaiḥ-by offering prayers; jaya-śabdaiḥ-by saying "jaya, jaya"; ca-also; tat-vīrya-mahimā-aṅkitaiḥ-which indicated the glorious activities of the Lord; nṛtya-vāditra-gītaiḥ ca-by dancing, playing various musical instruments, and singing songs; śaṅkha-of vibrating conchshells; dundubhi-of the beating on kettledrums; niḥsvanaiḥ-by the sound vibrations.





They worshiped the Lord by offering fragrant flowers, water, pādya and arghya, sandalwood pulp and aguru pulp, incense, lamps, fused rice, unbroken grains, fruits, roots and sprouts. While so doing, they offered prayers indicating the glorious activities of the Lord and shouted "Jaya! Jaya!" They also danced, played instruments, sang, sounded conchshells and beat kettledrums, in this way worshiping the Lord.





TEXT 8



jāmbavān ṛkṣa-rājas tu

bherī-śabdair mano-javaḥ

vijayaṁ dikṣu sarvāsu

mahotsavam aghoṣayat

SYNONYMS



jāmbavān-who was named Jāmbavān; ṛkṣa-rājaḥ tu-the king in the form of a bear also; bherī-śabdaiḥ-by sounding the bugle; manaḥ-javaḥ-in mental ecstasy; vijayam-victory; dikṣu-in all directions; sarvāsu-everywhere; mahā-utsavam-festival; aghoṣayat-declared.





Jāmbavān, king of the bears, also joined in the ceremony. Sounding his bugle in all directions, he declared a great festival for Lord Vāmanadeva's victory.





TEXT 9



mahīṁ sarvāṁ hṛtāṁ dṛṣṭvā

tripada-vyāja-yācñayā

ūcuḥ sva-bhartur asurā

dīkṣitasyātyamarṣitāḥ

SYNONYMS



mahīm-land; sarvām-all; hṛtām-lost; dṛṣṭvā-after seeing; tri-pada-vyāja-yācñayā-by simply asking three steps of land; ūcuḥ-said; sva-bhartuḥ-of their master; asurāḥ-the demons; dīkṣitasya-of Bali Mahārāja, who was so determined in the sacrifice; ati-very much; amarṣitāḥ-for whom the function was unbearable.





When the demoniac followers of Mahārāja Bali saw that their master, who had been determined in performing sacrifice, had lost all his possessions to Vāmanadeva, who had taken them away on the plea of begging three paces of land, they were very angry and spoke as follows.





TEXT 10



na vāyaṁ brahma-bandhur

viṣṇur māyāvināṁ varaḥ

dvija-rūpa-praticchanno

deva-kāryaṁ cikīrṣati

SYNONYMS



na-not; vā-either; ayam-this; brahma-bandhuḥ-Vāmanadeva, in the form of a brāhmaṇa; viṣṇuḥ-He is Lord Viṣṇu Himself; māyāvinām-of all cheaters; varaḥ-the greatest; dvija-rūpa-by assuming the form of a brāhmaṇa; praticchannaḥ-is disguised for the purpose of cheating; deva-kāryam-the interest of the demigods; cikīrṣati-He is trying for.





"This Vāmana is certainly not a brāhmaṇa but the best of cheaters, Lord Viṣṇu. Assuming the form of a brāhmaṇa, He has covered His own form, and thus He is working for the interests of the demigods.





TEXT 11



anena yācamānena

śatruṇā vaṭu-rūpiṇā

sarvasvaṁ no hṛtaṁ bhartur

nyasta-daṇḍasya barhiṣi

SYNONYMS



anena-by Him; yācamānena-who is in the position of a beggar; śatruṇā-by the enemy; vaṭu-rūpiṇā-in the form of a brahmacārī; sarvasvam-everything; naḥ-our; hṛtam-has been taken away; bhartuḥ-of our master; nyasta-had been given up; daṇḍasya-of whom the power of giving punishment; barhiṣi-because of taking the vow of a ritualistic ceremony.





"Our lord, Bali Mahārāja, because of his position in performing the yajña, has given up the power to punish. Taking advantage of this, our eternal enemy, Viṣṇu, dressed in the form of a brahmacārī beggar, has taken away all his possessions.





TEXT 12



satya-vratasya satataṁ

dīkṣitasya viśeṣataḥ

nānṛtaṁ bhāṣituṁ śakyaṁ

brahmaṇyasya dayāvataḥ

SYNONYMS



satya-vratasya-of Mahārāja Bali, who is fixed in truthfulness; satatam-always; dīkṣitasya-of he who was initiated into performing yajña; viśeṣataḥ-specifically; na-not; anṛtam-untruth; bhāṣitum-to speak; śakyam-is able; brahmaṇyasya-to the brahminical culture, or to the brāhmaṇa; dayā-vataḥ-of he who is always kind.





"Our lord, Bali Mahārāja, is always fixed in truthfulness, and this is especially so at present, since he has been initiated into performing a sacrifice. He is always kind and merciful toward the brāhmaṇas, and he cannot at any time speak lies.





TEXT 13



tasmād asya vadho dharmo

bhartuḥ śuśrūṣaṇaṁ ca naḥ

ity āyudhāni jagṛhur

baler anucarāsurāḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; asya-of this brahmacārī Vāmana; vadhaḥ-the killing; dharmaḥ-is our duty; bhartuḥ-of our master; śuśrūṣaṇam ca-and it is the way of serving; naḥ-our; iti-thus; āyudhāni-all kinds of weapons; jagṛhuḥ-they took up; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; anucara-followers; asurāḥ-all the demons.





"Therefore it is our duty to kill this Vāmanadeva, Lord Viṣṇu. It is our religious principle and the way to serve our master." After making this decision, the demoniac followers of Mahārāja Bali took up their various weapons with a view to killing Vāmanadeva.





TEXT 14



te sarve vāmanaṁ hantuṁ

śūla-paṭṭiśa-pāṇayaḥ

anicchanto bale rājan

prādravañ jāta-manyavaḥ

SYNONYMS



te-the demons; sarve-all of them; vāmanam-Lord Vāmanadeva; hantum-to kill; śūla-tridents; paṭṭiśa-lances; pāṇayaḥ-all taking in hand; anicchantaḥ-against the will; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; rājan-O King; prādravan-they pushed forward; jāta-manyavaḥ-aggravated by usual anger.





O King, the demons, aggravated by their usual anger, took their lances and tridents in hand, and against the will of Bali Mahārāja they pushed forward to kill Lord Vāmanadeva.





TEXT 15



tān abhidravato dṛṣṭvā

ditijānīkapān nṛpa

prahasyānucarā viṣṇoḥ

pratyaṣedhann udāyudhāḥ

SYNONYMS



tān-them; abhidravataḥ-thus going forward; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; ditija-anīka-pān-the soldiers of the demons; nṛpa-O King; prahasya-smiling; anucarāḥ-the associates; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; pratyaṣedhan-forbade; udāyudhāḥ-taking up their weapons.





O King, when the associates of Lord Viṣṇu saw the soldiers of the demons coming forward in violence, they smiled. Taking up their weapons, they forbade the demons to continue their attempt.





TEXTS 16–17



nandaḥ sunando 'tha jayo

vijayaḥ prabalo balaḥ

kumudaḥ kumudākṣaś ca

viṣvaksenaḥ patattrirāṭ

jayantaḥ śrutadevaś ca



puṣpadanto 'tha sātvataḥ

sarve nāgāyuta-prāṇāś

camūṁ te jaghnur āsurīm

SYNONYMS



nandaḥ sunandaḥ-the associates of Lord Viṣṇu such as Nanda and Sunanda; atha-in this way; jayaḥ vijayaḥ prabalaḥ balaḥ kumudaḥ kumudākṣaḥ ca viṣvaksenaḥ-as well as Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumada, Kumudākṣa and Viṣvaksena; patattri-rāṭ-Garuḍa, the king of the birds; jayantaḥ śrutadevaḥ ca puṣpadantaḥ atha sātvataḥ-Jayanta, Śrutadeva, Puṣpadanta and Sātvata; sarve-all of them; nāga-ayuta-prāṇāḥ-as powerful as ten thousand elephants; camūm-the soldiers of the demons; te-they; jaghnuḥ-killed; āsurīm-demoniac.





Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumuda, Kumudākṣa, Viṣvaksena, Patattrirāṭ [Garuḍa], Jayanta, Śrutadeva, Puṣpadanta and Sātvata were all associates of Lord Viṣṇu. They were as powerful as ten thousand elephants, and now they began killing the soldiers of the demons.





TEXT 18



hanyamānān svakān dṛṣṭvā

puruṣānucarair baliḥ

vārayām āsa saṁrabdhān

kāvya-śāpam anusmaran

SYNONYMS



hanyamānān-being killed; svakān-his own soldiers; dṛṣṭvā-after seeing; puruṣa-anucaraiḥ-by the associates of the Supreme Person; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; vārayām āsa-forbade; saṁrabdhān-even though they were very angry; kāvya-śāpam-the curse given by Śukrācārya; anusmaran-remembering.





When Bali Mahārāja saw that his own soldiers were being killed by the associates of Lord Viṣṇu, he remembered the curse of Śukrācārya and forbade his soldiers to continue fighting.





TEXT 19



he vipracitte he rāho

he neme śrūyatāṁ vacaḥ

mā yudhyata nivartadhvaṁ

na naḥ kālo 'yam artha-kṛt

SYNONYMS



he vipracitte-O Vipracitti; he rāho-O Rāhu; he neme-O Nemi; śrūyatām-kindly hear; vacaḥ-my words; mā-do not; yudhyata-fight; nivartadhvam-stop this fighting; na-not; naḥ-our; kālaḥ-favorable time; ayam-this; artha-kṛt-which can give us success.





O Vipracitti, O Rāhu, O Nemi, please hear my words! Don't fight. Stop immediately, for the present time is not in our favor.





TEXT 20



yaḥ prabhuḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

sukha-duḥkhopapattaye

taṁ nātivartituṁ daityāḥ

pauruṣair īśvaraḥ pumān

SYNONYMS



yaḥ prabhuḥ-that Supreme Person, the master; sarva-bhūtānām-of all living entities; sukha-duḥkha-upapattaye-for administering happiness and distress; tam-Him; na-not; ativartitum-to overcome; daityāḥ-O demons; pauruṣaiḥ-by human endeavors; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller; pumān-a person.





O Daityas, by human efforts no one can supersede the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can bring happiness and distress to all living entities.





TEXT 21



yo no bhavāya prāg āsīd

abhavāya divaukasām

sa eva bhagavān adya

vartate tad-viparyayam

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-the time factor, which represents the Supreme Personality of Godhead; naḥ-of us; bhavāya-for the improvement; prāk-formerly; āsīt-was situated; abhavāya-for the defeat; diva-okasām-of the demigods; saḥ-that time factor; eva-indeed; bhagavān-the representative of the Supreme Person; adya-today; vartate-is existing; tat-viparyayam-just the opposite of our favor.





The supreme time factor, which represents the Supreme Person, was previously in our favor and not in favor of the demigods, but now that same time factor is against us.





TEXT 22



balena sacivair buddhyā

durgair mantrauṣadhādibhiḥ

sāmādibhir upāyaiś ca

kālaṁ nātyeti vai janaḥ

SYNONYMS



balena-by material power; sacivaiḥ-by the counsel of ministers; buddhyā-by intelligence; durgaiḥ-by fortresses; mantra-auṣadha-ādibhiḥ-by mystic chanting or the influence of drugs and herbs; sāma-ādibhiḥ-by diplomacy and other such means; upāyaiḥ ca-by similar other attempts; kālam-the time factor, representing the Supreme Lord; na-never; atyeti-can overcome; vai-indeed; janaḥ-any person.





No one can surpass the time representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by material power, by the counsel of ministers, by intelligence, by diplomacy, by fortresses, by mystic mantras, by drugs, by herbs or by any other means.





TEXT 23



bhavadbhir nirjitā hy ete

bahuśo 'nucarā hareḥ

daivenarddhais ta evādya

yudhi jitvā nadanti naḥ

SYNONYMS



bhavadbhiḥ-by all of you demons; nirjitāḥ-have been defeated; hi-indeed; ete-all these soldiers of the demigods; bahuśaḥ-in great number; anucarāḥ-followers; hareḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; daivena-by providence; ṛddhaiḥ-whose opulence was increased; te-they (the demigods); eva-indeed; adya-today; yudhi-in the fight; jitvā-defeating; nadanti-are vibrating in jubilation; naḥ-us.





Previously, being empowered by providence, you defeated a great number of such followers of Lord Viṣṇu. But today those same followers, having defeated us, are roaring in jubilation like lions.





Bhagavad-gītā mentions five causes of defeat or victory. Of these five, daiva (providence) is the most powerful (na ca daivāt paraṁ balam). Bali Mahārāja knew the secret of how he had formerly been victorious because providence was in his favor. Now, since that same providence was not in his favor, there was no possibility of his victory. Thus he very intelligently forbade his associates to fight.





TEXT 24



etān vayaṁ vijeṣyāmo

yadi daivaṁ prasīdati

tasmāt kālaṁ pratīkṣadhvaṁ

yo no 'rthatvāya kalpate

SYNONYMS



etān-all these soldiers of the demigods; vayam-we; vijeṣyāmaḥ-shall gain victory over them; yadi-if; daivam-providence; prasīdati-is in favor; tasmāt-therefore; kālam-that favorable time; pratīkṣadhvam-wait until; yaḥ-which; naḥ-our; arthatvāya kalpate-should be considered in our favor.





Unless providence is in our favor, we shall not be able to gain victory. Therefore we must wait for that favorable time when our defeating them will be possible.





TEXT 25



śrī-śuka uvāca

patyur nigaditaṁ śrutvā

daitya-dānava-yūthapāḥ

rasāṁ nirviviśū rājan

viṣṇu-pārṣada tāḍitāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; patyuḥ-of their master (Bali Mahārāja); nigaditam-what had been thus described; śrutvā-after hearing; daitya-dānava-yūtha-pāḥ-the leaders of the Daityas and demons; rasām-the lower regions of the universe; nirviviśūḥ-entered; rājan-O King; viṣṇu-pārṣada-by the associates of Lord Viṣṇu; tāḍitāḥ-driven.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, in accordance with the order of their master, Bali Mahārāja, all the chiefs of the demons and the Daityas entered the lower regions of the universe, to which they were driven by the soldiers of Viṣṇu.





TEXT 26



atha tārkṣya-suto jñātvā

virāṭ prabhu-cikīrṣitam

babandha vāruṇaiḥ pāśair

baliṁ sūtye 'hani kratau

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; tārkṣya-sutaḥ-Garuḍa; jñātvā-knowing; virāṭ-the king of birds; prabhu-cikīrṣitam-the desire of Lord Viṣṇu as Vāmanadeva; babandha-arrested; vāruṇaiḥ-belonging to Varuṇa; pāśaiḥ-by the ropes; balim-Bali; sūtye-when soma-rasa is taken; ahani-on the day; kratau-at the time of sacrifice.





Thereafter, on the day of soma-pāna, after the sacrifice was finished, Garuḍa, king of the birds, understanding the desire of his master, arrested Bali Mahārāja with the ropes of Varuṇa.





Garuḍa, the constant companion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, knows the confidential part of the Lord's desire. Bali Mahārāja's tolerance and devotion were undoubtedly superexcellent. Garuḍa arrested Bali Mahārāja to show the entire universe the greatness of the King's tolerance.





TEXT 27



hāhākāro mahān āsīd

rodasyoḥ sarvato diśam

nigṛhyamāṇe 'sura-patau

viṣṇunā prabhaviṣṇunā

SYNONYMS



hāhā-kāraḥ-a tumultuous roar of lamentation; mahān-great; āsīt-there was; rodasyoḥ-in both the lower and upper planetary systems; sarvataḥ-everywhere; diśam-all directions; nigṛhyamāṇe-because of being suppressed; asura-patau-when Bali Mahārāja, the King of the demons; viṣṇunā-by Lord Viṣṇu; prabhaviṣṇunā-who is the most powerful everywhere.





When Bali Mahārāja was thus arrested by Lord Viṣṇu, who is the most powerful, there was a great roar of lamentation in all directions throughout the upper and lower planetary systems of the universe.





TEXT 28



taṁ baddhaṁ vāruṇaiḥ pāśair

bhagavān āha vāmanaḥ

naṣṭa-śriyaṁ sthira-prajñam

udāra-yaśasaṁ nṛpa

SYNONYMS



tam-unto him; baddham-who was so arrested; vāruṇaiḥ pāśaiḥ-by the ropes of Varuṇa; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āha-said; vāmanaḥ-Vāmanadeva; naṣṭa-śriyam-unto Bali Mahārāja, who had lost his bodily luster; sthira-prajñam-but was all the same determined in his decision; udāra-yaśasam-the most magnanimous and celebrated; nṛpa-O King.





O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāmanadeva, then spoke to Bali Mahārāja, the most liberal and celebrated personality whom He had arrested with the ropes of Varuṇa. Bali Mahārāja had lost all bodily luster, but he was nonetheless fixed in his determination.





When one is bereft of all his possessions, he is certainly reduced in bodily luster. But although Bali Mahārāja had lost everything, he was fixed in his determination to satisfy Vāmanadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gītā, such a person is called sthita-prajña. A pure devotee is never deviated from the service of the Lord, despite all difficulties and impediments offered by the illusory energy. Generally men who have wealth and opulence are famous, but Bali Mahārāja became famous for all time by being deprived of all his possessions. This is the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead toward His devotees. The Lord says, yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ. As the first installment of His special favor, the Lord takes away all the possessions of His devotee. A devotee, however, is never disturbed by such a loss. He continues his service, and the Lord amply rewards him, beyond the expectations of any common man.





TEXT 29



padāni trīṇi dattāni

bhūmer mahyaṁ tvayāsura

dvābhyāṁ krāntā mahī sarvā

tṛtīyam upakalpaya

SYNONYMS



padāni-footsteps; trīṇi-three; dattāni-have been given; bhūmeḥ-of land; mahyam-unto Me; tvayā-by you; asura-O King of the demons; dvābhyām-by two steps; krāntā-have been occupied; mahī-all the land; sarvā-completely; tṛtīyam-for the third step; upakalpaya-now find the means.





O King of the demons, you have promised to give Me three steps of land, but I have occupied the entire universe with two steps. Now think about where I should put My third.





TEXT 30



yāvat tapaty asau gobhir

yāvad induḥ sahoḍubhiḥ

yāvad varṣati parjanyas

tāvatī bhūr iyaṁ tava

SYNONYMS



yāvat-as far as; tapati-is shining; asau-the sun; gobhiḥ-by the sunshine; yāvat-as long or as far as; induḥ-the moon; saha-uḍubhiḥ-with the luminaries or stars; yāvat-as far as; varṣati-are pouring rain; parjanyaḥ-the clouds; tāvatī-to that much distance; bhūḥ-land; iyam-this; tava-in your possession.





As far as the sun and moon shine with the stars and as far as the clouds pour rain, all the land throughout the universe is in your possession.





TEXT 31



padaikena mayākrānto

bhūrlokaḥ khaṁ diśas tanoḥ

svarlokas te dvitīyena

paśyatas te svam ātmanā

SYNONYMS



padā ekena-by one step only; mayā-by Me; ākrāntaḥ-have been covered; bhūrlokaḥ-the entire planetary system known as Bhūrloka; kham-the sky; diśaḥ-and all directions; tanoḥ-by My body; svarlokaḥ-the upper planetary system; te-in your possession; dvitīyena-by the second step; paśyataḥ te-while you were seeing; svam-your own; ātmanā-by Myself.





Of these possessions, with one step I have occupied Bhūrloka, and with My body I have occupied the entire sky and all directions. And in your presence, with My second step, I have occupied the upper planetary system.





According to the Vedic description of the planetary system, all the planets move from east to west. The sun, the moon and five other planets, such as Mars and Jupiter, orbit one above another. Vāmanadeva, however, expanding His body and extending His steps, occupied the entire planetary system.





TEXT 32



pratiśrutam adātus te

niraye vāsa iṣyate

viśa tvaṁ nirayaṁ tasmād

guruṇā cānumoditaḥ

SYNONYMS



pratiśrutam-what had been promised; adātuḥ-who could not give; te-of you; niraye-in hell; vāsaḥ-residence; iṣyate-prescribed; viśa-now enter; tvam-yourself; nirayam-the hellish planet; tasmāt-therefore; guruṇā-by your spiritual master; ca-also; anumoditaḥ-approved.





Because you have been unable to give charity according to your promise, the rule is that you should go down to live in the hellish planets. Therefore, in accordance with the order of Śukrācārya, your spiritual master, now go down and live there.





It is said:



nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve

na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narakeṣv

api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ





"Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees are interested only in the service of the Lord." (Bhāg. 6.12.28) A devotee engaged in the service of Nārāyaṇa is always in equilibrium. A devotee actually lives transcendentally. Although he may appear to have gone to hell or heaven, he does not live in either place; rather, he always lives in Vaikuṇṭha (sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). Vāmanadeva asked Bali Mahārāja to go to the hellish planets, apparently just to show the entire universe how tolerant he was, and Bali Mahārāja did not hesitate to carry out the order. A devotee does not live alone. Of course, everyone lives with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but because the devotee is engaged in His service, he actually does not live in any material condition. Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, kīṭa janma hao yathā tuyā dāsa. Thus he prays to take birth as an insignificant insect in the association of devotees. Because devotees are engaged in the service of the Lord, anyone who lives with them also lives in Vaikuṇṭha.





TEXT 33



vṛthā manorathas tasya

dūraḥ svargaḥ pataty adhaḥ

pratiśrutasyādānena

yo 'rthinaṁ vipralambhate

SYNONYMS



vṛthā-without any good result; manorathaḥ-mental concoction; tasya-of him; dūraḥ-far away; svargaḥ-elevation to the higher planetary system; patati-falls down; adhaḥ-to a hellish condition of life; pratiśrutasya-things promised; adānena-being unable to give; yaḥ-anyone who; arthinam-a beggar; vipralambhate-cheats.





Far from being elevated to the heavenly planets or fulfilling one's desire, one who does not properly give a beggar what he has promised falls down to a hellish condition of life.





TEXT 34



vipralabdho dadāmīti

tvayāhaṁ cāḍhya-māninā

tad vyalīka-phalaṁ bhuṅkṣva

nirayaṁ katicit samāḥ

SYNONYMS



vipralabdhaḥ-now I am cheated; dadāmi-I promise I shall give you; iti-thus; tvayā-by you; aham-I am; ca-also; āḍhya-māninā-by being very proud of your opulence; tat-therefore; vyalīka-phalam-as a result of cheating; bhuṅkṣva-you enjoy; nirayam-in hellish life; katicit-a few; samāḥ-years.





Being falsely proud of your possessions, you promised to give Me land, but you could not fulfill your promise. Therefore, because your promise was false, you must live for a few years in hellish life.





The false prestige of thinking "I am very rich, and I possess such vast property" is another side of material life. Everything belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and no one else possesses anything. This is the real fact. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ samaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat. Bali Mahārāja was undoubtedly the most exalted devotee, whereas previously he had maintained a misunderstanding due to false prestige. By the supreme will of the Lord, he now had to go to the hellish planets, but because he went there by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he lived there more opulently than one could expect to live in the planets of heaven. A devotee always lives with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, engaging in His service, and therefore he is always transcendental to hellish or heavenly residences.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Bali Mahārāja Arrested by the Lord"



Chapter Twenty-two



Bali Mahārāja Surrenders His Life





The summary of this Twenty-second Chapter is as follows. The Supreme Personality of Godhead was pleased by the behavior of Bali Mahārāja. Thus the Lord placed him on the planet Sutala, and there, after bestowing benedictions upon him, the Lord agreed to become his doorman.





Bali Mahārāja was extremely truthful. Being unable to keep his promise, he was very much afraid, for he knew that one who has deviated from truthfulness is insignificant in the eyes of society. An exalted person can suffer the consequences of hellish life, but he is very much afraid of being defamed for deviation from the truth. Bali Mahārāja agreed with great pleasure to accept the punishment awarded him by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bali Mahārāja's dynasty there were many asuras who because of their enmity toward Viṣṇu had achieved a destination more exalted than that of many mystic yogīs. Bali Mahārāja specifically remembered the determination of Prahlāda Mahārāja in devotional service. Considering all these points, he decided to give his head in charity as the place for Viṣṇu's third step. Bali Mahārāja also considered how great personalities give up their family relationships and material possessions to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Indeed, they sometimes even sacrifice their lives for the satisfaction of the Lord, just to become His personal servants. Accordingly, by following in the footsteps of previous ācāryas and devotees, Bali Mahārāja perceived himself successful.





While Bali Mahārāja, having been arrested by the ropes of Varuṇa, was offering prayers to the Lord, his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja appeared there and described how the Supreme Personality of Godhead had delivered Bali Mahārāja by taking his possessions in a tricky way. While Prahlāda Mahārāja was present, Lord Brahmā and Bali's wife, Vindhyāvali, described the supremacy of the Supreme Lord. Since Bali Mahārāja had given everything to the Lord, they prayed for his release. The Lord then described how a nondevotee's possession of wealth is a danger whereas a devotee's opulence is a benediction from the Lord. Then, being pleased with Bali Mahārāja, the Supreme Lord offered His disc to protect Bali Mahārāja and promised to remain with him.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ viprakṛto rājan

balir bhagavatāsuraḥ

bhidyamāno 'py abhinnātmā

pratyāhāviklavaṁ vacaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus, as aforementioned; viprakṛtaḥ-having been put into difficulty; rājan-O King; baliḥ-Mahārāja Bali; bhagavatā-by the Personality of Godhead Vāmanadeva; asuraḥ-the King of the asuras; bhidyamānaḥ api-although situated in this uncomfortable position; abhinna-ātmā-without being disturbed in body or mind; pratyāha-replied; aviklavam-undisturbed; vacaḥ-the following words.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead was superficially seen to have acted mischievously toward Bali Mahārāja, Bali Mahārāja was fixed in his determination. Considering himself not to have fulfilled his promise, he spoke as follows.





TEXT 2



śrī-balir uvāca

yady uttamaśloka bhavān mameritaṁ

vaco vyalīkaṁ sura-varya manyate

karomy ṛtaṁ tan na bhavet pralambhanaṁ

padaṁ tṛtīyaṁ kuru śīrṣṇi me nijam

SYNONYMS



śrī-baliḥ uvāca-Bali Mahārāja said; yadi-if; uttamaśloka-O Supreme Lord; bhavān-Your good self; mama-my; īritam-promised; vacaḥ-words; vyalīkam-false; sura-varya-O greatest of all suras (demigods); manyate-You think so; karomi-I shall make it; ṛtam-truth; tat-that (promise); na-not; bhavet-will become; pralambhanam-cheating; padam-step; tṛtīyam-the third; kuru-just do it; śīrṣṇi-on the head; me-my; nijam-Your lotus feet.





Bali Mahārāja said: O best Personality of Godhead, most worshipable for all the demigods, if You think that my promise has become false, I shall certainly rectify matters to make it truthful. I cannot allow my promise to be false. Please, therefore, place Your third lotus footstep on my head.





Bali Mahārāja could understand the pretense of Lord Vāmanadeva, who had taken the side of the demigods and come before him as a beggar. Although the Lord's purpose was to cheat him, Bali Mahārāja took pleasure in understanding how the Lord will cheat His devotee to glorify the devotee's position. It is said that God is good, and this is a fact. Whether He cheats or rewards, He is always good. Bali Mahārāja therefore addressed Him as Uttamaśloka. "Your Lordship," he said, "You are always praised with the best of selected verses. On behalf of the demigods, You disguised Yourself to cheat me, saying that You wanted only three paces of land, but later You expanded Your body to such an extent that with two footsteps You covered the entire universe. Because You were working on behalf of Your devotees, You do not regard this as cheating. Never mind. I cannot be considered a devotee. Nonetheless, because although You are the husband of the goddess of fortune You have come to me to beg, I must satisfy You to the best of my ability. So please do not think that I wanted to cheat You; I must fulfill my promise. I still have my body. When I place my body for Your satisfaction, please put Your third step on my head." Since the Lord had covered the entire universe with two steps, one might ask how Bali Mahārāja's head could be sufficient for His third step? Bali Mahārāja, however, thought that the possessor of wealth must be greater than the possession. Therefore although the Lord had taken all his possessions, the head of Bali Mahārāja, the possessor, would provide adequate place for the Lord's third step.





TEXT 3



bibhemi nāhaṁ nirayāt pada-cyuto

na pāśa-bandhād vyasanād duratyayāt

naivārtha-kṛcchrād bhavato vinigrahād

asādhu-vādād bhṛśam udvije yathā

SYNONYMS



bibhemi-I do fear; na-not; aham-I; nirayāt-from a position in hell; pada-cyutaḥ-nor do I fear being deprived of my position; na-nor; pāśa-bandhāt-from being arrested by the ropes of Varuṇa; vyasanāt-nor from the distress; duratyayāt-which was unbearable for me; na-nor; eva-certainly; artha-kṛcchrāt-because of poverty, or scarcity of money; bhavataḥ-of Your Lordship; vinigrahāt-from the punishment I am now suffering; asādhu-vādāt-from defamation; bhṛśam-very much; udvije-I become anxious; yathā-as.





I do not fear being deprived of all my possessions, living in hellish life, being arrested for poverty by the ropes of Varuṇa or being punished by You as much as I fear defamation.





Although Bali Mahārāja fully surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he could not tolerate being defamed for cheating a brāhmaṇa-brahmacārī, Being quite alert in regard to his reputation, he thought deeply about how to prevent being defamed. The Lord, therefore, gave him the good counsel to prevent defamation by offering his head. A Vaiṣṇava does not fear any punishment. Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati (Bhāg. 6.17.28).





TEXT 4



puṁsāṁ ślāghyatamaṁ manye

daṇḍam arhattamārpitam

yaṁ na mātā pitā bhrātā

suhṛdaś cādiśanti hi

SYNONYMS



puṁsām-of men; ślāghya-tamam-the most exalted; manye-I consider; daṇḍam-punishment; arhattama-arpitam-given by You, the supreme worshipable Lord; yam-which; na-neither; mātā-mother; pitā-father; bhrātā-brother; suhṛdaḥ-friends; ca-also; ādiśanti-offer; hi-indeed.





Although a father, mother, brother or friend may sometimes punish one as a well-wisher, they never punish their subordinate like this. But because You are the most worshipable Lord, I regard the punishment You have given me as most exalted.





Punishment meted out by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is accepted by the devotee as the greatest mercy.



tat te 'nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk





"One who seeks Your compassion and thus tolerates all kinds of adverse conditions due to the karma of his past deeds, who engages always in Your devotional service with his mind, words and body, and who always offers obeisances to You is certainly a bona fide candidate for liberation." (Bhāg. 10.14.8) A devotee knows that so-called punishment by the Supreme Personality of Godhead is only His favor to correct His devotee and bring him to the right path. Therefore the punishment awarded by the Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot be compared to even the greatest benefit awarded by one's material father, mother, brother or friend.





TEXT 5



tvaṁ nūnam asurāṇāṁ naḥ

parokṣaḥ paramo guruḥ

yo no 'neka-madāndhānāṁ

vibhraṁśaṁ cakṣur ādiśat

SYNONYMS



tvam-Your Lordship; nūnam-indeed; asurāṇām-of the demons; naḥ-as we are; parokṣaḥ-indirect; paramaḥ-the supreme; guruḥ-spiritual master; yaḥ-Your Lordship; naḥ-of us; aneka-many; mada-andhānām-blinded by material opulences; vibhraṁśam-destroying our false prestige; cakṣuḥ-the eye of knowledge; ādiśat-gave.





Since Your Lordship is indirectly the greatest well-wisher of us demons, You act for our best welfare by posing as if our enemy. Because demons like us always aspire for a position of false prestige, by chastising us You give us the eyes by which to see the right path.





Bali Mahārāja considered the Supreme Personality of Godhead a better friend to the demons than to the demigods. In the material world, the more one gets material possessions, the more he becomes blind to spiritual life. The demigods are devotees of the Lord for the sake of material possessions, but although the demons apparently do not have the Supreme Personality of Godhead on their side, He always acts as their well-wisher by depriving them of their positions of false prestige. By false prestige one is misguided, so the Supreme Lord takes away their position of false prestige as a special favor.





TEXTS 6–7



yasmin vairānubandhena

vyūḍhena vibudhetarāḥ

bahavo lebhire siddhiṁ

yām u haikānta-yoginaḥ

tenāhaṁ nigṛhīto 'smi



bhavatā bhūri-karmaṇā

baddhaś ca vāruṇaiḥ pāśair

nātivrīḍe na ca vyathe

SYNONYMS



yasmin-unto You; vaira-anubandhena-by continuously treating as an enemy; vyūḍhena-firmly fixed by such intelligence; vibudha-itarāḥ-the demons (those other than the demigods); bahavaḥ-many of them; lebhire-achieved; siddhim-perfection; yām-which; u ha-it is well known; ekānta-yoginaḥ-equal to the achievements of the greatly successful mystic yogīs; tena-therefore; aham-I; nigṛhītaḥ asmi-although I am being punished; bhavatā-by Your Lordship; bhūri-karmaṇā-who can do many wonderful things; baddhaḥ ca-I am arrested and bound; vāruṇaiḥ pāśaiḥ-by the ropes of Varuṇa; na ati-vrīḍe-I am not at all ashamed of this; na ca vyathe-nor am I suffering very much.





Many demons who were continuously inimical toward You finally achieved the perfection of great mystic yogīs. Your Lordship can perform one work to serve many purposes, and consequently, although You have punished me in many ways, I do not feel ashamed of having been arrested by the ropes of Varuṇa, nor do I feel aggrieved.





Bali Mahārāja appreciated the Lord's mercy not only upon him but upon many other demons. Because this mercy is liberally distributed, the Supreme Lord is called all-merciful. Bali Mahārāja was indeed a fully surrendered devotee, but even some demons who were not at all devotees but merely enemies of the Lord attained the same exalted position achieved by many mystic yogīs. Thus Bali Mahārāja could understand that the Lord had some hidden purpose in punishing him. Consequently he was neither unhappy nor ashamed because of the awkward position in which he had been put by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 8



pitāmaho me bhavadīya-sammataḥ

prahrāda āviṣkṛta-sādhu-vādaḥ

bhavad-vipakṣeṇa vicitra-vaiśasaṁ

samprāpitas tvaṁ paramaḥ sva-pitrā

SYNONYMS



pitāmahaḥ-grandfather; me-my; bhavadīya-sammataḥ-approved by the devotees of Your Lordship; prahrādaḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja; āviṣkṛta-sādhu-vādaḥ-famous, being celebrated everywhere as a devotee; bhavat-vipakṣeṇa-simply going against You; vicitra-vaiśasam-inventing different kinds of harassments; samprāpitaḥ-suffered; tvam-You; paramaḥ-the supreme shelter; sva-pitrā-by his own father.





My grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja is famous, being recognized by all Your devotees. Although harassed in many ways by his father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he still remained faithful, taking shelter at Your lotus feet.





A pure devotee like Prahlāda Mahārāja, although harassed circumstantially in many ways, never gives up the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to take shelter of anyone else. A pure devotee never complains against the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A vivid example is Prahlāda Mahārāja. Examining the life of Prahlāda Mahārāja, we can see how severely he was harassed by his own father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, yet he did not divert his attention from the Lord even to the smallest extent. Bali Mahārāja, following in the footsteps of his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja, remained fixed in his devotion to the Lord, despite the Lord's having punished him.





TEXT 9



kim ātmanānena jahāti yo 'ntataḥ

kiṁ riktha-hāraiḥ svajanākhya-dasyubhiḥ

kiṁ jāyayā saṁsṛti-hetu-bhūtayā

martyasya gehaiḥ kim ihāyuṣo vyayaḥ

SYNONYMS



kim-what is the use; ātmanā anena-of this body; jahāti-gives up; yaḥ-which (body); antataḥ-at the end of life; kim-what is the use; riktha-hāraiḥ-the plunderers of wealth; svajana-ākhya-dasyubhiḥ-they who are actually plunderers but who pass by the name of relatives; kim-what is the use; jāyayā-of a wife; saṁsṛti-hetu-bhūtayā-who is the source of increasing material conditions; martyasya-of a person sure to die; gehaiḥ-of houses, family and community; kim-what is the use; iha-in which house; āyuṣaḥ-of the duration of life; vyayaḥ-simply wasting.





What is the use of the material body, which automatically leaves its owner at the end of life? And what is the use of all one's family members, who are actually plunderers taking away money that is useful for the service of the Lord in spiritual opulence? What is the use of a wife? She is only the source of increasing material conditions. And what is the use of family, home, country and community? Attachment for them merely wastes the valuable energy of one's lifetime.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, advises, sama-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: "Give up all other varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." The common man does not appreciate such a statement by the Supreme Personality of Godhead because he thinks that during his lifetime his family, society, country, body and relatives are everything. Why should one give up any one of them and take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? But from the behavior of great personalities like Prahlāda Mahārāja and Bali Mahārāja we understand that surrendering to the Lord is the right action for an intelligent person. Prahlāda Mahārāja took shelter of Viṣṇu against the will of his father. Similarly, Bali Mahārāja took shelter of Vāmanadeva against the will of his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, and all the leading demons. People may be surprised that devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja and Bali Mahārāja could seek shelter of the side of the enemy, giving up the natural affinity for family, hearth and home. In this connection, Bali Mahārāja explains that the body, which is the center of all material activities, is also a foreign element. Even though we want to keep the body fit and helpful to our activities, the body cannot continue eternally. Although I am the soul, which is eternal, after using the body for some time I have to accept another body (tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ), according to the laws of nature, unless I render some service with the body for advancement in devotional service. One should not use the body for any other purpose. One must know that if he uses the body for any other purpose he is simply wasting time, for as soon as the time is ripe, the soul will automatically leave the body.



We are very interested in society, friendship and love, but what are they? Those in the garb of friends and relatives merely plunder the hard-earned money of the bewildered soul. Everyone is affectionate toward his wife and is attached to her, but what is this wife? The wife is called strī, which means, "one who expands the material condition." If a person lives without a wife, his material conditions are less extensive. As soon as one marries and is connected with a wife, his material necessities increase.



puṁsaḥ striyā mithunī-bhāvam etaṁ

tayor mitho hṛdaya-granthim āhuḥ

ato gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair

janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti





"The attraction between male and female is the basic principle of material existence. On the basis of this misconception, which ties together the hearts of the male and female, one becomes attracted to his body, home, property, children, relatives and wealth. In this way one increases life's illusions and thinks in terms of 'I and mine.' " (Bhāg. 5.5.8) Human life is meant for self-realization, not for increasing unwanted things. Actually, a wife increases unwanted things. One's lifetime, one's home and everything one has, if not properly used in the service of the Lord, are all sources of material conditions of perpetual suffering under the threefold miseries (adhyātmika, adhibhautika and adhidaivika). Unfortunately, there is no institution in human society for education on this subject. People are kept in darkness about the goal of life, and thus there is a continuous struggle for existence. We speak of "survival of the fittest," but no one survives, for no one is free under material conditions.





TEXT 10



itthaṁ sa niścitya pitāmaho mahān

agādha-bodho bhavataḥ pāda-padmam

dhruvaṁ prapede hy akutobhayaṁ janād

bhītaḥ svapakṣa-kṣapaṇasya sattama

SYNONYMS



ittham-because of this (as stated above); saḥ-he, Prahlāda Mahārāja; niścitya-definitely deciding on this point; pitāmahaḥ-my grandfather; mahān-the great devotee; agādha-bodhaḥ-my grandfather, who received unlimited knowledge because of his devotional service; bhavataḥ-of Your Lordship; pāda-padmam-the lotus feet; dhruvam-the infallible, eternal shelter; prapede-surrendered; hi-indeed; akutaḥ-bhayam-completely free of fear; janāt-from ordinary common people; bhītaḥ-being afraid; svapakṣa-kṣapaṇasya-of Your Lordship, who kill the demons on our own side; sat-tama-O best of the best.





My grandfather, the best of all men, who achieved unlimited knowledge and was worshipable for everyone, was afraid of the common men in this world. Being fully convinced of the substantiality afforded by shelter at Your lotus feet, He took shelter of Your lotus feet, against the will of his father and demoniac friends, who were killed by Your own self.





TEXT 11



athāham apy ātma-ripos tavāntikaṁ

daivena nītaḥ prasabhaṁ tyājita-śrīḥ

idaṁ kṛtāntāntika-varti jīvitaṁ

yayādhruvaṁ stabdha-matir na budhyate

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; aham-I; api-also; ātma-ripoḥ-who are the traditional enemy of the family; tava-of Your good self; antikam-the shelter; daivena-by providence; nītaḥ-brought in; prasabham-by force; tyājita-bereft of; śrīḥ-all opulence; idam-this philosophy of life; kṛta-anta-antika-varti-always given the facility for death; jīvitam-the duration of life; yayā-by such material opulence; adhruvam-as temporary; stabdha-matiḥ-such an unintelligent person; na budhyate-cannot understand.





Only by providence have I been forcibly brought under Your lotus feet and deprived of all my opulence. Because of the illusion created by temporary opulence, people in general, who live under material conditions, facing accidental death at every moment, do not understand that this life is temporary. Only by providence have I been saved from that condition.





Bali Mahārāja appreciated the actions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although all the members of the demoniac families except Prahlāda Mahārāja and Bali Mahārāja considered Viṣṇu their eternal traditional enemy. As described by Bali Mahārāja, Lord Viṣṇu was actually not the enemy of the family but the best friend of the family. The principle of this friendship has already been stated. Yasyāham anugṛhnāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ: the Lord bestows special favor upon His devotee by taking away all his material opulences. Bali Mahārāja appreciated this behavior by the Lord. Therefore he said, daivena nītaḥ prasabhaṁ tyājita-śrīḥ: "It is to bring me to the right platform of eternal life that You have put me into these circumstances."



Actually, everyone should fear the so-called society, friendship and love for which he works so hard all day and night. As indicated by Bali Mahārāja by the words janād bhītaḥ, every devotee in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should always be afraid of the common man engaged in pursuing material prosperity. Such a person is described as pramatta, a madman chasing the will-o'-the-wisp. Such men do not know that after a hard struggle for life one must change his body, with no certainty of what kind of body he will receive next. Those who are completely established in Kṛṣṇa conscious philosophy and who therefore understand the aim of life will never take to the activities of the materialistic dog race. But if a sincere devotee somehow does fall down, the Lord corrects him and saves him from gliding down to the darkest region of hellish life.



adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām





(Bhāg. 7.5.30)



The materialistic way of life is nothing but the repeated chewing of that which has already been chewed. Although there is no profit in such a life, people are enamored of it because of uncontrolled senses. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma [SB 5.5.4]. Because of uncontrolled senses, people fully engage in sinful activities by which they get a body full of suffering. Bali Mahārāja appreciated how the Lord had saved him from such a bewildered life of ignorance. He therefore said that his intelligence had been stunned. Stabdha-matir na budhyate. He could not understand how the Supreme Personality of Godhead favors His devotees by forcibly stopping their materialistic activities.





TEXT 12



śrī-śuka uvāca

tasyetthaṁ bhāṣamāṇasya

prahrādo bhagavat-priyaḥ

ājagāma kuru-śreṣṭha

rākā-patir ivotthitaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasya-Bali Mahārāja; ittham-in this way; bhāṣamāṇasya-while describing his fortunate position; prahrādaḥ-Mahārāja Prahlāda, his grandfather; bhagavat-priyaḥ-the most favored devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ājagāma-appeared there; kuru-śreṣṭha-O best of the Kurus, Mahārāja Parīkṣit; rākā-patiḥ-the moon; iva-like; utthitaḥ-having risen.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O best of the Kurus, while Bali Mahārāja was describing his fortunate position in this way, the most dear devotee of the Lord, Prahlāda Mahārāja, appeared there, like the moon rising in the nighttime.





TEXT 13



tam indra-senaḥ sva-pitāmahaṁ śriyā

virājamānaṁ nalināyatekṣaṇam

prāṁśuṁ piśaṅgāmbaram añjana-tviṣaṁ

pralamba-bāhuṁ śubhagarṣabham aikṣata

SYNONYMS



tam-that Prahlāda Mahārāja; indra-senaḥ-Bali Mahārāja, who now possessed all the military force of Indra; sva-pitāmaham-unto his grandfather; śriyā-present with all beautiful features; virājamānam-standing there; nalina-āyata-īkṣaṇam-with eyes as broad as the petals of a lotus; prāṁśum-a very beautiful body; piśaṅga-ambaram-dressed in yellow garments; añjana-tviṣam-with his body resembling black ointment for the eyes; pralamba-bāhum-very long arms; śubhaga-ṛṣabham-the best of all auspicious persons; aikṣata-he saw.





Then Bali Mahārāja saw his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja, the most fortunate personality, whose dark body resembled black ointment for the eyes. His tall, elegant figure was dressed in yellow garments, he had long arms, and his beautiful eyes were like the petals of a lotus. He was very dear and pleasing to everyone.





TEXT 14



tasmai balir vāruṇa-pāśa-yantritaḥ

samarhaṇaṁ nopajahāra pūrvavat

nanāma mūrdhnāśru-vilola-locanaḥ

sa-vrīḍa-nīcīna-mukho babhūva ha

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto Prahlāda Mahārāja; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; vāruṇa-pāśa-yantritaḥ-being bound by the ropes of Varuṇa; samarhaṇam-befitting respect; na-not; upajahāra-offered; pūrva-vat-like before; nanāma-he offered obeisances; mūrdhnā-with the head; aśru-vilola-locanaḥ-eyes inundated with tears; sa-vrīḍa-with shyness; nīcīna-downward; mukhaḥ-face; babhūva ha-he so became.





Being bound by the ropes of Varuṇa, Bali Mahārāja could not offer befitting respect to Prahlāda Mahārāja as he had before. Rather, he simply offered respectful obeisances with his head, his eyes being inundated with tears and his face lowered in shame.





Since Bali Mahārāja had been arrested by Lord Vāmanadeva, he was certainly to be considered an offender. Bali Mahārāja seriously felt that he was an offender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Certainly Prahlāda Mahārāja would not like this. Therefore Bali Mahārāja was ashamed and hung his head.





TEXT 15



sa tatra hāsīnam udīkṣya sat-patiṁ

hariṁ sunandādy-anugair upāsitam

upetya bhūmau śirasā mahā-manā

nanāma mūrdhnā pulakāśru-viklavaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja; tatra-there; ha āsīnam-seated; udīkṣya-after seeing; sat-patim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the liberated souls; harim-Lord Hari; sunanda-ādi-anugaiḥ-by His followers, like Sunanda; upāsitam-being worshiped; upetya-reaching nearby; bhūmau-on the ground; śirasā-with his head (bowed down); mahā-manāḥ-the great devotee; nanāma-offered obeisances; mūrdhnā-with his head; pulaka-aśru-viklavaḥ-agitated by tears of jubilation.





When the great personality Prahlāda Mahārāja saw that the Supreme Lord was sitting there, surrounded and worshiped by His intimate associates like Sunanda, he was overwhelmed with tears of jubilation. Approaching the Lord and falling to the ground, he offered obeisances to the Lord with his head.





TEXT 16



śrī-prahrāda uvāca

tvayaiva dattaṁ padam aindram ūrjitaṁ

hṛtaṁ tad evādya tathaiva śobhanam

manye mahān asya kṛto hy anugraho

vibhraṁśito yac chriya ātma-mohanāt

SYNONYMS



śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca-Prahlāda Mahārāja said; tvayā-by Your Lordship; eva-indeed; dattam-which had been given; padam-this position; aindram-of the King of heaven; ūrjitam-very, very great; hṛtam-has been taken away; tat-that; eva-indeed; adya-today; tathā-as; eva-indeed; śobhanam-beautiful; manye-I consider; mahān-very great; asya-of him (Bali Mahārāja); kṛtaḥ-has been done by You; hi-indeed; anugrahaḥ-mercy; vibhraṁśitaḥ-being bereft of; yat-because; śriyaḥ-from that opulence; ātma-mohanāt-which was covering the process of self-realization.





Prahlāda Mahārāja said: My Lord, it is Your Lordship who gave this Bali the very great opulence of the post of heavenly king, and now, today, it is You who have taken it all away. I think You have acted with equal beauty in both ways. Because his exalted position as King of heaven was putting him in the darkness of ignorance, You have done him a very merciful favor by taking away all his opulence.





As it is said, yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ (Bhāg. 10.88.8). It is by the mercy of the Lord that one gets all material opulence, but if such material opulence causes one to become puffed up and forget the process of self-realization, the Lord certainly takes all the opulence away. The Lord bestows mercy upon His devotee by helping him find out his constitutional position. For that purpose, the Lord is always ready to help the devotee in every way. But material opulence is sometimes dangerous because it diverts one's attention to false prestige by giving one the impression that he is the owner and master of everything he surveys, although actually this is not the fact. To protect the devotee from such a misunderstanding, the Lord, showing special mercy, sometimes takes away his material possessions. Yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ.





TEXT 17



yayā hi vidvān api muhyate yatas

tat ko vicaṣṭe gatim ātmano yathā

tasmai namas te jagad-īśvarāya vai

nārāyaṇāyākhila-loka-sākṣiṇe

SYNONYMS



yayā-by which material opulence; hi-indeed; vidvān api-even a person fortunately advanced in education; muhyate-becomes bewildered; yataḥ-self-controlled; tat-that; kaḥ-who; vicaṣṭe-can search for; gatim-the progress; ātmanaḥ-of the self; yathā-properly; tasmai-unto Him; namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances; te-unto You; jagat-īśvarāya-unto the Lord of the universe; vai-indeed; nārāyaṇāya-unto His Lordship Nārāyaṇa; akhila-loka-sākṣiṇe-who are the witness of all creation.





Material opulence is so bewildering that it makes even a learned, self-controlled man forget to search for the goal of self-realization. But the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the universe, can see everything by His will. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.





The words ko vicaṣṭe gatim ātmano yathā indicate that when one is puffed up by the false prestige of possessing material opulence, he certainly neglects the goal of self-realization. This is the position of the modern world. Because of so-called scientific improvements in material opulence, people have entirely given up the path of self-realization. Practically no one is interested in God, one's relationship with God or how one should act. Modern men have altogether forgotten such questions because they are mad for material possessions. If this kind of civilization continues, the time will soon come when the Supreme Personality of Godhead will take away all the material opulences. Then people will come to their senses.





TEXT 18



śrī-śuka uvāca

tasyānuśṛṇvato rājan

prahrādasya kṛtāñjaleḥ

hiraṇyagarbho bhagavān

uvāca madhusūdanam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasya-of Prahlāda Mahārāja; anuśṛṇvataḥ-so that he could hear; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; prahrādasya-of Prahlāda Mahārāja; kṛta-añjaleḥ-who was standing with folded hands; hiraṇyagarbhaḥ-Lord Brahmā; bhagavān-the most powerful; uvāca-said; madhusūdanam-unto Madhusūdana, the Personality of Godhead.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, Lord Brahmā then began to speak to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, within the hearing of Prahlāda Mahārāja, who stood nearby with folded hands.





TEXT 19



baddhaṁ vīkṣya patiṁ sādhvī

tat-patnī bhaya-vihvalā

prāñjaliḥ praṇatopendraṁ

babhāṣe 'vāṅ-mukhī nṛpa

SYNONYMS



baddham-arrested; vīkṣya-seeing; patim-her husband; sādhvī-the chaste woman; tat-patnī-Bali Mahārāja's wife; bhaya-vihvalā-being very disturbed by fear; prāñjaliḥ-with folded hands; praṇatā-having offered obeisances; upendram-unto Vāmanadeva; babhāṣe-addressed; avāk-mukhī-with face downward; nṛpa-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit.





But Bali Mahārāja's chaste wife, afraid and aggrieved at seeing her husband arrested, immediately offered obeisances to Lord Vāmanadeva [Upendra]. She folded her hands and spoke as follows.





Although Lord Brahmā was speaking, he had to stop for a while because Bali Mahārāja's wife, Vindhyāvali, who was very agitated and afraid, wanted to say something.





TEXT 20



śrī-vindhyāvalir uvāca

krīḍārtham ātmana idaṁ tri-jagat kṛtaṁ te

svāmyaṁ tu tatra kudhiyo 'para īśa kuryuḥ

kartuḥ prabhos tava kim asyata āvahanti

tyakta-hriyas tvad-avaropita-kartṛ-vādāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-vindhyāvaliḥ uvāca-Vindhyāvali, the wife of Bali Mahārāja, said; krīḍā-artham-for the sake of pastimes; ātmanaḥ-of Yourself; idam-this; tri-jagat-the three worlds (this universe); kṛtam-was created; te-by You; svāmyam-proprietorship; tu-but; tatra-thereon; kudhiyaḥ-foolish rascals; apare-others; īśa-O my Lord; kuryuḥ-have established; kartuḥ-for the supreme creator; prabhoḥ-for the supreme maintainer; tava-for Your good self; kim-what; asyataḥ-for the supreme annihilator; āvahanti-they can offer; tyakta-hriyaḥ-shameless, without intelligence; tvat-by You; avaropita-falsely imposed because of a poor fund of knowledge; kartṛ-vādāḥ-the proprietorship of such foolish agnostics.





Śrīmatī Vindhyāvali said: O my Lord, You have created the entire universe for the enjoyment of Your personal pastimes, but foolish, unintelligent men have claimed proprietorship for material enjoyment. Certainly they are shameless agnostics. Falsely claiming proprietorship, they think they can give charity and enjoy. In such a condition, what good can they do for You, who are the independent creator, maintainer and annihilator of this universe?





Bali Mahārāja's wife, who was most intelligent, supported the arrest of her husband and accused him of having no intelligence because he had claimed proprietorship of the property of the Lord. Such a claim is a sign of demoniac life. Although the demigods, who are officials appointed by the Lord for management, are attached to materialistic enjoyment, they never claim to be proprietors of the universe, for they know that the actual proprietor of everything is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the qualification of the demigods. But the demons, instead of accepting the exclusive proprietorship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, claim the property of the universe for themselves through demarcations of nationalism. "This part is mine, and that part is yours," they say. "This part I can give in charity, and this part I can keep for my enjoyment." These are all demoniac conceptions. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā (16.13): idam adya mayā labdham imaṁ prāpsye manoratham. "Thus far I have acquired so much money and land. Now I have to add more and more. In this way I shall be the greatest proprietor of everything. Who can compete with me?" These are all demoniac conceptions.



Bali Mahārāja's wife accused Bali Mahārāja by saying that although the Supreme Personality of Godhead had arrested him, showing him extraordinary mercy, and although Bali Mahārāja was offering his body to the Supreme Lord for the Lord's third step, he was still in the darkness of ignorance. Actually the body did not belong to him, but because of his long-standing demoniac mentality he could not understand this. He thought that since he had been defamed for his inability to fulfill his promise of charity, and since the body belonged to him, he would free himself from defamation by offering his body. Actually, however, the body does not belong to anyone but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whom the body is given. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61):



īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati

bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni

yantrārūḍhāni māyayā





The Lord is situated in the core of everyone's heart, and, according to the material desires of the living entity, the Lord offers a particular type of machine-the body-through the agency of the material energy. The body actually does not belong to the living entity; it belongs to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Under the circumstances, how could Bali Mahārāja claim that the body belonged to him?



Thus Vindhyāvali, Bali Mahārāja's intelligent wife, prayed that her husband be released, by the Lord's causeless mercy. Otherwise, Bali Mahārāja was nothing but a shameless demon, specifically described as tyakta-hriyas tvad-avaropita-kartṛ-vādāḥ, a foolish person claiming proprietorship over the property of the Supreme Person. In the present age, Kali-yuga, the number of such shameless men, who are agnostics disbelieving in the existence of God, has increased. Trying to defy the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, so-called scientists, philosophers and politicians manufacture plans and schemes for the destruction of the world. They cannot do anything good for the world, and unfortunately, because of Kali-yuga, they have plunged the affairs of the world into mismanagement. Thus there is a great need for the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement for the benefit of innocent people who are being carried away by propaganda of such demons. If the present status quo is allowed to continue, people will certainly suffer more and more under the leadership of these demoniac agnostics.





TEXT 21



śrī-brahmovāca

bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa

deva-deva jaganmaya

muñcainaṁ hṛta-sarvasvaṁ

nāyam arhati nigraham

SYNONYMS



śrī-brahmā uvāca-Lord Brahmā said; bhūta-bhāvana-O Supreme Being, well-wisher of everyone, who can cause one to flourish; bhūta-īśa-O master of everyone; deva-deva-O worshipable Deity of the demigods; jagat-maya-O all-pervading one; muñca-please release; enam-this poor Bali Mahārāja; hṛta-sarvasvam-now bereft of everything; na-not; ayam-such a poor man; arhati-deserves; nigraham-punishment.





Lord Brahmā said: O well-wisher and master of all living entities, O worshipable Deity of all the demigods, O all-pervading Personality of Godhead, now this man has been sufficiently punished, for You have taken everything. Now You can release him. He does not deserve to be punished more.





When Lord Brahmā saw that Prahlāda Mahārāja and Vindhyāvali had already approached the Lord to ask mercy for Bali Mahārāja, he joined them and recommended Bali Mahārāja's release on the grounds of worldly calculations.





TEXT 22



kṛtsnā te 'nena dattā bhūr

lokāḥ karmārjitāś ca ye

niveditaṁ ca sarvasvam

ātmāviklavayā dhiyā

SYNONYMS



kṛtsnāḥ-all; te-unto You; anena-by Bali Mahārāja; dattāḥ-have been given or returned; bhūḥ lokāḥ-all land and all planets; karma-arjitāḥ ca-whatever he achieved by his pious activities; ye-all of which; niveditam ca-have been offered to You; sarvasvam-everything he possessed; ātmā-even his body; aviklavayā-without hesitation; dhiyā-by such intelligence.





Bali Mahārāja had already offered everything to Your Lordship. Without hesitation, he has offered his land, the planets and whatever else he earned by his pious activities, including even his own body.





TEXT 23



yat-pādayor aśaṭha-dhīḥ salilaṁ pradāya

dūrvāṅkurair api vidhāya satīṁ saparyām

apy uttamāṁ gatim asau bhajate tri-lokīṁ

dāśvān aviklava-manāḥ katham ārtim ṛcchet

SYNONYMS



yat-pādayoḥ-at the lotus feet of Your Lordship; aśaṭha-dhīḥ-a great-minded person who is without duplicity; salilam-water; pradāya-offering; dūrvā-with fully grown grass; aṅkuraiḥ-and with buds of flowers; api-although; vidhāya-offering; satīm-most exalted; saparyām-with worship; api-although; uttamām-the most highly elevated; gatim-destination; asau-such a worshiper; bhajate-deserves; tri-lokīm-the three worlds; dāśvān-giving to You; aviklava-manāḥ-without mental duplicity; katham-how; ārtim-the distressed condition of being arrested; ṛcchet-he deserves.





By offering even water, newly grown grass, or flower buds at Your lotus feet, those who maintain no mental duplicity can achieve the most exalted position within the spiritual world. This Bali Mahārāja, without duplicity, has now offered everything in the three worlds. How then can he deserve to suffer from arrest?





In Bhagavad-gītā (9.26) it is stated:



patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind that if an unsophisticated person, with devotion and without duplicity, offers at the lotus feet of the Lord a little water, a flower, a fruit or a leaf, the Lord accepts it. Then the devotee is promoted to Vaikuṇṭha, the spiritual world. Brahmā drew the Lord's attention to this subject and requested that He release Bali Mahārāja, who was suffering, being bound by the ropes of Varuṇa, and who had already given everything, including the three worlds and whatever he possessed.





TEXT 24



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

brahman yam anugṛhṇāmi

tad-viśo vidhunomy aham

yan-madaḥ puruṣaḥ stabdho

lokaṁ māṁ cāvamanyate

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; brahman-O Lord Brahmā; yam-unto anyone to whom; anugṛhṇāmi-I show My mercy; tat-his; viśaḥ-material opulence or riches; vidhunomi-take away; aham-I; yat-madaḥ-having false prestige due to this money; puruṣaḥ-such a person; stabdhaḥ-being dull-minded; lokam-the three worlds; mām ca-unto Me also; avamanyate-derides.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Lord Brahmā, because of material opulence a foolish person becomes dull-witted and mad. Thus he has no respect for anyone within the three worlds and defies even My authority. To such a person I show special favor by first taking away all his possessions.





A civilization that has become godless because of material advancement in opulence is extremely dangerous. Because of great opulence, a materialist becomes so proud that he has no regard for anyone and even refuses to accept the authority of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The result of such a mentality is certainly very dangerous. To show special favor, the Lord sometimes makes an example of someone like Bali Mahārāja, who was now bereft of all his possessions.





TEXT 25



yadā kadācij jīvātmā

saṁsaran nija-karmabhiḥ

nānā-yoniṣv anīśo 'yaṁ

pauruṣīṁ gatim āvrajet

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; kadācit-sometimes; jīva-ātmā-the living entity; saṁsaran-rotating in the cycle of birth and death; nija-karmabhiḥ-because of his own fruitive activities; nānā-yoniṣu-in different species of life; anīśaḥ-not independent (completely under the control of material nature); ayam-this living entity; pauruṣīm gatim-the situation of being human; āvrajet-wants to obtain.





While rotating in the cycle of birth and death again and again in different species because of his own fruitive activities, the dependent living entity, by good fortune, may happen to become a human being. This human birth is very rarely obtained.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is fully independent. Thus it is not always a fact that a living being's loss of all opulence is a sign of the Supreme Lord's mercy upon him. The Lord can act any way He likes. He may take away one's opulence, or He may not. There are varieties of forms of life, and the Lord treats them according to the circumstances, as He chooses. Generally it is to be understood that the human form of life is one of great responsibility.



puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi

bhuṅkte prakṛtijān guṇān

kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya

sad-asad-yoni-janmasu





"The living entity in material nature follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various species." (Bg. 13.22) After thus rotating through many, many forms of life in the cycle of birth and death, the living being gets a chance for a human form. Therefore every human being, especially one belonging to a civilized nation or culture, must be extremely responsible in his activities. He should not risk degradation in the next life. Because the body will change (tathā dehāntara-prāptir), we should be extremely careful. To see to the proper use of life is the purpose of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The foolish living entity declares freedom from all control, but factually he is not free; he is fully under the control of material nature. He must therefore be most careful and responsible in the activities of his life.





TEXT 26



janma-karma-vayo-rūpa-

vidyaiśvarya-dhanādibhiḥ

yady asya na bhavet stambhas

tatrāyaṁ mad-anugrahaḥ

SYNONYMS



janma-by birth in an aristocratic family; karma-by wonderful activities, pious activities; vayaḥ-by age, especially youth, when one is capable of doing many things; rūpa-by personal beauty, which attracts everyone; vidyā-by education; aiśvarya-by opulence; dhana-by wealth; ādibhiḥ-by other opulences also; yadi-if; asya-of the possessor; na-not; bhavet-there is; stambhaḥ-pride; tatra-in such a condition; ayam-a person; mat-anugrahaḥ-should be considered to have received My special mercy.





If a human being is born in an aristocratic family or a higher status of life, if he performs wonderful activities, if he is youthful, if he has personal beauty, a good education and good wealth, and if he is nonetheless not proud of his opulences, it is to be understood that he is especially favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





When in spite of possessing all these opulences a person is not proud, this means that he is fully aware that all his opulences are due to the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He therefore engages all his possessions in the service of the Lord. A devotee knows very well that everything, even his body, belongs to the Supreme Lord. If one lives perfectly in such Kṛṣṇa consciousness, it is to be understood that he is especially favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The conclusion is that one's being deprived of his wealth is not to be considered the special mercy of the Lord. If one continues in his opulent position but does not become unnecessarily proud, falsely thinking that he is the proprietor of everything, this is the Lord's special mercy.





TEXT 27



māna-stambha-nimittānāṁ

janmādīnāṁ samantataḥ

sarva-śreyaḥ-pratīpānāṁ

hanta muhyen na mat-paraḥ

SYNONYMS



māna-of false prestige; stambha-because of this impudence; nimittānām-which are the causes; janma-ādīnām-such as birth in a high family; samantataḥ-taken together; sarva-śreyaḥ-for the supreme benefit of life; pratīpānām-which are impediments; hanta-also; muhyet-becomes bewildered; na-not; mat-paraḥ-My pure devotee.





Although aristocratic birth and other such opulences are impediments to advancement in devotional service because they are causes of false prestige and pride, these opulences never disturb a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Devotees like Dhruva Mahārāja, who was given unlimited material opulence, have the special mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Once Kuvera wanted to give Dhruva Mahārāja a benediction, but although Dhruva Mahārāja could have asked him for any amount of material opulence, he instead begged Kuvera that he might continue his devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When a devotee is fixed in his devotional service, there is no need for the Lord to deprive him of his material opulences. The Supreme Personality of Godhead never takes away material opulences achieved because of devotional service, although He sometimes takes away opulences achieved by pious activities. He does this to make a devotee prideless or put him in a better position in devotional service. If a special devotee is meant for preaching but does not give up his family life or material opulences to take to the service of the Lord, the Lord surely takes away his material opulences and establishes him in devotional service. Thus the pure devotee becomes fully engaged in propagating Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 28



eṣa dānava-daityānām

agranīḥ kīrti-vardhanaḥ

ajaiṣīd ajayāṁ māyāṁ

sīdann api na muhyati

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this Bali Mahārāja; dānava-daityānām-among the demons and unbelievers; agranīḥ-the foremost devotee; kīrti-vardhanaḥ-the most famous; ajaiṣīt-has already surpassed; ajayām-the insurmountable; māyām-material energy; sīdan-being bereft (of all material opulences); api-although; na-not; muhyati-is bewildered.





Bali Mahārāja has become the most famous among the demons and nonbelievers, for in spite of being bereft of all material opulences, he is fixed in his devotional service.





In this verse, the words sīdann api na muhyati are very important. A devotee is sometimes put into adversity while executing devotional service. In adversity, everyone laments and becomes aggrieved, but by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a devotee, even in the worst condition, can understand that he is going through a severe examination by the Personality of Godhead. Bali Mahārāja passed all such examinations, as explained in the following verses.





TEXTS 29–30



kṣīṇa-rikthaś cyutaḥ sthānāt

kṣipto baddhaś ca śatrubhiḥ

jñātibhiś ca parityakto

yātanām anuyāpitaḥ

guruṇā bhartsitaḥ śapto



jahau satyaṁ na suvrataḥ

chalair ukto mayā dharmo

nāyaṁ tyajati satya-vāk

SYNONYMS



kṣīṇa-rikthaḥ-although bereft of all riches; cyutaḥ-fallen; sthānāt-from his superior position; kṣiptaḥ-forcefully thrown away; baddhaḥ ca-and forcefully bound; śatrubhiḥ-by his enemies; jñātibhiḥ ca-and by his family members or relatives; parityaktaḥ-deserted; yātanām-all kinds of suffering; anuyāpitaḥ-unusually severely suffered; guruṇā-by his spiritual master; bhartsitaḥ-rebuked; śaptaḥ-and cursed; jahau-gave up; satyam-truthfulness; na-not; su-vrataḥ-being fixed in his vow; chalaiḥ-pretentiously; uktaḥ-spoken; mayā-by Me; dharmaḥ-the religious principles; na-not; ayam-this Bali Mahārāja; tyajati-does give up; satya-vāk-being true to his word.





Although bereft of his riches, fallen from his original position, defeated and arrested by his enemies, rebuked and deserted by his relatives and friends, although suffering the pain of being bound and although rebuked and cursed by his spiritual master, Bali Mahārāja, being fixed in his vow, did not give up his truthfulness. It was certainly with pretension that I spoke about religious principles, but he did not give up religious principles, for he is true to his word.





Bali Mahārāja passed the severe test put before him by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is further proof of the Lord's mercy toward His devotee. The Supreme Personality of Godhead sometimes puts a devotee to severe tests that are almost unbearable. One could hardly even live under the conditions forced upon Bali Mahārāja. That Bali Mahārāja endured all these severe tests and austerities is the mercy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord certainly appreciates the devotee's forbearance, and it is recorded for the future glorification of the devotee. This was not an ordinary test. As described in this verse, hardly anyone could survive such a test, but for the future glorification of Bali Mahārāja, one of the mahājanas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead not only tested him but also gave him the strength to tolerate such adversity. The Lord is so kind to His devotee that when severely testing him the Lord gives him the necessary strength to be tolerant and continue to remain a glorious devotee.





TEXT 31



eṣa me prāpitaḥ sthānaṁ

duṣprāpam amarair api

sāvarṇer antarasyāyaṁ

bhavitendro mad-āśrayaḥ

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-Bali Mahārāja; me-by Me; prāpitaḥ-has achieved; sthānam-a place; duṣprāpam-extremely difficult to obtain; amaraiḥ api-even by the demigods; sāvarṇeḥ antarasya-during the period of the Manu known as Sāvarṇi; ayam-this Bali Mahārāja; bhavitā-will become; indraḥ-the lord of the heavenly planet; mat-āśrayaḥ-completely under My protection.





The Lord continued: Because of his great tolerance, I have given him a place not obtainable even by the demigods. He will become King of the heavenly planets during the period of the Manu known as Sāvarṇi.





This is the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even if the Lord takes away a devotee's material opulences, the Lord immediately offers him a position of which the demigods cannot even dream. There are many examples of this in the history of devotional service. One of them is the opulence of Sudāmā Vipra. Sudāmā Vipra suffered severe material scarcity, but he was not disturbed and did not deviate from devotional service. Thus he was ultimately given an exalted position by the mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Here the word mad-āśrayaḥ is very significant. Because the Lord wanted to give Bali Mahārāja the exalted position of Indra, the demigods might naturally have been envious of him and might have fought to disturb his position. But the Supreme Personality of Godhead assured Bali Mahārāja that he would always remain under the Lord's protection (mad-āśrayaḥ).





TEXT 32



tāvat sutalam adhyāstāṁ

viśvakarma-vinirmitam

yad ādhayo vyādhayaś ca

klamas tandrā parābhavaḥ

nopasargā nivasatāṁ

sambhavanti mamekṣayā

SYNONYMS



tāvat-as long as you are not in the post of Lord Indra; sutalam-in the planet known as Sutala; adhyāstām-go live there and occupy the place; viśvakarma-vinirmitam-which is especially created by Viśvakarmā; yat-wherein; ādhayaḥ-miseries pertaining to the mind; vyādhayaḥ-miseries pertaining to the body; ca-also; klamaḥ-fatigue; tandrā-dizziness or laziness; parābhavaḥ-becoming defeated; na-not; upasargāḥ-symptoms of other disturbances; nivasatām-of those who live there; sambhavanti-become possible; mama-of Me; īkṣayā-by the special vigilance.





Until Bali Mahārāja achieves the position of King of heaven, he shall live on the planet Sutala, which was made by Viśvakarmā according to My order. Because it is especially protected by Me, it is free from mental and bodily miseries, fatigue, dizziness, defeat and all other disturbances. Bali Mahārāja, you may now go live there peacefully.





Viśvakarmā is the engineer or architect for the palatial buildings in the heavenly planets. Therefore, since he was engaged to construct the residential quarters of Bali Mahārāja, the buildings and palaces on the planet Sutala must at least equal those on the heavenly planets. A further advantage of this place designed for Bali Mahārāja was that he would not be disturbed by any outward calamity. Moreover, he would not be disturbed by mental or bodily miseries. These are all extraordinary features of the planet Sutala, where Bali Mahārāja would live.



In the Vedic literatures we find descriptions of many different planets where there are many, many palaces, hundreds and thousands of times better than those of which we have experience on this planet earth. When we speak of palaces, this naturally includes the idea of great cities and towns. Unfortunately, when modern scientists try to explore other planets they see nothing but rocks and sand. Of course, they may go on their frivolous excursions, but the students of the Vedic literature will never believe them or give them any credit for exploring other planets.





TEXT 33



indrasena mahārāja

yāhi bho bhadram astu te

sutalaṁ svargibhiḥ prārthyaṁ

jñātibhiḥ parivāritaḥ

SYNONYMS



indrasena-O Mahārāja Bali; mahārāja-O King; yāhi-better go; bhoḥ-O King; bhadram-all auspiciousness; astu-let there be; te-unto you; sutalam-in the planet known as Sutala; svargibhiḥ-by the demigods; prārthyam-desirable; jñātibhiḥ-by your family members; parivāritaḥ-surrounded.





O Bali Mahārāja [Indrasena], now you may go to the planet Sutala, which is desired even by the demigods. Live there peacefully, surrounded by your friends and relatives. All good fortune unto you.





Bali Mahārāja was transferred from the heavenly planet to the planet Sutala, which is hundreds of times better than heaven, as indicated by the words svargibhiḥ prārthyam. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead deprives His devotee of material opulences, this does not mean that the Lord puts him into poverty; rather, the Lord promotes him to a higher position. The Supreme Personality of Godhead did not ask Bali Mahārāja to separate from his family; instead, the Lord allowed him to stay with his family members (jñātibhiḥ parivāritaḥ).





TEXT 34



na tvām abhibhaviṣyanti

lokeśāḥ kim utāpare

tvac-chāsanātigān daityāṁś

cakraṁ me sūdayiṣyati

SYNONYMS



na-not; tvām-unto you; abhibhaviṣyanti-will be able to conquer; loka-īśāḥ-the predominating deities of the various planets; kim uta apare-what to speak of ordinary people; tvat-śāsana-atigān-who transgress your rulings; daityān-such demons; cakram-disc; me-My; sūdayiṣyati-will kill.





On the planet Sutala, not even the predominating deities of other planets, what to speak of ordinary people, will be able to conquer you. As far as the demons are concerned, if they transgress your rule, My disc will kill them.





TEXT 35



rakṣiṣye sarvato 'haṁ tvāṁ

sānugaṁ saparicchadam

sadā sannihitaṁ vīra

tatra māṁ drakṣyate bhavān

SYNONYMS



rakṣiṣye-shall protect; sarvataḥ-in all respects; aham-I; tvām-you; sa-anugam-with your associates; sa-paricchadam-with your paraphernalia; sadā-always; sannihitam-situated nearby; vīra-O great hero; tatra-there, in your place; mām-Me; drakṣyate-will be able to see; bhavān-you.





O great hero, I shall always be with you and give you protection in all respects along with your associates and paraphernalia. Moreover, you will always be able to see Me there.





TEXT 36



tatra dānava-daityānāṁ

saṅgāt te bhāva āsuraḥ

dṛṣṭvā mad-anubhāvaṁ vai

sadyaḥ kuṇṭho vinaṅkṣyati

SYNONYMS



tatra-in that place; dānava-daityānām-of the demons and the Dānavas; saṅgāt-because of the association; te-your; bhāvaḥ-mentality; āsuraḥ-demoniac; dṛṣṭvā-by observing; mat-anubhāvam-My superexcellent power; vai-indeed; sadyaḥ-immediately; kuṇṭhaḥ-anxiety; vinaṅkṣyati-will be destroyed.





Because there you will see My supreme prowess, your materialistic ideas and anxieties that have arisen from your association with the demons and Dānavas will immediately be vanquished.





The Lord assured Bali Mahārāja of all protection, and finally the Lord assured him of protection from the effects of bad association with the demons. Bali Mahārāja certainly became an exalted devotee, but he was somewhat anxious because his association was not purely devotional. The Supreme Personality of Godhead therefore assured him that his demoniac mentality would be annihilated. In other words, by the association of devotees, the demoniac mentality is vanquished.



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ





(Bhāg. 3.25.25)



When a demon associates with devotees engaged in glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he gradually becomes a pure devotee.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Bali Mahārāja Surrenders His Life."



Chapter Twenty-three



The Demigods Regain the Heavenly Planets





This chapter describes how Bali Mahārāja, along with his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja, entered the planet Sutala and how the Supreme Personality of Godhead allowed Indra to reenter the heavenly planet.





The great soul Bali Mahārāja experienced that the highest gain in life is to attain devotional service under the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet in full surrender. Being fixed in this conclusion, his heart full of ecstatic devotion and his eyes full of tears, he offered obeisances to the Personality of Godhead and then, with his associates, entered the planet known as Sutala. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead satisfied the desire of Aditi and reinstalled Lord Indra. Prahlāda Mahārāja, being aware of Bali's release from arrest, then described the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this material world. Prahlāda Mahārāja praised the Supreme Lord for creating the material world, for being equal to everyone and for being extremely liberal to the devotees, just like a desire tree. Indeed, Prahlāda Mahārāja said that the Lord is kind not only to His devotees but also to the demons. In this way he described the unlimited causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then, with folded hands, he offered his respectful obeisances unto the Lord, and after circumambulating the Lord he also entered the planet Sutala in accordance with the Lord's order. The Lord then ordered Śukrācārya to describe Bali Mahārāja's faults and discrepancies in executing the sacrificial ceremony. Śukrācārya became free from fruitive actions by chanting the holy name of the Lord, and he explained how chanting can diminish all the faults of the conditioned soul. He then completed Bali Mahārāja's sacrificial ceremony. All the great saintly persons accepted Lord Vāmanadeva as the benefactor of Lord Indra because He had returned Indra to his heavenly planet. They accepted the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the maintainer of all the affairs of the universe. Being very happy, Indra, along with his associates, placed Vāmanadeva before him and reentered the heavenly planet in their airplane. Having seen the wonderful activities of Lord Viṣṇu in the sacrificial arena of Bali Mahārāja, all the demigods, saintly persons, Pitās, Bhūtas and Siddhas glorified the Lord again and again. The chapter concludes by saying that the most auspicious function of the conditioned soul is to chant and hear about the glorious activities of Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity uktavantaṁ puruṣaṁ purātanaṁ

mahānubhāvo 'khila-sādhu-sammataḥ

baddhāñjalir bāṣpa-kalākulekṣaṇo

bhakty-utkalo gadgadayā girābravīt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; uktavantam-upon the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purātanam-the oldest of everyone; mahā-anubhāvaḥ-Bali Mahārāja, who was a great and exalted soul; akhila-sādhu-sammataḥ-as approved by all saintly persons; baddha-añjaliḥ-with folded hands; bāṣpa-kala-ākula-īkṣaṇaḥ-whose eyes were filled with tears; bhakti-utkalaḥ-full of ecstatic devotion; gadgadayā-which were faltering in devotional ecstasy; girā-by such words; abravīt-said.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When the supreme, ancient, eternal Personality of Godhead had thus spoken to Bali Mahārāja, who is universally accepted as a pure devotee of the Lord and therefore a great soul, Bali Mahārāja, his eyes filled with tears, his hands folded and his voice faltering in devotional ecstasy, responded as follows.





TEXT 2



śrī-balir uvāca

aho praṇāmāya kṛtaḥ samudyamaḥ

prapanna-bhaktārtha-vidhau samāhitaḥ

yal loka-pālais tvad-anugraho 'marair

alabdha-pūrvo 'pasade 'sure 'rpitaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-baliḥ uvāca-Bali Mahārāja said; aho-alas; praṇāmāya-to offer my respectful obeisances; kṛtaḥ-I did; samudyamaḥ-only an endeavor; prapanna-bhakta-artha-vidhau-in the regulative principles observed by pure devotees; samāhitaḥ-is capable; yat-that; loka-pālaiḥ-by the leaders of various planets; tvat-anugrahaḥ-Your causeless mercy; amaraiḥ-by the demigods; alabdha-pūrvaḥ-not achieved previously; apasade-unto a fallen person like me; asure-belonging to the asura community; arpitaḥ-endowed.





Bali Mahārāja said: What a wonderful effect there is in even attempting to offer respectful obeisances to You! I merely endeavored to offer You obeisances, but nonetheless the attempt was as successful as those of pure devotees. The causeless mercy You have shown to me, a fallen demon, was never achieved even by the demigods or the leaders of the various planets.





When Vāmanadeva appeared before Bali Mahārāja, Bali Mahārāja immediately wanted to offer Him respectful obeisances, but he was unable to do so because of the presence of Śukrācārya and other demoniac associates. The Lord is so merciful, however, that although Bali Mahārāja did not actually offer obeisances but only endeavored to do so within his mind, the Supreme Personality of Godhead blessed him with more mercy than even the demigods could ever expect. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (2.40), svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt: "Even a little advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear." The Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as bhāva-grāhī janārdana because He takes only the essence of a devotee's attitude. If a devotee sincerely surrenders, the Lord, as the Supersoul in everyone's heart, immediately understands this. Thus even though, externally, a devotee may not render full service, if he is internally sincere and serious the Lord welcomes his service nonetheless. Thus the Lord is known as bhāva-grāhī janārdana because He takes the essence of one's devotional mentality.





TEXT 3



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity uktvā harim ānatya

brahmāṇaṁ sabhavaṁ tataḥ

viveśa sutalaṁ prīto

balir muktaḥ sahāsuraiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti uktvā-saying this; harim-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; ānatya-offering obeisances; brahmāṇam-unto Lord Brahmā; sa-bhavam-with Lord Śiva; tataḥ-thereafter; viveśa-he entered; sutalam-the planet Sutala; prītaḥ-being fully satisfied; baliḥ-Bali Mahārāja; muktaḥ-thus released; saha asuraiḥ-with his asura associates.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After speaking in this way, Bali Mahārāja offered his obeisances first to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, and then to Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. Thus he was released from the bondage of the nāga-pāśa [the ropes of Varuṇa], and in full satisfaction he entered the planet known as Sutala.





TEXT 4



evam indrāya bhagavān

pratyānīya triviṣṭapam

pūrayitvāditeḥ kāmam

aśāsat sakalaṁ jagat

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; indrāya-unto King Indra; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyānīya-giving back; tri-viṣṭapam-his supremacy in the heavenly planets; pūrayitvā-fulfilling; aditeḥ-of Aditi; kāmam-the desire; aśāsat-ruled; sakalam-complete; jagat-universe.





Thus having delivered the proprietorship of the heavenly planets to Indra and having fulfilled the desire of Aditi, mother of the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ruled the affairs of the universe.





TEXT 5



labdha-prasādaṁ nirmuktaṁ

pautraṁ vaṁśa-dharaṁ balim

niśāmya bhakti-pravaṇaḥ

prahrāda idam abravīt

SYNONYMS



labdha-prasādam-who had achieved the blessings of the Lord; nirmuktam-who was released from bondage; pautram-his grandson; vaṁśa-dharam-the descendant; balim-Bali Mahārāja; niśāmya-after overhearing; bhakti-pravaṇaḥ-in fully ecstatic devotion; prahrādaḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja; idam-this; abravīt-spoke.





When Prahlāda Mahārāja heard how Bali Mahārāja, his grandson and descendant, had been released from bondage and had achieved the benediction of the Lord, he spoke as follows in a tone of greatly ecstatic devotion.





TEXT 6



śrī-prahrāda uvāca

nemaṁ viriñco labhate prasādaṁ

na śrīr na śarvaḥ kim utāpare 'nye

yan no 'surāṇām asi durga-pālo

viśvābhivandyair abhivanditāṅghriḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca-Prahlāda Mahārāja said; na-not; imam-this; viriñcaḥ-even Lord Brahmā; labhate-can achieve; prasādam-benediction; na-nor; śrīḥ-the goddess of fortune; na-nor; śarvaḥ-Lord Śiva; kim uta-what to speak of; apare anye-others; yat-which benediction; naḥ-of us; asurāṇām-the demons; asi-You have become; durga-pālaḥ-the maintainer; viśva-abhivandyaiḥ-by personalities like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who are worshiped all over the universe; abhivandita-aṅghriḥ-whose lotus feet are worshiped.





Prahlāda Mahārāja said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are universally worshiped; even Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva worship Your lotus feet. Yet although You are such a great personality, You have kindly promised to protect us, the demons. I think that such kindness has never been achieved even by Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva or the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, what to speak of other demigods or common people.





The word durga-pāla is significant. The word durga means "that which does not go very easily." Generally durga refers to a fort, which one cannot very easily enter. Another meaning of durga is "difficulty." Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead promised to protect Bali Mahārāja and his associates from all dangers, He is addressed here as durga-pāla, the Lord who gives protection from all miserable conditions.





TEXT 7



yat-pāda-padma-makaranda-niṣevaṇena

brahmādayaḥ śaraṇadāśnuvate vibhūtīḥ

kasmād vayaṁ kusṛtayaḥ khala-yonayas te

dākṣiṇya-dṛṣṭi-padavīṁ bhavataḥ praṇītāḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-of whom; pāda-padma-of the lotus flower of the feet; makaranda-of the honey; niṣevaṇena-by tasting the sweetness of rendering service; brahma-ādayaḥ-great personalities like Lord Brahmā; śaraṇa-da-O my Lord, supreme shelter of everyone; aśnuvate-enjoy; vibhūtīḥ-benedictions given by You; kasmāt-how; vayam-we; ku-sṛtayaḥ-all the rogues and thieves; khala-yonayaḥ-born of an envious dynasty, namely that of the demons; te-those asuras; dākṣiṇya-dṛṣṭi-padavīm-the position bestowed by the merciful glance; bhavataḥ-of Your Lordship; praṇītāḥ-have achieved.





O supreme shelter of everyone, great personalities like Brahmā enjoy their perfection simply by tasting the honey of rendering service at Your lotus feet. But as for us, who are all rogues and debauchees born of an envious family of demons, how have we received Your mercy? It has been possible only because Your mercy is causeless.





TEXT 8



citraṁ tavehitam aho 'mita-yogamāyā-

līlā-visṛṣṭa-bhuvanasya viśāradasya

sarvātmanaḥ samadṛśo 'viṣamaḥ svabhāvo

bhakta-priyo yad asi kalpataru-svabhāvaḥ

SYNONYMS



citram-very wonderful; tava īhitam-all Your activities; aho-alas; amita-unlimited; yogamāyā-of Your spiritual potency; līlā-by the pastimes; visṛṣṭa-bhuvanasya-of Your Lordship, by whom all the universes have been created; viśāradasya-of Your Lordship, who are expert in all respects; sarva-ātmanaḥ-of Your Lordship, who pervade all; sama-dṛśaḥ-and who are equal toward all; aviṣamaḥ-without differentiation; svabhāvaḥ-that is Your characteristic; bhakta-priyaḥ-under the circumstances You become favorable to the devotees; yat-because; asi-You are; kalpataru-svabhāvaḥ-having the characteristic of a desire tree.





O my Lord, Your pastimes are all wonderfully performed by Your inconceivable spiritual energy; and by her perverted reflection, the material energy, You have created all the universes. As the Supersoul of all living entities, You are aware of everything, and therefore You are certainly equal toward everyone. Nonetheless, You favor Your devotees. This is not partiality, however, for Your characteristic is just like that of a desire tree, which yields everything according to one's desire.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (9.29):



samo 'haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo 'sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham





"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him." The Supreme Personality of Godhead is certainly equal toward all living entities, but a devotee who fully surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord is different from a nondevotee. In other words, everyone can take shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord to enjoy equal benedictions from the Lord, but nondevotees do not do so, and therefore they suffer the consequences created by the material energy. We can understand this fact by a simple example. The king or government is equal to all citizens. Therefore, if a citizen capable of receiving special favors from the government is offered such favors, this does not mean that the government is partial. One who knows how to receive favors from the authority can receive them, but one who does not neglects these favors and does not receive them. There are two classes of men-the demons and the demigods. The demigods are fully aware of the Supreme Lord's position, and therefore they are obedient to Him, but even if demons know about the supremacy of the Lord they purposely defy His authority. Therefore, the Lord makes distinctions according to the mentality of the living being, but otherwise He is equal to everyone. Like a desire tree, the Lord fulfills the desires of one who takes shelter of Him, but one who does not take such shelter is distinct from the surrendered soul. One who takes shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord is favored by the Lord, regardless of whether such a person is a demon or a demigod.





TEXT 9



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

vatsa prahrāda bhadraṁ te

prayāhi sutalālayam

modamānaḥ sva-pautreṇa

jñātīnāṁ sukham āvaha

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Personality of Godhead said; vatsa-O My dear son; prahrāda-O Prahlāda Mahārāja; bhadram te-all auspiciousness unto you; prayāhi-please go; sutala-ālayam-to the place known as Sutala; modamānaḥ-in a spirit of jubilation; sva-pautreṇa-with your grandson (Bali Mahārāja); jñātīnām-of your relatives and friends; sukham-happiness; āvaha-just enjoy.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear son Prahlāda, all good fortune unto you. For the time being, please go to the place known as Sutala and there enjoy happiness with your grandson and your other relatives and friends.





TEXT 10



nityaṁ draṣṭāsi māṁ tatra

gadā-pāṇim avasthitam

mad-darśana-mahāhlāda-

dhvasta-karma-nibandhanaḥ

SYNONYMS



nityam-constantly; draṣṭā-the seer; asi-you shall be; mām-unto Me; tatra-there (in Sutalaloka); gadā-pāṇim-with a club in My hand; avasthitam-situated there; mat-darśana-by seeing Me in that form; mahā-āhlāda-by the great transcendental bliss; dhvasta-having been vanquished; karma-nibandhanaḥ-the bondage of fruitive activities.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead assured Prahlāda Mahārāja: You shall be able to see Me there in My usual feature with conchshell, disc, club and lotus in My hand. Because of your transcendental bliss due to always personally seeing Me, you will have no further bondage to fruitive activities.





Karma-bandha, the bondage of fruitive activities, entails the repetition of birth and death. One performs fruitive activities in such a way that he creates another body for his next life. As long as one is attached to fruitive activities, he must accept another material body. This repeated acceptance of material bodies is called saṁsāra-bandhana. To stop this, a devotee is advised to see the Supreme Lord constantly. The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, or neophyte devotee, is therefore advised to visit the temple every day and see the form of the Lord regularly. Thus the neophyte devotee can be freed from the bondage of fruitive activities.





TEXTS 11–12



śrī-śuka uvāca

ājñāṁ bhagavato rājan

prahrādo balinā saha

bāḍham ity amala-prajño

mūrdhny ādhāya kṛtāñjaliḥ

parikramyādi-puruṣaṁ



sarvāsura-camūpatiḥ

praṇatas tad-anujñātaḥ

praviveśa mahā-bilam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ājñām-the order; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); prahrādaḥ-Mahārāja Prahlāda; balinā saha-accompanied by Bali Mahārāja; bāḍham-yes, sir, what You say is all right; iti-thus; amala-prajñaḥ-Prahlāda Mahārāja, who had clear intelligence; mūrdhni-on his head; ādhāya-accepting; kṛta-añjaliḥ-with folded hands; parikramya-after circumambulating; ādi-puruṣam-the supreme original person, Bhagavān; sarva-asura-camūpatiḥ-the master of all the chiefs of the demons; praṇataḥ-after offering obeisances; tat-anujñātaḥ-being permitted by Him (Lord Vāmana); praviveśa-entered; mahā-bilam-the planet known as Sutala.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Accompanied by Bali Mahārāja, my dear King Parīkṣit, Prahlāda Mahārāja, the master of all the chiefs of the demons, took the Supreme Lord's order on his head with folded hands. After saying yes to the Lord, circumambulating Him and offering Him respectful obeisances, he entered the lower planetary system known as Sutala.





TEXT 13



athāhośanasaṁ rājan

harir nārāyaṇo 'ntike

āsīnam ṛtvijāṁ madhye

sadasi brahma-vādinām

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; āha-said; uśanasam-unto Śukrācārya; rājan-O King; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nārāyaṇaḥ-the Lord; antike-nearby; āsīnam-who was sitting; ṛtvijām madhye-in the group of all the priests; sadasi-in the assembly; brahma-vādinām-of the followers of Vedic principles.





Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, thereafter addressed Śukrācārya, who was sitting nearby in the midst of the assembly with the priests [brahma, hotā, udgātā and adhvaryu]. O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, these priests were all brahma-vādīs, followers of the Vedic principles for performing sacrifices.





TEXT 14



brahman santanu śiṣyasya

karma-cchidraṁ vitanvataḥ

yat tat karmasu vaiṣamyaṁ

brahma-dṛṣṭaṁ samaṁ bhavet

SYNONYMS



brahman-O brāhmaṇa; santanu-please describe; śiṣyasya-of your disciple; karma-chidram-the discrepancies in the fruitive activities; vitanvataḥ-of he who was performing sacrifices; yat tat-that which; karmasu-in the fruitive activities; vaiṣamyam-discrepancy; brahma-dṛṣṭam-when it is judged by the brāhmaṇas; samam-equipoised; bhavet-it so becomes.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, Śukrācārya, please describe the fault or discrepancy in your disciple Bali Mahārāja, who engaged in performing sacrifices. This fault will be nullified when judged in the presence of qualified brāhmaṇas.





When Bali Mahārāja and Prahlāda Mahārāja had departed for the planet Sutala, Lord Viṣṇu asked Śukrācārya what the fault was in Bali Mahārāja for which Śukrācārya had cursed him. It might be argued that since Bali Mahārāja had now left the scene, how could his faults be judged? In reply to this, Lord Viṣṇu informed Śukrācārya that there was no need for Bali Mahārāja's presence, for his faults and discrepancies could be nullified if judged before the brāhmaṇas. As will be seen in the next verse, Bali Mahārāja had no faults; Śukrācārya had unnecessarily cursed him. Nonetheless, this was better for Bali Mahārāja. Being cursed by Śukrācārya, Bali Mahārāja was deprived of all his possessions, with the result that the Supreme Personality of Godhead favored him for his strong faith in devotional service. Of course, a devotee is not required to engage in fruitive activities. As stated in the śāstra, sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā (Bhāg. 4.31.14). By worshiping Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one satisfies everyone. Because Bali Mahārāja had satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there were no discrepancies in his performance of sacrifices.





TEXT 15



śrī-śukra uvāca

kutas tat-karma-vaiṣamyaṁ

yasya karmeśvaro bhavān

yajñeśo yajña-puruṣaḥ

sarva-bhāvena pūjitaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukraḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukrācārya said; kutaḥ-where is that; tat-of him (Bali Mahārāja); karma-vaiṣamyam-discrepancy in discharging fruitive activities; yasya-of whom (Bali Mahārāja); karma-īśvaraḥ-the master of all fruitive activities; bhavān-Your Lordship; yajña-īśaḥ-You are the enjoyer of all sacrifices; yajña-puruṣaḥ-You are the person for whose pleasure all sacrifices are offered; sarva-bhāvena-in all respects; pūjitaḥ-having worshiped.





Śukrācārya said: My Lord, You are the enjoyer and lawgiver in all performances of sacrifice, and You are the yajña-puruṣa, the person to whom all sacrifices are offered. If one has fully satisfied You, where is the chance of discrepancies or faults in his performances of sacrifice?





In Bhagavad-gītā (5.29) the Lord says, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram: the Lord, the supreme proprietor, is the actual person to he satisfied by the performance of yajñas. The Viṣṇu Purāṇa (3.8.9) says:



varṇāśramācāravatā

puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā

nanyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam





All the Vedic ritualistic sacrifices are performed for the purpose of satisfying Lord Viṣṇu, the yajña-puruṣa. The divisions of society-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa-are all meant to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu. To act according to this principle of the varṇāśrama institution is called varṇāśramācaraṇa. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.13), Sūta Gosvāmī says:



ataḥ pumbhir dvija-śreṣṭhā

varṇāśrama-vibhāgaśaḥ

svanuṣṭhitasya dharmasya

saṁsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam





"O best among the twice-born, it is therefore concluded that the highest perfection one can achieve by discharging his prescribed duties according to caste divisions and orders of life is to please the Personality of Godhead." Everything is meant to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, since Bali Mahārāja had satisfied the Lord, he had no faults, and Śukrācārya admitted that cursing him was not good.





TEXT 16



mantratas tantrataś chidraṁ

deśa-kālārha-vastutaḥ

sarvaṁ karoti niśchidram

anusaṅkīrtanaṁ tava

SYNONYMS



mantrataḥ-in pronouncing the Vedic mantras improperly; tantrataḥ-in insufficient knowledge for following regulative principles; chidram-discrepancy; deśa-in the matter of country; kāla-and time; arha-and recipient; vastutaḥ-and paraphernalia; sarvam-all these; karoti-makes; niśchidram-without discrepancy; anusaṅkīrtanam-constantly chanting the holy name; tava-of Your Lordship.





There may be discrepancies in pronouncing the mantras and observing the regulative principles, and, moreover, there may be discrepancies in regard to time, place, person and paraphernalia. But when Your Lordship's holy name is chanted, everything becomes faultless.





Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has recommended:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way." (Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa 38.126) In this age of Kali, it is extremely difficult to perform Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or sacrifices perfectly. Hardly anyone can chant the Vedic mantras with perfect pronunciation or accumulate the paraphernalia for Vedic performances. Therefore the sacrifice recommended in this age is saṅkīrtana, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ (Bhāg. 11.5.29). Instead of wasting time performing Vedic sacrifices, those who are intelligent, those who possess good brain substance, should take to the chanting of the Lord's holy name and thus perform sacrifice perfectly. I have seen that many religious leaders are addicted to performing yajñas and spending hundreds and thousands of rupees for imperfect sacrificial performances. This is a lesson for those who unnecessarily execute such imperfect sacrifices. We should take the advice of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ). Although Śukrācārya was a strict brāhmaṇa addicted to ritualistic activities, he also admitted, niśchidram anusaṅkīrtanaṁ tava: "My Lord, constant chanting of the holy name of Your Lordship makes everything perfect." In Kali-yuga the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies cannot be performed as perfectly as before. Therefore Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has recommended that although one should take care to follow all the principles in every kind of spiritual activity, especially in worship of the Deity, there is still a chance of discrepancies, and one should compensate for this by chanting the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we therefore give special stress to the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra in all activities.





TEXT 17



tathāpi vadato bhūman

kariṣyāmy anuśāsanam

etac chreyaḥ paraṁ puṁsāṁ

yat tavājñānupālanam

SYNONYMS



tathāpi-although there was no fault on the part of Bali Mahārāja; vadataḥ-because of your order; bhūman-O Supreme; kariṣyāmi- I must execute; anuśāsanam-because it is Your order; etat-this is; śreyaḥ-that which is the most auspicious; param-supreme; puṁsām-of all persons; yat-because; tava ājñā-anupālanam-to obey Your order.





Lord Viṣṇu, I must nonetheless act in obedience to Your order because obeying Your order is most auspicious and is the first duty of everyone.





TEXT 18



śrī-śuka uvāca

pratinandya harer ājñām

uśanā bhagavān iti

yajña-cchidraṁ samādhatta

baler viprarṣibhiḥ saha

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pratinandya-offering all obeisances; hareḥ-of the Personality of Godhead; ājñām-the order; uśanāḥ-Śukrācārya; bhagavān-the most powerful; iti-thus; yajña-chidram-discrepancies in the performance of sacrifices; samādhatta-made it a point to fulfill; baleḥ-of Bali Mahārāja; vipra-ṛṣibhiḥ-the best brāhmaṇas; saha-along with.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In this way, the most powerful Śukrācārya accepted the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full respect. Along with the best brāhmaṇas, he began to compensate for the discrepancies in the sacrifices performed by Bali Mahārāja.





TEXT 19



evaṁ baler mahīṁ rājan

bhikṣitvā vāmano hariḥ

dadau bhrātre mahendrāya

tridivaṁ yat parair hṛtam

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; baleḥ-from Bali Mahārāja; mahīm-the land; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; bhikṣitvā-after begging; vāmanaḥ-His Lordship Vāmana; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadau-delivered; bhrātre-unto His brother; mahā-indrāya-Indra, the King of heaven; tridivam-the planetary system of the demigods; yat-which; paraiḥ-by others; hṛtam-was taken.





O King Parīkṣit, thus having taken all the land of Bali Mahārāja by begging, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Vāmanadeva, delivered to His brother Indra all the land taken away by Indra's enemy.





TEXTS 20–21



prajāpati-patir brahmā

devarṣi-pitṛ-bhūmipaiḥ

dakṣa-bhṛgv-aṅgiro-mukhyaiḥ

kumāreṇa bhavena ca

kaśyapasyāditeḥ prītyai



sarva-bhūta-bhavāya ca

lokānāṁ loka-pālānām

akarod vāmanaṁ patim

SYNONYMS



prajāpati-patiḥ-the master of all Prajāpatis; brahmā-Lord Brahmā; deva-with the demigods; ṛṣi-with the great saintly persons; pitṛ-with the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; bhūmipaiḥ-with the Manus; dakṣa-with Dakṣa; bhṛgu-with Bhṛgu Muni; aṅgiraḥ-with Aṅgirā Muni; mukhyaiḥ-with all the chiefs of the various planetary systems; kumāreṇa-with Kārttikeya; bhavena-with Lord Śiva; ca-also; kaśyapasya-of Kaśyapa Muni; aditeḥ-of Aditi; prītyai-f or the pleasure; sarva-bhūta-bhavāya-for the auspiciousness of all living entities; ca-also; lokānām-of all planetary systems; loka-pālānām-of the predominating persons in all planets; akarot-made; vāmanam-Lord Vāmana; patim-the supreme leader.





Lord Brahmā [the master of King Dakṣa and all other Prajāpatis], accompanied by all the demigods, the great saintly persons, the inhabitants of Pitṛloka, the Manus, the munis, and such leaders as Dakṣa, Bhṛgu and Aṅgirā, as well as Kārttikeya and Lord Śiva, accepted Lord Vāmanadeva as the protector of everyone. He did this for the pleasure of Kaśyapa Muni and his wife Aditi and for the welfare of all the inhabitants of the universe, including their various leaders.





TEXTS 22–23



vedānāṁ sarva-devānāṁ

dharmasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

maṅgalānāṁ vratānāṁ ca

kalpaṁ svargāpavargayoḥ

upendraṁ kalpayāṁ cakre



patiṁ sarva-vibhūtaye

tadā sarvāṇi bhūtāni

bhṛśaṁ mumudire nṛpa

SYNONYMS



vedānām-(for the protection) of all the Vedas; sarva-devānām-of all the demigods; dharmasya-of all principles of religion; yaśasaḥ-of all fame; śriyaḥ-of all opulences; maṅgalānām-of all auspiciousness; vratānām ca-and of all vows; kalpam-the most expert; svarga-apavargayoḥ-of elevation to the heavenly planets or liberation from material bondage; upendram-Lord Vāmanadeva; kalpayām cakre-they made it the plan; patim-the master; sarva-vibhūtaye-for all purposes; tadā-at that time; sarvāṇi-all; bhūtāni-living entities; bhṛśam-very much; mumudire-became happy; nṛpa-O King.





O King Parīkṣit, Indra was considered the King of all the universe, but the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, wanted Upendra, Lord Vāmanadeva, as the protector of the Vedas, the principles of religion, fame, opulence, auspiciousness, vows, elevation to the higher planetary system, and liberation. Thus they accepted Upendra, Lord Vāmanadeva, as the supreme master of everything. This decision made all living entities extremely happy.





TEXT 24



tatas tv indraḥ puraskṛtya

deva-yānena vāmanam

loka-pālair divaṁ ninye

brahmaṇā cānumoditaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; tu-but; indraḥ-the King of heaven; puraskṛtya-keeping forward; deva-yānena-by an airplane used by the demigods; vāmanam-Lord Vāmana; loka-pālaiḥ-with the chiefs of all other planets; divam-to the heavenly planets; ninye-brought; brahmaṇā-by Lord Brahmā; ca-also; anumoditaḥ-being approved.





Thereafter, along with all the leaders of the heavenly planets, Indra, the King of heaven, placed Lord Vāmanadeva before him and, with the approval of Lord Brahmā, brought Him to the heavenly planet in a celestial airplane.





TEXT 25



prāpya tri-bhuvanaṁ cendra

upendra-bhuja-pālitaḥ

śriyā paramayā juṣṭo

mumude gata-sādhvasaḥ

SYNONYMS



prāpya-after obtaining; tri-bhuvanam-the three worlds; ca-also; indraḥ-the King of heaven; upendra-bhuja-pālitaḥ-being protected by the arms of Vāmanadeva, Upendra; śriyā-by opulence; paramayā-by supreme; juṣṭaḥ-thus being served; mumude-enjoyed; gata-sādhvasaḥ-without fear of the demons.





Indra, King of heaven, being protected by the arms of Vāmanadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thus regained his rule of the three worlds and was reinstated in his own position, supremely opulent, fearless and fully satisfied.





TEXTS 26–27



brahmā śarvaḥ kumāraś ca

bhṛgv-ādyā munayo nṛpa

pitaraḥ sarva-bhūtāni

siddhā vaimānikāś ca ye

sumahat karma tad viṣṇor



gāyantaḥ param adbhutam

dhiṣṇyāni svāni te jagmur

aditiṁ ca śaśaṁsire

SYNONYMS



brahmā-Lord Brahmā; śarvaḥ-Lord Śiva; kumāraḥ ca-also Lord Kārttikeya; bhṛgu-ādyāḥ-headed by Bhṛgu Muni, one of the seven ṛṣis; munayaḥ-the saintly persons; nṛpa-O King; pitaraḥ-the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; sarva-bhūtāni-other living entities; siddhāḥ-the residents of Siddhaloka; vaimānikāḥ ca-human beings who can travel everywhere in outer space by airplane; ye-such persons; sumahat-highly praiseworthy; karma-activities; tat-all those (activities); viṣṇoḥ-done by Lord Viṣṇu; gāyantaḥ-glorifying; param adbhutam-uncommon and wonderful; dhiṣṇyāni-to their respective planets; svāni-own; te-all of them; jagmuḥ-departed; aditim ca-as well as Aditi; śaśaṁsire-praised all these activities of the Lord.





Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Lord Kārttikeya, the great sage Bhṛgu, other saintly persons, the inhabitants of Pitṛloka and all other living entities present, including the inhabitants of Siddhaloka and living entities who travel in outer space by airplane, all glorified the uncommon activities of Lord Vāmanadeva. O King, while chanting about and glorifying the Lord, they returned to their respective heavenly planets. They also praised the position of Aditi.





TEXT 28



sarvam etan mayākhyātaṁ

bhavataḥ kula-nandana

urukramasya caritaṁ

śrotṝṇām agha-mocanam

SYNONYMS



sarvam-all; etat-these incidents; mayā-by me; ākhyātam-have been described; bhavataḥ-of you; kula-nandana-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the pleasure of your dynasty; urukramasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; caritam-activities; śrotṝṇām-of the audience; agha-mocanam-such hearing of the Lord's activities certainly vanquishes the results of sinful activities.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, pleasure of your dynasty, I have now described to you everything about the wonderful activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Vāmanadeva. Those who hear about this are certainly freed from all the results of sinful activities.





TEXT 29



pāraṁ mahimna uruvikramato gṛṇāno

yaḥ pārthivāni vimame sa rajāṁsi martyaḥ

kiṁ jāyamāna uta jāta upaiti martya

ity āha mantra-dṛg ṛṣiḥ puruṣasya yasya

SYNONYMS



pāram-the measurement; mahimnaḥ-of the glories; uruvikramataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who acts wonderfully; gṛṇānaḥ-can count; yaḥ-a person who; pārthivāni-of the whole planet earth; vimame-can count; saḥ-he; rajāṁsi-the atoms; martyaḥ-a human being who is subject to death; kim-what; jāyamānaḥ-one who will take birth in the future; uta-either; jātaḥ-one who is already born; upaiti-can do; martyaḥ-a person subject to death; iti-thus; āha-said; mantra-dṛk-who could foresee the Vedic mantras; ṛṣiḥ-the great saintly Vasiṣṭha Muni; puruṣasya-of the supreme person; yasya-of whom.





One who is subject to death cannot measure the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Trivikrama, Lord Viṣṇu, any more than he can count the number of atoms on the entire planet earth. No one, whether born already or destined to take birth, is able to do this. This has been sung by the great sage Vasiṣṭha.





Vasiṣṭha Muni has given a mantra about Lord Viṣṇu: na te viṣṇor jāyamāno na jāto mahimnaḥ pāram anantam āpa. No one can estimate the extent of the uncommonly glorious activities of Lord Viṣṇu. Unfortunately, there are so-called scientists who are subject to death at every moment but are trying to understand by speculation the wonderful creation of the cosmos. This is a foolish attempt. Long, long ago, Vasiṣṭha Muni said that no one in the past could measure the glories of the Lord and that no one can do so in the future. One must simply be satisfied with seeing the glorious activities of the Supreme Lord's creation. The Lord therefore says in Bhagavad-gītā (10.42), viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam ekāṁśena sthito jagat: "With a single fragment of Myself, I pervade and support this entire universe." The material world consists of innumerable universes, each one full of innumerable planets, which are all considered to be products of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's material energy. Yet this is only one fourth of God's creation. The other three fourths of creation constitute the spiritual world. Among the innumerable planets in only one universe, the so-called scientists cannot understand even the moon and Mars, but they try to defy the creation of the Supreme Lord and His uncommon energy. Such men have been described as crazy. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma (Bhāg. 5.5.4). Such crazy men unnecessarily waste time, energy and money in attempting to defy the glorious activities of Urukrama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 30



ya idaṁ deva-devasya

harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ

avatārānucaritaṁ

śṛṇvan yāti parāṁ gatim

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; idam-this; deva-devasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by the demigods; hareḥ-of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Hari; adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ-whose activities are all wonderful; avatāra-anucaritam-activities performed in His different incarnations; śṛṇvan-if one continues to hear; yāti-he goes; parām gatim-to the supreme perfection, back home, back to Godhead.





If one hears about the uncommon activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His various incarnations, he is certainly elevated to the higher planetary system or even brought back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 31



kriyamāṇe karmaṇīdaṁ

daive pitrye 'tha mānuṣe

yatra yatrānukīrtyeta

tat teṣāṁ sukṛtaṁ viduḥ

SYNONYMS



kriyamāṇe-upon the performance; karmaṇi-of a ritualistic ceremony; idam-this description of the characteristics of Vāmanadeva; daive-to please the demigods; pitrye-or to please the forefathers, as in a śrāddha ceremony; atha-either; mānuṣe-for the pleasure of human society, as in marriages; yatra-wherever; yatra-whenever; anukīrtyeta-is described; tat-that; teṣām-for them; sukṛtam-auspicious; viduḥ-everyone should understand.





Whenever the activities of Vāmanadeva are described in the course of a ritualistic ceremony, whether the ceremony be performed to please the demigods, to please one's forefathers in Pitṛloka, or to celebrate a social event like a marriage, that ceremony should be understood to be extremely auspicious.





There are three kinds of ceremonies-specifically, ceremonies to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the demigods, those performed for social celebrations like marriages and birthdays, and those meant to please the forefathers, like the śrāddha ceremony. In all these ceremonies, large amounts of money are spent for various activities, but here it is suggested that if along with this there is recitation of the wonderful activities of Vāmanadeva, certainly the ceremony will be carried out successfully and will be free of all discrepancies.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-third Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Demigods Regain the Heavenly planets."



Chapter Twenty-four



Matsya, the Lord's Fish Incarnation





This chapter describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead's incarnation as a fish, and it also describes the saving of Mahārāja Satyavrata from an inundation.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead expands Himself by svāṁśa (His personal expansions) and vibhinnāṁśa (His expansions as the living entities). As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8), paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears on this planet for the protection of the sādhus, or devotees, and for the destruction of the miscreants, or nondevotees. He especially descends to give protection to the cows, the brāhmaṇas, the demigods, the devotees and the Vedic system of religion. Thus He appears in various forms-sometimes as a fish, sometimes a boar, sometimes Nṛsiṁhadeva, sometimes Vāmanadeva and so on-but in any form or incarnation, although He comes within the atmosphere of the material modes of nature, He is unaffected. This is a sign of His supreme controlling power. Although He comes within the material atmosphere, māyā cannot touch Him. Therefore, no material qualities can be attributed to Him in any degree.





Once, at the end of the previous kalpa, a demon named Hayagrīva wanted to take the Vedic knowledge away from Lord Brahmā at the time of annihilation. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead took the incarnation of a fish at the beginning of the period of Svāyambhuva Manu and saved the Vedas. During the reign of Cākṣuṣa Manu there was a king named Satyavrata, who was a great pious ruler. To save him, the Lord appeared as the fish incarnation for a second time. King Satyavrata later became the son of the sun-god and was known as Śrāddhadeva. He was established as Manu by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





To receive the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King Satyavrata engaged in the austerity of subsisting only by drinking water. Once, while performing this austerity on the bank of the Kṛtamālā River and offering oblations of water with the palm of his hand, he found a small fish. The fish appealed to the King for protection, asking the King to keep Him in a safe place. Although the King did not know that the small fish was the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, as a king he gave shelter to the fish and kept Him in a water jug. The fish, being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, wanted to show His potency to King Satyavrata, and thus He immediately expanded His body in such a way that He could no longer be kept in the jug of water. The King then put the fish in a big well, but the well was also too small. Then the King put the fish in a lake, but the lake was also unsuitable. Finally the King put the fish in the sea, but even the sea could not accommodate Him. Thus the King understood that the fish was no one else but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he requested the Lord to describe His incarnation as a fish. The Personality of Godhead, being pleased with the King, informed him that within a week there would be an inundation throughout the universe and that the fish incarnation would protect the King, along with the ṛṣis, herbs, seeds and other living entities, in a boat, which would be attached to the fish's horn. After saying this, the Lord disappeared. King Satyavrata offered respectful obeisances to the Supreme Lord and continued to meditate upon Him. In due course of time, annihilation took place, and the King saw a boat coming near. After getting aboard with learned brāhmaṇas and saintly persons, he offered prayers to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, and thus he taught Mahārāja Satyavrata and the saintly persons about Vedic knowledge from the core of the heart. King Satyavrata took his next birth as Vaivasvata Manu, who is mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā. Vivasvān manave prāha: the sun-god spoke the science of Bhagavad-gītā to his son Manu. Because of being the son of Vivasvān, this Manu is known as Vaivasvata Manu.





TEXT 1



śrī-rājovāca

bhagavañ chrotum icchāmi

harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ

avatāra-kathām ādyāṁ

māyā-matsya-viḍambanam

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; bhagavan-O most powerful; śrotum-to hear; icchāmi-I desire; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ-whose activities are wonderful; avatāra-kathām-pastimes of the incarnation; ādyām-first; māyā-matsya-viḍambanam-which is simply an imitation of a fish.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is eternally situated in His transcendental position, yet He descends to this material world and manifests Himself in various incarnations. His first incarnation was that of a great fish. O most powerful Śukadeva Gosvāmī, I wish to hear from you the pastimes of that fish incarnation.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-powerful, yet He accepted the form of an uncommon fish. This is one of the ten original incarnations of the Lord.





TEXTS 2–3



yad-artham adadhād rūpaṁ

mātsyaṁ loka-jugupsitam

tamaḥ-prakṛti-durmarṣaṁ

karma-grasta iveśvaraḥ

etan no bhagavan sarvaṁ



yathāvad vaktum arhasi

uttamaśloka-caritaṁ

sarva-loka-sukhāvaham

SYNONYMS



yat-artham-for what purpose; adadhāt-accepted; rūpam-form; mātsyam-of a fish; loka-jugupsitam-which is certainly not very favorable in this world; tamaḥ-in the mode of ignorance; prakṛti-such behavior; durmarṣam-which is certainly very painful and condemned; karma-grastaḥ-one who is under the laws of karma; iva-like; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; etat-all these facts; naḥ-unto us; bhagavan-O most powerful sage; sarvam-everything; yathāvat-properly; vaktum arhasi-kindly describe; uttamaśloka-caritam-the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-loka-sukha-āvaham-by hearing of which everyone becomes happy.





What was the purpose for which the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepted the abominable form of a fish, exactly as an ordinary living being accepts different forms under the laws of karma? The form of a fish is certainly condemned and full of terrible pain. O my lord, what was the purpose of this incarnation? Kindly explain this to us, for hearing about the pastimes of the Lord is auspicious for everyone.





Parīkṣit Mahārāja's question to Śukadeva Gosvāmī was based on this principle stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (4.7):



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham





"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself." The Lord appears in each incarnation to save the world from irreligious principles and especially to protect His devotees (paritrāṇāya sādhūnām). Vāmanadeva, for example, appeared to save the devotee Bali Mahārāja. Similarly, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepted the abominable form of a fish, He must have done so to favor some devotee. Parīkṣit Mahārāja was eager to know about the devotee for whom the Supreme Lord accepted this form.





TEXT 4



śrī-sūta uvāca

ity ukto viṣṇu-rātena

bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ

uvāca caritaṁ viṣṇor

matsya-rūpeṇa yat kṛtam

SYNONYMS



śrī-sūtaḥ uvāca-Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; iti uktaḥ-thus being questioned; viṣṇu-rātena-by Mahārāja Parīkṣit, known as Viṣṇurāta; bhagavān-the most powerful; bādarāyaṇiḥ-the son of Vyāsadeva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī; uvāca-said; caritam-the pastimes; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; matsya-rūpeṇa-by Him in the form of a fish; yat-whatever; kṛtam-was done.





Sūta Gosvāmī said: When Parīkṣit Mahārāja thus inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, that most powerful saintly person began describing the pastimes of the Lord's incarnation as a fish.





TEXT 5



śrī-śuka uvāca

go-vipra-sura-sādhūnāṁ

chandasām api ceśvaraḥ

rakṣām icchaṁs tanūr dhatte

dharmasyārthasya caiva hi

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; go-of the cows; vipra-of the brāhmaṇas; sura-of the demigods; sādhūnām-and of the devotees; chandasām api-even of the Vedic literature; ca-and; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller; rakṣām-the protection; icchan-desiring; tanūḥ dhatte-accepts the forms of incarnations; dharmasya-of the principles of religion; arthasya-of the principles of the purpose of life; ca-and; eva-indeed; hi-certainly.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, for the sake of protecting the cows, brāhmaṇas, demigods, devotees, the Vedic literature, religious principles, and principles to fulfill the purpose of life, the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts the forms of incarnations.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead generally appears in various types of incarnations to give protection to the cows and brāhmaṇas. The Lord is described as go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca; in other words, He is always eager to benefit the cows and brāhmaṇas. When Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared, He purposefully became a cowherd boy and showed personally how to give protection to the cows and calves. Similarly, He showed respect to Sudāmā Vipra, a real brāhmaṇa. From the Lord's personal activities, human society should learn how to give protection specifically to the brāhmaṇas and cows. Then the protection of religious principles, fulfillment of the aim of life and protection of Vedic knowledge can be achieved. Without protection of cows, brahminical culture cannot be maintained; and without brahminical culture, the aim of life cannot be fulfilled. The Lord, therefore, is described as go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya because His incarnation is only for the protection of the cows and brāhmaṇas. Unfortunately, because in Kali-yuga there is no protection of the cows and brahminical culture, everything is in a precarious position. If human society wants to be exalted, the leaders of society must follow the instructions of Bhagavad-gītā and give protection to the cows, the brāhmaṇas and brahminical culture.





TEXT 6



uccāvaceṣu bhūteṣu

caran vāyur iveśvaraḥ

noccāvacatvaṁ bhajate

nirguṇatvād dhiyo guṇaiḥ

SYNONYMS



ucca-avaceṣu-having higher or lower bodily forms; bhūteṣu-among the living entities; caran-behaving; vāyuḥ iva-exactly like the air; īśvaraḥ-the Supreme Lord; na-not; ucca-avacatvam-the quality of higher or lower grades of life; bhajate-accepts; nirguṇatvāt-because of being transcendental, above all material qualities; dhiyaḥ-generally; guṇaiḥ-by the modes of material nature.





Like the air passing through different types of atmosphere, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing sometimes as a human being and sometimes as a lower animal, is always transcendental. Because He is above the material modes of nature, He is unaffected by higher and lower forms.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master of the material nature (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacarācaram [Bg. 9.10]). Therefore, being the supreme controller of the laws of nature, the Lord cannot be under their influence. An example given in this regard is that although the wind blows through many places, the air is not affected by the qualities of these places. Although the air sometimes carries the odor of a filthy place, the air has nothing to do with such a place. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, being all-good and all-auspicious, is never affected by the material qualities like an ordinary living entity. puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi bhuṅkte prakṛtijān guṇān (Bg. 13.21). When the living entity is in the material nature, he is affected by its qualities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, is not affected. Disrespectfully, one who does not know this considers the Supreme Personality of Godhead an ordinary living being (avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ). Paraṁ bhāvam ajānantaḥ: such a conclusion is reached by the unintelligent because they are unaware of the transcendental qualities of the Lord.





TEXT 7



āsīd atīta-kalpānte

brāhmo naimittiko layaḥ

samudropaplutās tatra

lokā bhūr-ādayo nṛpa

SYNONYMS



āsīt-there was; atīta-past; kalpa-ante-at the end of the kalpa; brāhmaḥ-of Lord Brahmā's day; naimittikaḥ-because of that; layaḥ-inundation; samudra-in the ocean; upaplutāḥ-were inundated; tatra-there; lokāḥ-all the planets; bhūḥ-ādayaḥ-Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ and Svaḥ, the three lokas; nṛpa-O King.





O King Parīkṣit, at the end of the past millennium, at the end of Brahmā's day, because Lord Brahmā sleeps during the night, annihilation took place, and the three worlds were covered by the water of the ocean.





TEXT 8



kālenāgata-nidrasya

dhātuḥ śiśayiṣor balī

mukhato niḥsṛtān vedān

hayagrīvo 'ntike 'harat

SYNONYMS



kālena-because of time (the end of Brahmā's day); āgata-nidrasya-when he felt sleepy; dhātuḥ-of Brahmā; śiśayiṣoḥ-desiring to lie down to sleep; balī-very powerful; mukhataḥ-from the mouth; niḥsṛtān-emanating; vedān-the Vedic knowledge; hayagrīvaḥ-the great demon named Hayagrīva; antike-nearby; aharat-stole.





At the end of Brahmā's day, when Brahmā felt sleepy and desired to lie down, the Vedas were emanating from his mouth, and the great demon named Hayagrīva stole the Vedic knowledge.





TEXT 9



jñātvā tad dānavendrasya

hayagrīvasya ceṣṭitam

dadhāra śapharī-rūpaṁ

bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



jñātvā-after understanding; tat-that; dānava-indrasya-of the great demon; hayagrīvasya-of Hayagrīva; ceṣṭitam-activity; dadhāra-accepted; śapharī-rūpam-the form of a fish; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ-the Lord; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller.





Understanding the acts of the great demon Hayagrīva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is full of all opulences, assumed the form of a fish and saved the Vedas by killing the demon.





Because everything was inundated by water, to save the Vedas it was necessary for the Lord to assume the form of a fish.





TEXT 10



tatra rāja-ṛṣiḥ kaścin

nāmnā satyavrato mahān

nārāyaṇa-paro 'tapat

tapaḥ sa salilāśanaḥ

SYNONYMS



tatra-in that connection; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-a king equally qualified as a great saintly person; kaścit-someone; nāmnā-by the name; satyavrataḥ-Satyavrata; mahān-a great personality; nārāyaṇa-paraḥ-a great devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atapat-performed austerities; tapaḥ-penances; saḥ-he; salila-āśanaḥ-only drinking water.





During the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara there was a great king named Satyavrata who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Satyavrata performed austerities by subsisting only on water.





The Lord assumed one fish incarnation to save the Vedas at the beginning of the Svāyambhuva-manvantara, and at the end of the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara the Lord again assumed the form of a fish just to favor the great king named Satyavrata. As there were two incarnations of Varāha, there were also two incarnations of fish. The Lord appeared as one fish incarnation to save the Vedas by killing Hayagrīva, and He assumed the other fish incarnation to show favor to King Satyavrata.





TEXT 11



yo 'sāv asmin mahā-kalpe

tanayaḥ sa vivasvataḥ

śrāddhadeva iti khyāto

manutve hariṇārpitaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-one who; asau-He (the Supreme Person); asmin-in this; mahā-kalpe-great millennium; tanayaḥ-son; saḥ-he; vivasvataḥ-of the sun-god; śrāddhadevaḥ-by the name Śrāddhadeva; iti-thus; khyātaḥ-celebrated; manutve-in the position of Manu; hariṇā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arpitaḥ-was situated.





In this [the present] millennium King Satyavrata later became the son of Vivasvān, the king of the sun planet, and was known as Śrāddhadeva. By the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was given the post of Manu.





TEXT 12



ekadā kṛtamālāyāṁ

kurvato jala-tarpaṇam

tasyāñjaly-udake kācic

chaphary ekābhyapadyata

SYNONYMS



ekadā-one day; kṛtamālāyām-on the bank of the Kṛtamālā River; kurvataḥ-executing; jala-tarpaṇam-the offering of oblations of water; tasya-his; añjali-palmful; udake-in the water; kācit-some; śapharī-a small fish; ekā-one; abhyapadyata-was generated.





One day while King Satyavrata was performing austerities by offering water on the bank of the River Kṛtamālā, a small fish appeared in the water in his palms.





TEXT 13



satyavrato 'ñjali-gatāṁ

saha toyena bhārata

utsasarja nadī-toye

śapharīṁ draviḍeśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



satyavrataḥ-King Satyavrata; añjali-gatām-in the water held in the palms of the King; saha-with; toyena-water; bhārata-O King Parīkṣit; utsasarja-threw; nadī-toye-in the water of the river; śapharīm-that small fish; draviḍa-īśvaraḥ-Satyavrata, the King of Draviḍa.





Satyavrata, the King of Draviḍadeśa, threw the fish into the water of the river along with the water in his palm, O King Parīkṣit, descendant of Bharata.





TEXT 14



tam āha sātikaruṇaṁ

mahā-kāruṇikaṁ nṛpam

yādobhyo jñāti-ghātibhyo

dīnāṁ māṁ dīna-vatsala

kathaṁ visṛjase rājan

bhītām asmin sarij-jale

SYNONYMS



tam-unto him (Satyavrata); āha-said; sā-that small fish; ati-karuṇam-extremely compassionate; mahā-kāruṇikam-extremely merciful; nṛpam-unto King Satyavrata; yādobhyaḥ-to the aquatics; jñāti-ghātibhyaḥ-who are always eager to kill the smaller fish; dīnām-very poor; mām-me; dīna-vatsala-O protector of the poor; katham-why; visṛjase-you are throwing; rājan-O King; bhītām-very much afraid; asmin-within this; sarit-jale-in the water of the river.





With an appealing voice, the poor small fish said to King Satyavrata, who was very merciful: My dear King, protector of the poor, why are you throwing Me in the water of the river, where there are other aquatics who can kill Me? I am very much afraid of them.





In the Matsya Purāṇa it is said:



ananta-śaktir bhagavān

matsya-rūpī janārdanaḥ

krīḍārthaṁ yācayām āsa

svayaṁ satyavrataṁ nṛpam





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead possesses unlimited potency. Nonetheless, in His pastime in the form of a fish He begged protection from King Satyavrata."





TEXT 15



tam ātmano 'nugrahārthaṁ

prītyā matsya-vapur-dharam

ajānan rakṣaṇārthāya

śapharyāḥ sa mano dadhe

SYNONYMS



tam-unto the fish; ātmanaḥ-personal; anugraha-artham-to show favor; prītyā-very much pleased; matsya-vapuḥ-dharam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish; ajānan-without knowledge of this; rakṣaṇa-arthāya-just to give protection; śapharyāḥ-of the fish; saḥ-the King; manaḥ-mind; dadhe-decided.





To please himself, King Satyavrata, not knowing that the fish was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, decided with great pleasure to give the fish protection.





Here is an example of giving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead even without knowledge. Such service is called ajñāta-sukṛti. King Satyavrata wanted to show his own mercy, not knowing that the fish was Lord Viṣṇu. By such unknowing devotional service, one is favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Service rendered to the Supreme Lord, knowingly or unknowingly, never goes in vain.





TEXT 16



tasyā dīnataraṁ vākyam

āśrutya sa mahīpatiḥ

kalaśāpsu nidhāyaināṁ

dayālur ninya āśramam

SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-of the fish; dīna-taram-pitiable; vākyam-words; āśrutya-hearing; saḥ-that; mahī-patiḥ-the King; kalaśa-apsu-in the water contained in the water jug; nidhāya-taking; enām-the fish; dayāluḥ-merciful; ninye-brought; āśramam-to his residence.





The merciful King, being moved by the pitiable words of the fish, placed the fish in a water jug and brought Him to his own residence.





TEXT 17



sā tu tatraika-rātreṇa

vardhamānā kamaṇḍalau

alabdhvātmāvakāśaṁ vā

idam āha mahīpatim

SYNONYMS



sā-that fish; tu-but; tatra-therein; eka-rātreṇa-in one night; vardhamānā-expanding; kamaṇḍalau-in the waterpot; alabdhvā-without attaining; ātma-avakāśam-a comfortable position for His body; vā-either; idam-this; āha-said; mahī-patim-unto the King.





But in one night that fish grew so much that He could not move His body comfortably in the water of the pot. He then spoke to the King as follows.





TEXT 18



nāhaṁ kamaṇḍalāv asmin

kṛcchraṁ vastum ihotsahe

kalpayaukaḥ suvipulaṁ

yatrāhaṁ nivase sukham

SYNONYMS



na-not; aham-I; kamaṇḍalau-in this waterpot; asmin-in this; kṛcchram-with great difficulty; vastum-to live; iha-here; utsahe-like; kalpaya-just consider; okaḥ-residential place; su-vipulam-more expanded; yatra-wherein; aham-I; nivase-can live; sukham-in pleasure.





O My dear King, I do not like living in this waterpot with such great difficulty. Therefore, please find some better reservoir of water where I can live comfortably.





TEXT 19



sa enāṁ tata ādāya

nyadhād audañcanodake

tatra kṣiptā muhūrtena

hasta-trayam avardhata

SYNONYMS



saḥ-the King; enām-unto the fish; tataḥ-thereafter; ādāya-taking out; nyadhāt-placed; audañcana-udake-in a well of water; tatra-therein; kṣiptā-being thrown; muhūrtena-within a moment; hasta-trayam-three cubits; avardhata-immediately developed.





Then, taking the fish out of the waterpot, the King threw Him in a large well. But within a moment the fish developed to the length of three cubits.





TEXT 20



na ma etad alaṁ rājan

sukhaṁ vastum udañcanam

pṛthu dehi padaṁ mahyaṁ

yat tvāhaṁ śaraṇaṁ gatā

SYNONYMS



na-not; me-unto Me; etat-this; alam-fit; rājan-O King; sukham-in happiness; vastum-to live; udañcanam-reservoir of water; pṛthu-very great; dehi-give; padam-a place; mahyam-unto Me; yat-which; tvā-unto you; aham-I; śaraṇam-shelter; gatā-have taken.





The fish then said: My dear King, this reservoir of water is not fit for My happy residence. Please give Me a more extensive pool of water, for I have taken shelter of you.





TEXT 21



tata ādāya sā rājñā

kṣiptā rājan sarovare

tad āvṛtyātmanā so 'yaṁ

mahā-mīno 'nvavardhata

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from there; ādāya-taking away; sā-the fish; rājñā-by the King; kṣiptā-being thrown; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); sarovare-in a lake; tat-that; āvṛtya-covering; ātmanā-by the body; saḥ-the fish; ayam-this; mahā-mīnaḥ-gigantic fish; anvavardhata-immediately developed.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the King took the fish from the well and threw Him in a lake, but the fish then assumed a gigantic form exceeding the extent of the water.





TEXT 22



naitan me svastaye rājann

udakaṁ salilaukasaḥ

nidhehi rakṣā-yogena

hrade mām avidāsini

SYNONYMS



na-not; etat-this; me-unto Me; svastaye-comfortable; rājan-O King; udakam-water; salila-okasaḥ-because I am a big aquatic; nidhehi-put; rakṣā-yogena-by some means; hrade-in a lake; mām-Me; avidāsini-perpetual.





The fish then said: O King, I am a large aquatic, and this water is not at all suitable for Me. Now kindly find some way to save Me. It would be better to put Me in the water of a lake that will never reduce.





TEXT 23



ity uktaḥ so 'nayan matsyaṁ

tatra tatrāvidāsini

jalāśaye 'sammitaṁ taṁ

samudre prākṣipaj jhaṣam

SYNONYMS



iti uktaḥ-thus being requested; saḥ-the King; anayat-brought; matsyam-the fish; tatra-therein; tatra-therein; avidāsini-where the water never diminishes; jala-āśaye-in the reservoir of water; asammitam-unlimited; tam-unto the fish; samudre-in the ocean; prākṣipat-threw; jhaṣam-the gigantic fish.





When thus requested, King Satyavrata took the fish to the largest reservoir of water. But when that also proved insufficient, the King at last threw the gigantic fish into the ocean.





TEXT 24



kṣipyamāṇas tam āhedam

iha māṁ makarādayaḥ

adanty atibalā vīra

māṁ nehotsraṣṭum arhasi

SYNONYMS



kṣipyamāṇaḥ-being thrown in the ocean; tam-unto the King; āha-the fish said; idam-this; iha-in this place; mām-Me; makara-ādayaḥ-dangerous aquatics like sharks; adanti-will eat; ati-balāḥ-because of being too powerful; vīra-O heroic King; mām-Me; na-not; iha-in this water; utsraṣṭum-to throw; arhasi-you deserve.





While being thrown in the ocean, the fish said to King Satyavrata: O hero, in this water there are very powerful and dangerous sharks that will eat Me. Therefore you should not throw Me in this place.





TEXT 25



evaṁ vimohitas tena

vadatā valgu-bhāratīm

tam āha ko bhavān asmān

matsya-rūpeṇa mohayan

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; vimohitaḥ-bewildered; tena-by the fish; vadatā-speaking; valgu-bhāratīm-sweet words; tam-unto him; āha-said; kaḥ-who; bhavān-You; asmān-us; matsya-rūpeṇa-in the form of a fish; mohayan-bewildering.





After hearing these sweet words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a fish, the King, being bewildered, asked Him: Who are You, sir? You simply bewilder us.





TEXT 26



naivaṁ vīryo jalacaro

dṛṣṭo 'smābhiḥ śruto 'pi vā

yo bhavān yojana-śatam

ahnābhivyānaśe saraḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; evam-thus; vīryaḥ-powerful; jala-caraḥ-aquatic; dṛṣṭaḥ-seen; asmābhiḥ-by us; śrutaḥ api-nor heard of; vā-either; yaḥ-who; bhavān-Your Lordship; yojana-śatam-hundreds of miles; ahnā-in one day; abhivyānaśe-expanding; saraḥ-water.





My Lord, in one day You have expanded Yourself for hundreds of miles, covering the water of the river and the ocean. Before this I had never seen or heard of such an aquatic animal.





TEXT 27



nūnaṁ tvaṁ bhagavān sākṣād

dharir nārāyaṇo 'vyayaḥ

anugrahāya bhūtānāṁ

dhatse rūpaṁ jalaukasām

SYNONYMS



nūnam-certainly; tvam-You (are); bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sākṣāt-directly; hariḥ-the Lord; nārāyaṇaḥ-the Personality of Godhead; avyayaḥ-inexhaustible; anugrahāya-to show mercy; bhūtānām-to all living entities; dhatse-You have assumed; rūpam-a form; jala-okasām-like an aquatic.





My Lord, You are certainly the inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Hari. It is to show Your mercy to the living entities that You have now assumed the form of an aquatic.





TEXT 28



namas te puruṣa-śreṣṭha

sthity-utpatty-apyayeśvara

bhaktānāṁ naḥ prapannānāṁ

mukhyo hy ātma-gatir vibho

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances; te-unto You; puruṣa-śreṣṭha-the best of all living entities, the best of all enjoyers; sthiti-of maintenance; utpatti-creation; apyaya-and destruction; īśvara-the Supreme Lord; bhaktānām-of Your devotees; naḥ-like us; prapannānām-those who are surrendered; mukhyaḥ-the supreme; hi-indeed; ātma-gatiḥ-the supreme destination; vibho-Lord Viṣṇu.





O my Lord, master of creation, maintenance and annihilation, O best of enjoyers, Lord Viṣṇu, You are the leader and destination of surrendered devotees like us. Therefore let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 29



sarve līlāvatārās te

bhūtānāṁ bhūti-hetavaḥ

jñātum icchāmy ado rūpaṁ

yad-arthaṁ bhavatā dhṛtam

SYNONYMS



sarve-everything; līlā-pastimes; avatārāḥ-incarnations; te-of Your Lordship; bhūtānām-of all living entities; bhūti-of a flourishing condition; hetavaḥ-the causes; jñātum-to know; icchāmi-I wish; adaḥ-this; rūpam-form; yat-artham-for what purpose; bhavatā-by Your Lordship; dhṛtam-assumed.





All Your pastimes and incarnations certainly appear for the welfare of all living entities. Therefore, my Lord, I wish to know the purpose for which You have assumed this form of a fish.





TEXT 30



na te 'ravindākṣa padopasarpaṇaṁ

mṛṣā bhavet sarva-suhṛt-priyātmanaḥ

yathetareṣāṁ pṛthag-ātmanāṁ satām

adīdṛśo yad vapur adbhutaṁ hi naḥ

SYNONYMS



na-never; te-of Your Lordship; aravinda-akṣa-My Lord, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus; pada-upasarpaṇam-worship of the lotus feet; mṛṣā-useless; bhavet-can become; sarva-suhṛt-the friend of everyone; priya-dear to everyone; ātmanaḥ-the Supersoul of everyone; yathā-as; itareṣām-of others (the demigods); pṛthak-ātmanām-living entities who have material bodies different from the soul; satām-of those who are spiritually fixed; adīdṛśaḥ-You have manifested; yat-that; vapuḥ-body; adbhutam-wonderful; hi-indeed; naḥ-unto us.





O my Lord, possessing eyes like the petals of a lotus, the worship of the demigods, who are in the bodily concept of life, is fruitless in all respects. But because You are the supreme friend and dearmost Supersoul of everyone, worship of Your lotus feet is never useless. You have therefore manifested Your form as a fish.





The demigods like Indra, Candra and Sūrya are ordinary living entities who are differentiated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord expands Himself through the living beings (nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām). His personal viṣṇu-tattva forms, which are all spiritual, are called svāṁśa, and the living entities who are differentiated parts are called vibhinnāṁśa. Some of the vibhinnāṁśa forms are spiritual, and some are a combination of matter and spirit. The conditioned souls in the material world are different from their external bodies made of material energy. Thus the demigods living in the upper planetary systems and the living entities living in the lower planetary system are of the same nature. Nonetheless, those living as human beings on this planet are sometimes attracted to worshiping the demigods in the higher planetary systems. Such worship is temporary. As the human beings on this planet have to change their bodies (tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ), the living entities known as Indra, Candra, Varuṇa and so on will also have to change their bodies in due course of time. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām: "Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary." Kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ: [Bg. 7.20] those who do not know the position of the demigods are inclined to worship the demigods for some material purpose, but the results of such worship are never permanent. Consequently, here it is said, yathetareṣāṁ pṛthag-ātmanāṁ satām, padopasarpaṇaṁ mṛṣā bhavet. In other words, if one is to worship someone else, he must worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then his worship will never be fruitless. Svalpam apy asya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt: even a slight attempt to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead is a permanent asset. Therefore, as recommended in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ hareḥ. One should take to the worship of the lotus feet of Hari, even if this means giving up the so-called occupational duty assigned because of the particular body one has accepted. Because worship in terms of the body is temporary, it does not bear any permanent fruit. But worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead gives immense benefit.





TEXT 31



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti bruvāṇaṁ nṛpatiṁ jagat-patiḥ

satyavrataṁ matsya-vapur yuga-kṣaye

vihartu-kāmaḥ pralayārṇave 'bravīc

cikīrṣur ekānta-jana-priyaḥ priyam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; bruvāṇam-speaking like that; nṛpatim-unto the King; jagat-patiḥ-the master of the entire universe; satyavratam-unto Satyavrata; matsya-vapuḥ-the Lord, who had assumed the form of a fish; yuga-kṣaye-at the end of a yuga; vihartu-kāmaḥ-to enjoy His own pastimes; pralaya-arṇave-in the water of inundation; abravīt-said; cikīrṣuḥ-desiring to do; ekānta-jana-priyaḥ-most beloved by the devotees; priyam-something very beneficial.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When King Satyavrata spoke in this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who at the end of the yuga had assumed the form of a fish to benefit His devotee and enjoy His pastimes in the water of inundation, responded as follows.





TEXT 32



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

saptame hy adyatanād ūrdhvam

ahany etad arindama

nimaṅkṣyaty apyayāmbhodhau

trailokyaṁ bhūr-bhuvādikam

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; saptame-on the seventh; hi-indeed; adyatanāt-from today; ūrdhvam-forward; ahani-on the day; etat-this creation; arimdama-O King who can subdue your enemies; nimaṅkṣyati-shall be inundated; apyaya-ambhodhau-in the ocean of destruction; trailokyam-the three lokas; bhūḥ-bhuva-ādikam-namely Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, who can subdue your enemies, on the seventh day from today the three worlds-Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ and Svaḥ-will all merge into the water of inundation.





TEXT 33



tri-lokyāṁ līyamānāyāṁ

saṁvartāmbhasi vai tadā

upasthāsyati nauḥ kācid

viśālā tvāṁ mayeritā

SYNONYMS



tri-lokyām-the three lokas; līyamānāyām-upon being merged; saṁvarta-ambhasi-in the water of destruction; vai-indeed; tadā-at that time; upasthāsyati-will appear; nauḥ-boat; kācit-one; viśālā-very big; tvām-unto you; mayā-by Me; īritā-sent.





When all the three worlds merge into the water, a large boat sent by Me will appear before you.





TEXTS 34–35



tvaṁ tāvad oṣadhīḥ sarvā

bījāny uccāvacāni ca

saptarṣibhiḥ parivṛtaḥ

sarva-sattvopabṛṁhitaḥ

āruhya bṛhatīṁ nāvaṁ



vicariṣyasy aviklavaḥ

ekārṇave nirāloke

ṛṣīṇām eva varcasā

SYNONYMS



tvam-you; tāvat-until that time; oṣadhīḥ-herbs; sarvāḥ-all kinds of; bījāni-seeds; ucca-avacāni-lower and higher; ca-and; sapta-ṛṣibhiḥ-by the seven ṛṣis; parivṛtaḥ-surrounded; sarva-sattva-all kinds of living entities; upabṛṁhitaḥ-surrounded by; āruhya-getting on; bṛhatīm-very large; nāvam-boat; vicariṣyasi-shall travel; aviklavaḥ-without moroseness; eka-arṇave-in the ocean of inundation; nirāloke-without being illuminated; ṛṣīṇām-of the great ṛṣis; eva-indeed; varcasā-by the effulgence.





Thereafter, O King, you shall collect all types of herbs and seeds and load them on that great boat. Then, accompanied by the seven ṛṣis and surrounded by all kinds of living entities, you shall get aboard that boat, and without moroseness you shall easily travel with your companions on the ocean of inundation, the only illumination being the effulgence of the great ṛṣis.





TEXT 36



dodhūyamānāṁ tāṁ nāvaṁ

samīreṇa balīyasā

upasthitasya me śṛṅge

nibadhnīhi mahāhinā

SYNONYMS



dodhūyamānām-being tossed about; tām-that; nāvam-boat; samīreṇa-by the wind; balīyasā-very powerful; upasthitasya-situated nearby; me-of Me; śṛṅge-to the horn; nibadhnīhi-bind; mahā-ahinā-by the large serpent (Vāsuki).





Then, as the boat is tossed about by the powerful winds, attach the vessel to My horn by means of the great serpent Vāsuki, for I shall be present by your side.





TEXT 37



ahaṁ tvām ṛṣibhiḥ sārdhaṁ

saha-nāvam udanvati

vikarṣan vicariṣyāmi

yāvad brāhmī niśā prabho

SYNONYMS



aham-I; tvām-unto you; ṛṣibhiḥ-with all the saintly persons; sārdham-all together; saha-with; nāvam-the boat; udanvati-in the water of devastation; vikarṣan-contacting; vicariṣyāmi-I shall travel; yāvat-as long as; brāhmī-pertaining to Lord Brahmā; niśā-night; prabho-O King.





Pulling the boat, with you and all the ṛṣis in it, O King, I shall travel in the water of devastation until the night of Lord Brahmā's slumber is over.





This particular devastation actually took place not during the night of Lord Brahmā but during his day, for it was during the time of Cākṣuṣa Manu. Brahmā's night takes place when Brahmā goes to sleep, but in the daytime there are fourteen Manus, one of whom is Cākṣuṣa Manu. Therefore, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments that although it was daytime for Lord Brahmā, Brahmā felt sleepy for a short time by the supreme will of the Lord. This short period is regarded as Lord Brahmā's night. This has been elaborately discussed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta. The following is a summary of his analysis. Because Agastya Muni cursed Svāyambhuva Manu, during the time of Svāyambhuva Manu a devastation took place. This devastation is mentioned in the Matsya Purāṇa. During the time of Cākṣuṣa Manu, by the supreme will of the Lord, there was suddenly another pralaya, or devastation. This is mentioned by Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi in the Viṣṇu-dharmottara. At the end of Manu's time there is not necessarily a devastation, but at the end of the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by His illusory energy, wanted to show Satyavrata the effects of devastation. Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī also agrees with this opinion. The Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta says:



madhye manvantarasyaiva

muneḥ śāpān manuṁ prati

pralayo 'sau babhūveti

purāṇe kvacid īryate





ayam ākasmiko jātaś

cākṣuṣasyāntare manoḥ

pralayaḥ padmanābhasya

līlayeti ca kutracit





sarva-manvantarasyānte

pralayo niścitaṁ bhavet

viṣṇu-dharmottare tv etat

mārkaṇḍeyeṇa bhāṣitam





manor ante layo nāsti

manave 'darśi māyayā

viṣṇuneti bruvāṇais tu

svāmibhir naiṣa manyate





TEXT 38



madīyaṁ mahimānaṁ ca

paraṁ brahmeti śabditam

vetsyasy anugṛhītaṁ me

sampraśnair vivṛtaṁ hṛdi

SYNONYMS



madīyam-pertaining to Me; mahimānam-glories; ca-and; param brahma-the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth; iti-thus; śabditam-celebrated; vetsyasi-you shall understand; anugṛhītam-being favored; me-by Me; sampraśnaiḥ-by inquiries; vivṛtam-thoroughly explained; hṛdi-within the heart.





You will be thoroughly advised and favored by Me, and because of your inquiries, everything about My glories, which are known as paraṁ brahma, will be manifest within your heart. Thus you will know everything about Me.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramātmā, is situated in everyone's heart, and from Him come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. The Lord reveals Himself in proportion to one's surrender to Him. Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham [Bg. 4.11]. In responsive cooperation, the Lord reveals Himself in proportion to one's surrender. That which is revealed to one who fully surrenders is different from what is revealed to one who surrenders partially. Everyone naturally surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, either directly or indirectly. The conditioned soul surrenders to the laws of nature in material existence, but when one fully surrenders to the Lord, material nature does not act upon him. Such a fully surrendered soul is favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly. Mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]. One who has fully surrendered to the Lord has no fear of the modes of material nature, for everything is but an expansion of the Lord's glories (sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma), and these glories are gradually revealed and realized. The Lord is the supreme purifier (paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]). The more one is purified and the more he wants to know about the Supreme, the more the Lord reveals to him. Full knowledge of Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān is revealed to the pure devotees. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (10.11):



teṣām evānukampārtham

aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ

nāśayāmy ātma-bhāvastho

jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā





"Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance."





TEXT 39



ittham ādiśya rājānaṁ

harir antaradhīyata

so 'nvavaikṣata taṁ kālaṁ

yaṁ hṛṣīkeśa ādiśat

SYNONYMS



ittham-as aforementioned; ādiśya-instructing; rājānam-the King (Satyavrata); hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; antaradhīyata-disappeared from that place; saḥ-he (the King); anvavaikṣata-began to wait for; tam kālam-that time; yam-which; hṛṣīka-īśaḥ-Lord Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of all the senses; ādiśat-instructed.





After thus instructing the King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately disappeared. Then King Satyavrata began to wait for that time of which the Lord had instructed.





TEXT 40



āstīrya darbhān prāk-kūlān

rājarṣiḥ prāg-udaṅ-mukhaḥ

niṣasāda hareḥ pādau

cintayan matsya-rūpiṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



āstīrya-spreading; darbhān-kuśa grass; prāk-kūlān-the upper portion facing east; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-Satyavrata, the saintly King; prāk-udak-mukhaḥ-looking toward the northeast (īśāna); niṣasāda-sat down; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pādau-upon the lotus feet; cintayan-meditating; matsya-rūpiṇaḥ-who had assumed the form of a fish.





After spreading kuśa with its tips pointing east, the saintly King, himself facing the northeast, sat down on the grass and began to meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who had assumed the form of a fish.





TEXT 41



tataḥ samudra udvelaḥ

sarvataḥ plāvayan mahīm

vardhamāno mahā-meghair

varṣadbhiḥ samadṛśyata

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; samudraḥ-the ocean; udvelaḥ-overflowing; sarvataḥ-everywhere; plāvayan-inundating; mahīm-the earth; vardhamānaḥ-increasing more and more; mahā-meghaiḥ-by gigantic clouds; varṣadbhiḥ-incessantly pouring rain; samadṛśyata-King Satyavrata saw it.





Thereafter, gigantic clouds pouring incessant water swelled the ocean more and more. Thus the ocean began to overflow onto the land and inundate the entire world.





TEXT 42



dhyāyan bhagavad-ādeśaṁ

dadṛśe nāvam āgatām

tām āruroha viprendrair

ādāyauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ

SYNONYMS



dhyāyan-remembering; bhagavat-ādeśam-the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadṛśe-he saw; nāvam-a boat; āgatām-coming near; tām-aboard the boat; āruroha-got up; vipra-indraiḥ-with the saintly brāhmaṇas; ādāya-taking; auṣadhi-herbs; vīrudhaḥ-and creepers.





As Satyavrata remembered the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he saw a boat coming near him. Thus he collected herbs and creepers, and, accompanied by saintly brāhmaṇas, he got aboard the boat.





TEXT 43



tam ūcur munayaḥ prītā

rājan dhyāyasva keśavam

sa vai naḥ saṅkaṭād asmād

avitā śaṁ vidhāsyati

SYNONYMS



tam-unto the King; ūcuḥ-said; munayaḥ-all the saintly brāhmaṇas; prītāḥ-being pleased; rājan-O King; dhyāyasva-meditate; keśavam-upon the Supreme Lord, Keśava; saḥ-His Lordship; vai-indeed; naḥ-us; saṅkaṭāt-from the great danger; asmāt-as now visible; avitā-will save; śam-auspiciousness; vidhāsyati-He will arrange.





The saintly brāhmaṇas, being pleased with the King, said to him: O King, please meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Keśava. He will save us from this impending danger and arrange for our well-being.





TEXT 44



so 'nudhyātas tato rājñā

prādurāsīn mahārṇave

eka-śṛṅga-dharo matsyo

haimo niyuta-yojanaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-the Lord; anudhyātaḥ-being meditated upon; tataḥ-thereafter (hearing the words of the saintly brāhmaṇas); rājñā-by the King; prādurāsīt-appeared (before him); mahā-arṇave-in the great ocean of inundation; eka-śṛṅga-dharaḥ-with one horn; matsyaḥ-a big fish; haimaḥ-made of gold; niyuta-yojanaḥ-eight million miles long.





Then, while the King constantly meditated upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a large golden fish appeared in the ocean of inundation. The fish had one horn and was eight million miles long.





TEXT 45



nibadhya nāvaṁ tac-chṛṅge

yathokto hariṇā purā

varatreṇāhinā tuṣṭas

tuṣṭāva madhusūdanam

SYNONYMS



nibadhya-anchoring; nāvam-the boat; tat-śṛṅge-onto the horn of the big fish; yathā-uktaḥ-as advised; hariṇā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purā-before; varatreṇa-used as a rope; ahinā-by the great serpent (of the name Vāsuki); tuṣṭaḥ-being pleased; tuṣṭāva-he satisfied; madhusūdanam-the Supreme Lord, the killer of Madhu.





Following the instructions formerly given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the King anchored the boat to the fish's horn, using the serpent Vāsuki as a rope. Thus being satisfied, he began offering prayers to the Lord.





TEXT 46



śrī-rājovāca

anādy-avidyopahatātma-saṁvidas

tan-mūla-saṁsāra-pariśramāturāḥ

yadṛcchayopasṛtā yam āpnuyur

vimuktido naḥ paramo gurur bhavān

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-the King offered prayers as follows; anādi-from time immemorial; avidyā-by ignorance; upahata-has been lost; ātma-saṁvidaḥ-knowledge about the self; tat-that is; mūla-the root; saṁsāra-material bondage; pariśrama-full of miserable conditions and hard work; āturāḥ-suffering; yadṛcchayā-by the supreme will; upasṛtāḥ-being favored by the ācārya; yam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āpnuyuḥ-can achieve; vimukti-daḥ-the process of liberation; naḥ-our; paramaḥ-the supreme; guruḥ-spiritual master; bhavān-Your Lordship.





The King said: By the grace of the Lord, those who have lost their self-knowledge since time immemorial, and who because of this ignorance are involved in a material, conditional life full of miseries, obtain the chance to meet the Lord's devotee. I accept that Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme spiritual master.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is actually the supreme spiritual master. The Supreme Lord knows everything about the suffering of the conditioned soul, and therefore He appears in this material world, sometimes personally, sometimes by an incarnation and sometimes by authorizing a living being to act on His behalf. In all cases, however, He is the original spiritual master who enlightens the conditioned souls who are suffering in the material world. The Lord is always busy helping the conditioned souls in many ways. Therefore He is addressed here as paramo gurur bhavān. The representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who acts to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness is also guided by the Supreme Lord to act properly in executing the Lord's order. Such a person may appear to be an ordinary human being, but because he acts on behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme spiritual master, he is not to be neglected as ordinary. It is therefore said, ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyāt: an ācārya who acts on behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead should be understood to be as good as the Supreme Lord Himself.



sākṣād dharitvena samasta-śāstrair

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam



Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has advised that the spiritual master acting on the Supreme Lord's behalf must be worshiped as being as good as the Supreme Lord, for he is the Lord's most confidential servant in broadcasting the Lord's message for the benefit of the conditioned souls involved in the material world.





TEXT 47



jano 'budho 'yaṁ nija-karma-bandhanaḥ

sukhecchayā karma samīhate 'sukham

yat-sevayā tāṁ vidhunoty asan-matiṁ

granthiṁ sa bhindyād dhṛdayaṁ sa no guruḥ

SYNONYMS



janaḥ-the conditioned soul subjected to birth and death; abudhaḥ-most foolish because of accepting the body as the self; ayam-he; nija-karma-bandhanaḥ-accepting different bodily forms as a result of his sinful activities; sukha-icchayā-desiring to be happy within this material world; karma-fruitive activities; samīhate-plans; asukham-but it is for distress only; yat-sevayā-by rendering service unto whom; tām-the entanglement of karma; vidhunoti-clears up; asat-matim-the unclean mentality (accepting the body as the self); granthim-hard knot; saḥ-His Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhindyāt-being cut off; hṛdayam-in the core of the heart; saḥ-He (the Lord); naḥ-our; guruḥ-the supreme spiritual master.





In hopes of becoming happy in this material world, the foolish conditioned soul performs fruitive activities that result only in suffering. But by rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one becomes free from such false desires for happiness. May my supreme spiritual master cut the knot of false desires from the core of my heart.





For material happiness, the conditioned soul involves himself in fruitive activities, which actually put him into material distress. Because the conditioned soul does not know this, he is said to be in avidyā, or ignorance. Because of a false hope for happiness, the conditioned soul becomes involved in various plans for material activity. Here Mahārāja Satyavrata prays that the Lord sever this hard knot of false happiness and thus become his supreme spiritual master.





TEXT 48



yat-sevayāgner iva rudra-rodanaṁ

pumān vijahyān malam ātmanas tamaḥ

bhajeta varṇaṁ nijam eṣa so 'vyayo

bhūyāt sa īśaḥ paramo guror guruḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-sevayā-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by serving whom; agneḥ-in touch with fire; iva-as it is; rudra-rodanam-a block of silver or gold becomes purified; pumān-a person; vijahyāt-can give up; malam-all the dirty things of material existence; ātmanaḥ-of one's self; tamaḥ-the mode of ignorance, by which one performs pious and impious activities; bhajeta-may revive; varṇam-his original identity; nijam-one's own; eṣaḥ-such; saḥ-He; avyayaḥ-inexhaustible; bhūyāt-let Him become; saḥ-He; īśaḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paramaḥ-the supreme; guroḥ guruḥ-the spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.





One who wants to be free of material entanglement should take to the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and give up the contamination of ignorance, involving pious and impious activities. Thus one regains his original identity, just as a block of gold or silver sheds all dirt and becomes purified when treated with fire. May that inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead become our spiritual master, for He is the original spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.





In human life one is meant to undergo austerity to purify one's existence. Tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ śuddhyet. Because of contamination by the modes of material nature, one continues in the cycle of birth and death (kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu). Therefore the purpose of human life is to purify oneself of this contamination so that one can regain his spiritual form and not undergo this cycle of birth and death. The recommended process of decontamination is devotional service to the Lord. There are various processes for self-realization, such as karma, jñāna and yoga, but none of them is equal to the process of devotional service. As gold and silver can be freed from all dirty contamination by being put into a fire but not merely by being washed, the living entity can be awakened to his own identity by performing devotional service (yat-sevayā), but not by karma, jñāna or yoga. Cultivation of speculative knowledge or practice of yogic gymnastics will not be helpful.



The word varṇam refers to the luster of one's original identity. The original luster of gold or silver is brilliant. Similarly, the original luster of the living being, who is part of the sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], is the luster of ānanda, or pleasure. Ānandamayo bhyāsāt. Every living entity has the right to become ānandamaya, joyful, because he is part of the sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], Kṛṣṇa. Why should the living being be put into tribulation because of dirty contamination by the material modes of nature? The living entity should become purified and regain his svarūpa, his original identity. This he can do only by devotional service. Therefore, one should adopt the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is described here as guror guruḥ, the spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.



Even though we may not have the fortune to contact the Supreme Lord personally, the Lord's representative is as good as the Lord Himself because such a representative does not say anything unless it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore gives a definition of guru. Yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa: [Cc. Madhya 7.128] the bona fide guru is he who advises his disciples exactly in accordance with the principles spoken by Kṛṣṇa. The bona fide guru is he who has accepted Kṛṣṇa as guru. This is the guru-paramparā system. The original guru is Vyāsadeva because he is the speaker of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, wherein everything spoken relates to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore guru-pūjā is known as Vyāsa-pūjā. In the final analysis, the original guru is Kṛṣṇa, His disciple is Nārada, whose disciple is Vyāsa, and in this way we gradually come in touch with the guru-paramparā. One cannot become a guru if he does not know what the Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa or His incarnation wants. The mission of the guru is the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead: to spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world.





TEXT 49



na yat-prasādāyuta-bhāga-leśam

anye ca devā guravo janāḥ svayam

kartuṁ sametāḥ prabhavanti puṁsas

tam īśvaraṁ tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye

SYNONYMS



na-not; yat-prasāda-of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ayuta-bhāga-leśam-only one ten-thousandth; anye-others; ca-also; devāḥ-even the demigods; guravaḥ-the so-called gurus; janāḥ-the total population; svayam-personally; kartum-to execute; sametāḥ-all together; prabhavanti-can become equally able; puṁsaḥ-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tam-unto Him; īśvaram-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvām-unto You; śaraṇam-shelter; prapadye-let me surrender.





Neither all the demigods, nor the so-called gurus nor all other people, either independently or together, can offer mercy that equals even one ten-thousandth of Yours. Therefore I wish to take shelter of Your lotus feet.





It is said, kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ: [Bg. 7.20] people in general, being motivated by material desires, worship the demigods to get fruitive results very quickly. People generally do not become devotees of Lord Viṣṇu, since Lord Viṣṇu never becomes the order-supplier of His devotee. Lord Viṣṇu does not give a devotee benedictions that will create a further demand for benedictions. By worshiping the demigods one may get results, but, as described in Bhagavad-gītā, antavat tu phalaṁ teṣāṁ tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām: whatever great benedictions one may achieve from the demigods are all temporary. Because the demigods themselves are temporary, their benedictions are also temporary and have no permanent value. Those who aspire for such benedictions have a poor fund of knowledge (tad bhavaty alpa-medhasām). The benedictions of Lord Viṣṇu are different. By the mercy of the Lord Viṣṇu, one can be completely freed from material contamination and go back home, back to Godhead. Therefore the benedictions offered by the demigods cannot compare to even one ten-thousandth of the Lord's benedictions. One should not, therefore, try to obtain benedictions from the demigods or false gurus. One should aspire only for the benediction offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66):



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ





"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." This is the greatest benediction.





TEXT 50



acakṣur andhasya yathāgraṇīḥ kṛtas

tathā janasyāviduṣo 'budho guruḥ

tvam arka-dṛk sarva-dṛśāṁ samīkṣaṇo

vṛto gurur naḥ sva-gatiṁ bubhutsatām

SYNONYMS



acakṣuḥ-one who does not have his power of sight; andhasya-for such a blind person; yathā-as; agraṇīḥ-the leader, who goes first; kṛtaḥ-accepted; tathā-similarly; janasya-such a person; aviduṣaḥ-who has no knowledge of the goal of life; abudhaḥ-a foolish rascal; guruḥ-the spiritual master; tvam-Your Lordship; arka-dṛk-appear like the sun; sarva-dṛśām-of all sources of knowledge; samīkṣaṇaḥ-the complete seer; vṛtaḥ-accepted; guruḥ-the spiritual master; naḥ-our; sva-gatim-one who knows his real self-interest; bubhutsatām-such an enlightened person.





As a blind man, being unable to see, accepts another blind man as his leader, people who do not know the goal of life accept someone as a guru who is a rascal and a fool. But we are interested in self-realization. Therefore we accept You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as our spiritual master, for You are able to see in all directions and are omniscient like the sun.





The conditioned soul, being wrapped in ignorance and therefore not knowing the goal of life, accepts a guru who can juggle words and make some display of magic that is wonderful to a fool. Sometimes a foolish person accepts someone as a guru because he can manufacture a small quantity of gold by mystic yogic power. Because such a disciple has a poor fund of knowledge, he cannot judge whether the manufacture of gold is the criterion for a guru. Why should one not accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, from whom unlimited numbers of gold mines come into being? Ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate [Bg. 10.8]. All the gold mines are created by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, why should one accept a magician who can manufacture only a small portion of gold? Such gurus are accepted by those who are blind, not knowing the goal of life. Mahārāja Satyavrata, however, knew the goal of life. He knew the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore he accepted the Lord as his guru. Either the Supreme Lord or His representative can become guru. The Lord says, mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te: [Bg. 7.14] "One can get relief from the clutches of māyā as soon as he surrenders unto Me." Therefore it is the guru's business to instruct his disciple to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he wants relief from the material clutches. This is the symptom of the guru. This same principle was instructed by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu: yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. In other words, one is advised not to accept a guru who does not follow the path of instruction given by Lord Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 51



jano janasyādiśate 'satīṁ gatiṁ

yayā prapadyeta duratyayaṁ tamaḥ

tvaṁ tv avyayaṁ jñānam amogham añjasā

prapadyate yena jano nijaṁ padam

SYNONYMS



janaḥ-a person who is not a bona fide guru (an ordinary person); janasya-of an ordinary person who does not know the goal of life; ādiśate-instructs; asatīm-impermanent, material; gatim-the goal of life; yayā-by such knowledge; prapadyeta-he surrenders; duratyayam-insurmountable; tamaḥ-to ignorance; tvam-Your Lordship; tu-but; avyayam-indestructible; jñānam-knowledge; amogham-without material contamination; añjasā-very soon; prapadyate-achieves; yena-by such knowledge; janaḥ-a person; nijam-his own; padam-original position.





A materialistic so-called guru instructs his materialistic disciples about economic development and sense gratification, and because of such instructions the foolish disciples continue in the materialistic existence of ignorance. But Your Lordship gives knowledge that is eternal, and the intelligent person receiving such knowledge is quickly situated in his original constitutional position.





So-called gurus instruct their disciples for the sake of material profit. Some guru advises that one meditate in such a way that his intelligence will increase in regard to keeping his body fit for sense gratification. Another guru advises that sex is the ultimate goal of life and that one should therefore engage in sex to the best of his ability. These are the instructions of foolish gurus. In other words, because of the instructions of a foolish guru one remains perpetually in material existence and suffers its tribulations. But if one is intelligent enough to take instructions from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as enunciated in Bhagavad-gītā or the Sāṅkhya philosophy of Kapiladeva, one can very soon attain liberation and be situated in his original position of spiritual life. The words nijaṁ padam are significant. The living entity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has the birthright to a position in Vaikuṇṭhaloka, or the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety. Therefore, one should follow the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so 'rjuna: [Bg. 4.9] after giving up one's body, one will return home, back to Godhead. The Lord lives in the spiritual world in His original personality, and a devotee who follows the instructions of the Lord approaches Him (mām eti). As a spiritual person, such a devotee returns to the Personality of Godhead and plays and dances with Him. That is the ultimate goal of life.





TEXT 52



tvaṁ sarva-lokasya suhṛt priyeśvaro

hy ātmā gurur jñānam abhīṣṭa-siddhiḥ

tathāpi loko na bhavantam andha-dhīr

jānāti santaṁ hṛdi baddha-kāmaḥ

SYNONYMS



tvam-You, my dear Lord; sarva-lokasya-of all planets and their inhabitants; suhṛt-the most well-wishing friend; priya-the most dear; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller; hi-also; ātmā-the supreme soul; guruḥ-the supreme teacher; jñānam-the supreme knowledge; abhīṣṭa-siddhiḥ-the fulfillment of all desires; tathā api-still; lokaḥ-persons; na-not; bhavantam-unto You; andha-dhīḥ-because of blind intelligence; jānāti-can know; santam-situated; hṛdi-in his heart; baddha-kāmaḥ-because of being bewildered by material lusty desires.





My Lord, You are the supreme well-wishing friend of everyone, the dearmost friend, the controller, the Supersoul, the supreme instructor and the giver of supreme knowledge and the fulfillment of all desires. But although You are within the heart, the foolish, because of lusty desires in the heart, cannot understand You.





Herein the reason for foolishness is described. Because the conditioned soul in this material world is full of materialistic lusty desires, he cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although the Lord is situated in everyone's heart (īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]). It is because of this foolishness that one cannot take instructions from the Lord, although the Lord is ready to instruct everyone both externally and internally. The Lord says, dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ tam yena mām upayānti te. In other words, the Lord can give instructions on devotional service by which one can return home, back to Godhead. Unfortunately, however, people do not take this devotional service. The Lord, being situated in everyone's heart, can give one complete instructions on going back to Godhead, but because of lusty desires one engages himself in materialistic activities and does not render service to the Lord. Therefore one is bereft of the value of the Lord's instructions. By mental speculation one can understand that one is not the body but a spirit soul, but unless one engages in devotional service, the real purpose of life is never fulfilled. The real purpose of life is to go back home, back to Godhead, and live with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, play with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, dance with the Supreme Personality of Godhead and eat with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These are different items of ānanda, spiritual happiness in spiritual variegatedness. Even though one may come to the platform of brahma-bhūta and understand his spiritual identity by speculative knowledge, one cannot enjoy spiritual life without understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is indicated here by the word abhīṣṭa-siddhiḥ. One can fulfill the ultimate goal of life only by engaging in devotional service to the Lord. Then the Lord will give one proper instructions on how to go back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 53



tvaṁ tvām ahaṁ deva-varaṁ vareṇyaṁ

prapadya īśaṁ pratibodhanāya

chindhy artha-dīpair bhagavan vacobhir

granthīn hṛdayyān vivṛṇu svam okaḥ

SYNONYMS



tvam-how exalted You are; tvām-unto You; aham-myself; deva-varam-worshiped by the demigods; vareṇyam-the greatest of all; prapadye-fully surrendering; īśam-unto the supreme controller; pratibodhanāya-for understanding the real purpose of life; chindhi-cut off; artha-dīpaiḥ-by the light of purposeful instruction; bhagavan-O Supreme Lord; vacobhiḥ-by Your words; granthīn-knots; hṛdayyān-fixed within the core of the heart; vivṛṇu-kindly explain; svam okaḥ-my destination in life.





O Supreme Lord, for self-realization I surrender unto You, who are worshiped by the demigods as the supreme controller of everything. By Your instructions, exposing life's purpose, kindly cut the knot from the core of my heart and let me know the destination of my life.





Sometimes it is argued that people do not know who is a spiritual master and that finding a spiritual master from whom to get enlightenment in regard to the destination of life is very difficult. To answer all these questions, King Satyavrata shows us the way to accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the real spiritual master. The Supreme Lord has given full directions in Bhagavad-gītā about how to deal with everything in this material world and how to return home, back to Godhead. Therefore, one should not be misled by so-called gurus who are rascals and fools. Rather, one should directly see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the guru or instructor. It is difficult, however, to understand Bhagavad-gītā without the help of the guru. Therefore the guru appears in the paramparā system. In Bhagavad-gītā (4.34) the Supreme Personality of Godhead recommends:



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ





"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Lord Kṛṣṇa directly instructed Arjuna. Arjuna is therefore tattva-darśī or guru. Arjuna accepted the Supreme Personality of Godhead (paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]). Similarly, following in the footsteps of Śrī Arjuna, who is a personal devotee of the Lord, one should accept the supremacy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, as supported by Vyāsa, Devala, Asita, Nārada and later by the ācāryas Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Nimbārka and Viṣṇusvāmī and still later by the greatest ācārya, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Where, then, is the difficulty in finding a guru? If one is sincere he can find the guru and learn everything. One should take lessons from the guru and find out the goal of life. Mahārāja Satyavrata, therefore, shows us the way of the mahājana. Mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ. One should surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (daśāvatāra) and learn from Him about the spiritual world and the goal of life.





TEXT 54



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity uktavantaṁ nṛpatiṁ

bhagavān ādi-pūruṣaḥ

matsya-rūpī mahāmbhodhau

viharaṁs tattvam abravīt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; uktavantam-being addressed by Mahārāja Satyavrata; nṛpatim-unto the King; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-pūruṣaḥ-the original person; matsya-rūpī-who had assumed the form of a fish; mahā-ambhodhau-in that water of inundation; viharan-while moving; tattvam abravīt-explained the Absolute Truth.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When Satyavrata had thus prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish, the Lord, while moving in the water of inundation, explained to him the Absolute Truth.





TEXT 55



purāṇa-saṁhitāṁ divyāṁ

sāṅkhya-yoga-kriyāvatīm

satyavratasya rājarṣer

ātma-guhyam aśeṣataḥ

SYNONYMS



purāṇa-the subject matter explained in the Purāṇas, the old histories, especially the Matsya Purāṇa; saṁhitām-the Vedic instructions contained in Brahma-saṁhitā and other saṁhitās; divyām-all transcendental literatures; sāṅkhya-the philosophical way of sāṅkhya-yoga; yoga-the science of self-realization or bhakti-yoga; kriyāvatīm-practically applied in life; satyavratasya-of King Satyavrata; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-the great king and saint; ātma-guhyam-all the mysteries of self-realization; aśeṣataḥ-including all branches.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead thus explained to King Satyavrata the spiritual science known as sāṅkhya-yoga, the science by which one distinguishes between matter and spirit [in other words, bhakti-yoga], along with the instructions contained in the Purāṇas [the old histories] and the saṁhitās. The Lord explained Himself in all these literatures.





TEXT 56



aśrauṣīd ṛṣibhiḥ sākam

ātma-tattvam asaṁśayam

nāvy āsīno bhagavatā

proktaṁ brahma sanātanam

SYNONYMS



aśrauṣīt-he heard; ṛṣibhiḥ-the great saintly persons; sākam-with; ātma-tattvam-the science of self-realization; asaṁśayam-without any doubt (because it was spoken by the Supreme Lord); nāvi āsīnaḥ-sitting in the boat; bhagavatā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; proktam-explained; brahma-all transcendental literatures; sanātanam-eternally existing.





While sitting in the boat, King Satyavrata, accompanied by the great saintly persons, listened to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in regard to self-realization. These instructions were all from the eternal Vedic literature [brahma]. Thus the King and sages had no doubt about the Absolute Truth.





TEXT 57



atīta-pralayāpāya

utthitāya sa vedhase

hatvāsuraṁ hayagrīvaṁ

vedān pratyāharad dhariḥ

SYNONYMS



atīta-passed; pralaya-apāye-at the end of the inundation; utthitāya-to bring him to his senses after sleeping; saḥ-the Supreme Lord; vedhase-unto Lord Brahmā; hatvā-after killing; asuram-the demon; hayagrīvam-by the name Hayagrīva; vedān-all the Vedic records; pratyāharat-delivered; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





At the end of the last inundation [during the period of Svāyambhuva Manu] the Supreme Personality of Godhead killed the demon named Hayagrīva and delivered all the Vedic literatures to Lord Brahmā when Lord Brahmā awakened from sleeping.





TEXT 58



sa tu satyavrato rājā

jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ

viṣṇoḥ prasādāt kalpe 'sminn

āsīd vaivasvato manuḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he; tu-indeed; satyavrataḥ-Satyavrata; rājā-the King; jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ-enlightened in full knowledge and its practical use; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; prasādāt-by the mercy; kalpe asmin-in this period (ruled by Vaivasvata Manu); āsīt-became; vaivasvataḥ manuḥ-Vaivasvata Manu.





King Satyavrata was illuminated with all Vedic knowledge by the mercy of Lord Viṣṇu, and in this period he has now taken birth as Vaivasvata Manu, the son of the sun-god.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives his verdict that Satyavrata appeared in the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara. When the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara ended, the period of Vaivasvata Manu began. By the grace of Lord Viṣṇu, Satyavrata received instructions from the second fish incarnation and was thus enlightened in all spiritual knowledge.





TEXT 59



satyavratasya rājarṣer

māyā-matsyasya śārṅgiṇaḥ

saṁvādaṁ mahad-ākhyānaṁ

śrutvā mucyeta kilbiṣāt

SYNONYMS



satyavratasya-of King Satyavrata; rāja-ṛṣeḥ-of the great king; māyā-matsyasya-and the fish incarnation; śārṅgiṇaḥ-who had one horn on His head; saṁvādam-the description or dealings; mahat-ākhyānam-the great story; śrutvā-by hearing; mucyeta-is delivered; kilbiṣāt-from all sinful reactions.





This story concerning the great King Satyavrata and the fish incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is a great transcendental narration. Anyone who hears it is delivered from the reactions of sinful life.





TEXT 60



avatāraṁ harer yo 'yaṁ

kīrtayed anvahaṁ naraḥ

saṅkalpās tasya sidhyanti

sa yāti paramāṁ gatim

SYNONYMS



avatāram-incarnation; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaḥ-whoever; ayam-he; kīrtayet-narrates and chants; anvaham-daily; naraḥ-such a person; saṅkalpāḥ-all ambitions; tasya-of him; sidhyanti-become successful; saḥ-such a person; yāti-goes back; paramām gatim-back home to Godhead, the supreme place.





One who narrates this description of the Matsya incarnation and King Satyavrata will certainly have all his ambitions fulfilled, and he will undoubtedly return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 61



pralaya-payasi dhātuḥ supta-śakter mukhebhyaḥ

śruti-gaṇam apanītaṁ pratyupādatta hatvā

ditijam akathayad yo brahma satyavratānāṁ

tam aham akhila-hetuṁ jihma-mīnaṁ nato 'smi

SYNONYMS



pralaya-payasi-in the water of inundation; dhātuḥ-from Lord Brahmā; supta-śakteḥ-who was inert because of sleeping; mukhebhyaḥ-from the mouths; śruti-gaṇam-Vedic records; apanītam-stolen; pratyupādatta-gave back to him; hatvā-by killing; ditijam-the great demon; akathayat-explained; yaḥ-one who; brahma-Vedic knowledge; satyavratānām-for the enlightenment of Satyavrata and the great saintly persons; tam-unto Him; aham-I; akhila-hetum-unto the cause of all causes; jihma-mīnam-appearing as and pretending to be a great fish; nataḥ asmi-I offer my respectful obeisances.





I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who pretended to be a gigantic fish, who restored the Vedic literature to Lord Brahmā when Lord Brahmā awakened from sleep, and who explained the essence of Vedic literature to King Satyavrata and the great saintly persons.





Here is a summary of Satyavrata's meeting with the fish incarnation of Lord Viṣṇu. Lord Viṣṇu's purpose was to take back all the Vedic literatures from the demon Hayagrīva and restore them to Lord Brahmā. Incidentally, by His causeless mercy, the Lord spoke with Satyavrata. The word satyavratānām is significant because it indicates that those on the level of Satyavrata can take knowledge from the Vedas delivered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whatever is spoken by the Supreme Lord is accepted as Veda. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, vedānta-kṛd veda-vit: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the compiler of all Vedic knowledge, and He knows the purport of the Vedas. Therefore, anyone who takes knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, or from Bhagavad-gītā as it is, knows the purpose of the Vedas (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]). One cannot understand Vedic knowledge from the veda-vāda-ratās, who read the Vedas and misconstrue their subject matter. One has to know the Vedas from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Eighth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Matsya, the Lord's Fish Incarnation."

-This commentation has been finished in our New Delhi center today, the first of September, 1976, the day of Rādhāṣṭamī, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the ācāryas. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, tāṅdera caraṇa sevi bhakta-sane vāsa janame janame haya, ei abhilāṣa. I am attempting to present Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the English language by the order of my spiritual master, Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and by his grace the work of translation is gradually progressing, and the European and American devotees who have joined the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement are helping me considerably. Thus we have expectations of finishing the great task before my passing away. All glories to Śrī Guru and Gaurāṅga.





END OF THE EIGHTH CANTO





Ninth Canto





Chapter One



King Sudyumna Becomes a Woman





This chapter describes how Sudyumna became a woman and how the dynasty of Vaivasvata Manu was amalgamated with the Soma-vaṁśa, the dynasty coming from the moon.





By the desire of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Śukadeva Gosvāmī told about the dynasty of Vaivasvata Manu, who was formerly King Satyavrata, the ruler of Draviḍa. While describing this dynasty, he also described how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, while lying down in the waters of devastation, gave birth to Lord Brahmā from a lotus generated from His navel. From the mind of Lord Brahmā, Marīci was generated, and his son was Kaśyapa. From Kaśyapa, through Aditi, Vivasvān was generated, and from Vivasvān came Śrāddhadeva Manu, who was born from the womb of Saṁjñā. Śrāddhadeva's wife, Śraddhā, gave birth to ten sons, such as Ikṣvāku and Nṛga.





Śrāddhadeva, or Vaivasvata Manu, the father of Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, was sonless before Ikṣvāku's birth, but by the grace of the great sage Vasiṣṭha he performed a yajña to satisfy Mitra and Varuṇa. Then, although Vaivasvata Manu wanted a son, by the desire of his wife he got a daughter named Ilā. Manu, however, was not satisfied with the daughter. Consequently, for Manu's satisfaction, the great sage Vasiṣṭha prayed for Ilā to be transformed into a boy, and his prayer was fulfilled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus Ilā became a beautiful young man named Sudyumna.





Once upon a time, Sudyumna went on tour with his ministers. At the foot of the mountain Sumeru there is a forest named Sukumāra, and as soon as they entered that forest, they were all transformed into women. When Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī about the reason for this transformation, Śukadeva Gosvāmī described how Sudyumna, being transformed into a woman, accepted Budha, the son of the moon, as her husband and had a son named Purūravā. By the grace of Lord Śiva, Sudyumna received the benediction that he would live one month as a woman and one month as a man. Thus he regained his kingdom and had three sons, named Utkala, Gaya and Vimala, who were all very religious. Thereafter, he entrusted his kingdom to Purūravā and took the order of vānaprastha life.





TEXT 1



śrī-rājovāca

manvantarāṇi sarvāṇi

tvayoktāni śrutāni me

vīryāṇy ananta-vīryasya

hares tatra kṛtāni ca

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; manvantarāṇi-all about the periods of the various Manus; sarvāṇi-all of them; tvayā-by you; uktāni-have been described; śrutāni-have been listened to; me-by me; vīryāṇi-wonderful activities; ananta-vīryasya-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited potency; hareḥ-of the Supreme Lord, Hari; tatra-in those manvantara periods; kṛtāni-which have been performed; ca-also.





King Parīkṣit said: My lord, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, you have elaborately described all the periods of the various Manus and, within those periods, the wonderful activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited potency. I am fortunate to have heard all of this from you.





TEXTS 2–3



yo 'sau satyavrato nāma

rājarṣir draviḍeśvaraḥ

jñānaṁ yo 'tīta-kalpānte

lebhe puruṣa-sevayā

sa vai vivasvataḥ putro



manur āsīd iti śrutam

tvattas tasya sutāḥ proktā

ikṣvāku-pramukhā nṛpāḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ asau-he who was known; satyavrataḥ-Satyavrata; nāma-by the name; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-the saintly king; draviḍa-īśvaraḥ-the ruler of the Draviḍa countries; jñānam-knowledge; yaḥ-one who; atīta-kalpa-ante-at the end of the period of the last Manu, or at the end of the last millennium; lebhe-received; puruṣa-sevayā-by rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saḥ-he; vai-indeed; vivasvataḥ-of Vivasvān; putraḥ-son; manuḥ āsīt-became the Vaivasvata Manu; iti-thus; śrutam-I have already heard; tvattaḥ-from you; tasya-his; sutāḥ-sons; proktāḥ-have been explained; ikṣvāku-pramukhāḥ-headed by Ikṣvāku; nṛpāḥ-many kings.





Satyavrata, the saintly king of Draviḍadeśa who received spiritual knowledge at the end of the last millennium by the grace of the Supreme, later became Vaivasvata Manu, the son of Vivasvān, in the next manvantara [period of Manu]. I have received this knowledge from you. I also understand that such kings as Ikṣvāku were his sons, as you have already explained.





TEXT 4



teṣāṁ vaṁśaṁ pṛthag brahman

vaṁśānucaritāni ca

kīrtayasva mahā-bhāga

nityaṁ śuśrūṣatāṁ hi naḥ

SYNONYMS



teṣām-of all those kings; vaṁśam-the dynasties; pṛthak-separately; brahman-O great brāhmaṇa (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); vaṁśa-anucaritāni ca-and their dynasties and characteristics; kīrtayasva-kindly describe; mahā-bhāga-O greatly fortunate one; nityam-eternally; śuśrūṣatām-who are engaged in your service; hi-indeed; naḥ-of ourselves.





O greatly fortunate Śukadeva Gosvāmī, O great brāhmaṇa, kindly describe to us separately the dynasties and characteristics of all those kings, for we are always eager to hear such topics from you.





TEXT 5



ye bhūtā ye bhaviṣyāś ca

bhavanty adyatanāś ca ye

teṣāṁ naḥ puṇya-kīrtīnāṁ

sarveṣāṁ vada vikramān

SYNONYMS



ye-all of whom; bhūtāḥ-have already appeared; ye-all of whom; bhaviṣyāḥ-will appear in the future; ca-also; bhavanti-are existing; adyatanāḥ-at present; ca-also; ye-all of whom; teṣām-of all of them; naḥ-unto us; puṇya-kīrtīnām-who were all pious and celebrated; sarveṣām-of all of them; vada-kindly explain; vikramān-about the abilities.





Kindly tell us about the abilities of all the celebrated kings born in the dynasty of Vaivasvata Manu, including those who have already passed, those who may appear in the future, and those who exist at present.





TEXT 6



śrī-sūta uvāca

evaṁ parīkṣitā rājñā

sadasi brahma-vādinām

pṛṣṭaḥ provāca bhagavāñ

chukaḥ parama-dharma-vit

SYNONYMS



śrī-sūtaḥ uvāca-Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; parīkṣitā-by Mahārāja Parīkṣit; rājñā-by the King; sadasi-in the assembly; brahma-vādinām-of all the great saintly experts in Vedic knowledge; pṛṣṭaḥ-having been asked; provāca-answered; bhagavān-the most powerful; śukaḥ-Śuka Gosvāmī; parama-dharma-vit-the most learned scholar in religious principles.





Sūta Gosvāmī said: When Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the greatest knower of religious principles, was thus requested by Mahārāja Parīkṣit in the assembly of all the scholars learned in Vedic knowledge, he then proceeded to speak.





TEXT 7



śrī-śuka uvāca

śrūyatāṁ mānavo vaṁśaḥ

prācuryeṇa parantapa

na śakyate vistarato

vaktuṁ varṣa-śatair api

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; śrūyatām-just hear from me; mānavaḥ vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty of Manu; prācuryeṇa-as expansive as possible; parantapa-O King, who can subdue your enemies; na-not; śakyate-one is able; vistarataḥ-very broadly; vaktum-to speak; varṣa-śataiḥ api-even if he does so for hundreds of years.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, subduer of your enemies, now hear from me in great detail about the dynasty of Manu. I shall explain as much as possible, although one could not say everything about it, even in hundreds of years.





TEXT 8



parāvareṣāṁ bhūtānām

ātmā yaḥ puruṣaḥ paraḥ

sa evāsīd idaṁ viśvaṁ

kalpānte 'nyan na kiñcana

SYNONYMS



para-avareṣām-of all living entities, in higher or lower statuses of life; bhūtānām-of those who have taken material bodies (the conditioned souls); ātmā-the Supersoul; yaḥ-one who is; puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Person; paraḥ-transcendental; saḥ-He; eva-indeed; āsīt-was existing; idam-this; viśvam-universe; kalpa-ante-at the end of the millennium; anyat-anything else; na-not; kiñcana-anything whatsoever.





The transcendental Supreme Person, the Supersoul of all living entities, who are in different statuses of life, high and low, existed at the end of the millennium, when neither this manifested cosmos nor anything else but Him existed.





Taking the proper position from which to describe the dynasty of Manu, Śukadeva Gosvāmī begins by saying that when the entire world is inundated, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead exists, and nothing else. Śukadeva Gosvāmī will now describe how the Lord creates other things, one after another.





TEXT 9



tasya nābheḥ samabhavat

padma-koṣo hiraṇmayaḥ

tasmiñ jajñe mahārāja

svayambhūś catur-ānanaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nābheḥ-from the navel; samabhavat-generated; padma-koṣaḥ-a lotus; hiraṇmayaḥ-known as Hiraṇmaya, or golden; tasmin-on that golden lotus; jajñe-appeared; mahārāja-O King; svayambhūḥ-one who is self-manifested, who takes birth without a mother; catuḥ-ānanaḥ-with four heads.





O King Parīkṣit, from the navel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead was generated a golden lotus, on which the four-faced Lord Brahmā took his birth.





TEXT 10



marīcir manasas tasya

jajñe tasyāpi kaśyapaḥ

dākṣāyaṇyāṁ tato 'dityāṁ

vivasvān abhavat sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



marīciḥ-the great saintly person known as Marīci; manasaḥ tasya-from the mind of Lord Brahmā; jajñe-took birth; tasya api-from Marīci; kaśyapaḥ-Kaśyapa (took birth); dākṣāyaṇyām-in the womb of the daughter of Mahārāja Dakṣa; tataḥ-thereafter; adityām-in the womb of Aditi; vivasvān-Vivasvān; abhavat-took birth; sutaḥ-a son.





From the mind of Lord Brahmā, Marīci took birth, and from the semen of Marīci, Kaśyapa appeared from the womb of the daughter of Dakṣa Mahārāja. From Kaśyapa, by the womb of Aditi, Vivasvān took birth.





TEXTS 11–12



tato manuḥ śrāddhadevaḥ

saṁjñāyām āsa bhārata

śraddhāyāṁ janayām āsa

daśa putrān sa ātmavān

ikṣvāku-nṛga-śaryāti-



diṣṭa-dhṛṣṭa-karūṣakān

nariṣyantaṁ pṛṣadhraṁ ca

nabhagaṁ ca kaviṁ vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Vivasvān; manuḥ śrāddhadevaḥ-the Manu named Śrāddhadeva; saṁjñāyām-in the womb of Saṁjñā (the wife of Vivasvān); āsa-was born; bhārata-O best of the Bhārata dynasty; śraddhāyām-in the womb of Śraddhā (the wife of Śrāddhadeva); janayām āsa-begot; daśa-ten; putrān-sons; saḥ-that Śrāddhadeva; ātmavān-having conquered his senses; ikṣvāku-nṛga-śaryāti-diṣṭa-dhṛṣṭa-karūṣakān-named Ikṣvāku, Nṛga, Śaryāti, Diṣṭa, Dhṛṣṭa and Karūṣaka; nariṣyantam-Nariṣyanta; pṛṣadhram ca-and Pṛṣadhra; nabhagam ca-and Nabhaga; kavim-Kavi; vibhuḥ-the great.





O King, best of the Bhārata dynasty, from Vivasvān, by the womb of Saṁjñā, Śrāddhadeva Manu was born. Śrāddhadeva Manu, having conquered his senses, begot ten sons in the womb of his wife, Śraddhā. The names of these sons were Ikṣvāku, Nṛga, Śaryāti, Diṣṭa, Dhṛṣṭa, Karūṣaka, Nariṣyanta, Pṛṣadhra, Nabhaga and Kavi.





TEXT 13



aprajasya manoḥ pūrvaṁ

vasiṣṭho bhagavān kila

mitrā-varuṇayor iṣṭiṁ

prajārtham akarod vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



aprajasya-of he who had no son; manoḥ-of Manu; pūrvam-formerly; vasiṣṭhaḥ-the great saint Vasiṣṭha; bhagavān-powerful; kila-indeed; mitrā-varuṇayoḥ-of the demigods named Mitra and Varuṇa; iṣṭim-a sacrifice; prajā-artham-for the sake of getting sons; akarot-executed; vibhuḥ-the great person.





Manu at first had no sons. Therefore, in order to get a son for him, the great saint Vasiṣṭha, who was very powerful in spiritual knowledge, performed a sacrifice to satisfy the demigods Mitra and Varuṇa.





TEXT 14



tatra śraddhā manoḥ patnī

hotāraṁ samayācata

duhitrartham upāgamya

praṇipatya payovratā

SYNONYMS



tatra-in that sacrifice; śraddhā-Śraddhā; manoḥ-of Manu; patnī-the wife; hotāram-to the priest performing the yajña; samayācata-begged properly; duhitṛ-artham-for a daughter; upāgamya-coming near; praṇipatya-offering obeisances; payaḥ-vratā-who was observing the vow of drinking only milk.





During that sacrifice, Śraddhā, Manu's wife, who was observing the vow of subsisting only by drinking milk, approached the priest offering the sacrifice, offered obeisances to him and begged for a daughter.





TEXT 15



preṣito 'dhvaryuṇā hotā

vyacarat tat samāhitaḥ

gṛhīte haviṣi vācā

vaṣaṭ-kāraṁ gṛṇan dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



preṣitaḥ-being told to execute the sacrifice; adhvaryuṇā-by the ṛtvik priest; hotā-the priest in charge of offering oblations; vyacarat-executed; tat-that (sacrifice); samāhitaḥ-with great attention; gṛhīte haviṣi-upon taking the clarified butter for the first oblation; vācā-by chanting the mantra; vaṣaṭ-kāram-the mantra beginning with the word vaṣaṭ; gṛṇan-reciting; dvijaḥ-the brāhmaṇa.





Told by the chief priest "Now offer oblations," the person in charge of oblations took clarified butter to offer. He then remembered the request of Manu's wife and performed the sacrifice while chanting the word "vaṣaṭ."





TEXT 16



hotus tad-vyabhicāreṇa

kanyelā nāma sābhavat

tāṁ vilokya manuḥ prāha

nātituṣṭamanā gurum

SYNONYMS



hotuḥ-of the priest; tat-of the yajña; vyabhicāreṇa-by that transgression; kanyā-a daughter; ilā-Ilā; nāma-by the name; sā-that daughter; abhavat-was born; tām-unto her; vilokya-seeing; manuḥ-Manu; prāha-said; na-not; atituṣṭamanāḥ-very much satisfied; gurum-unto his guru.





Manu had begun that sacrifice for the sake of getting a son, but because the priest was diverted by the request of Manu's wife, a daughter named Ilā was born. Upon seeing the daughter, Manu was not very satisfied. Thus he spoke to his guru, Vasiṣṭha, as follows.





Because Manu had no issue, he was pleased at the birth of the child, even though a daughter, and gave her the name Ilā. Later, however, he was not very satisfied to see the daughter instead of a son. Because he had no issue, he was certainly very glad at the birth of Ilā, but his pleasure was temporary.





TEXT 17



bhagavan kim idaṁ jātaṁ

karma vo brahma-vādinām

viparyayam aho kaṣṭaṁ

maivaṁ syād brahma-vikriyā

SYNONYMS



bhagavan-O my lord; kim idam-what is this; jātam-born; karma-fruitive activities; vaḥ-of all of you; brahma-vādinām-of you, who are expert in chanting the Vedic mantras; viparyayam-deviation; aho-alas; kaṣṭam-painful; mā evam syāt-thus it should not have been; brahma-vikriyā-this opposite action of the Vedic mantras.





My lord, all of you are expert in chanting the Vedic mantras. How then has the result been opposite to the one desired? This is a matter for lamentation. There should not have been such a reversal of the results of the Vedic mantras.





In this age, the performance of yajña has been forbidden because no one can properly chant the Vedic mantras. If Vedic mantras are chanted properly, the desire for which a sacrifice is performed must be successful. Therefore the Hare Kṛṣṇa chant is called the mahā-mantra, the great, exalted mantra above all other Vedic mantras, because simply chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra brings so many beneficial effects. As explained by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (Śikṣāṣṭaka 1):



ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

[Cc. Antya 20.12]





"Glory to the Śrī Kṛṣṇa saṅkīrtana, which cleanses the heart of all the dust accumulated for years and extinguishes the fire of conditional life, of repeated birth and death. This saṅkīrtana movement is the prime benediction for humanity at large because it spreads the rays of the benediction moon. It is the life of all transcendental knowledge. It increases the ocean of transcendental bliss, and it enables us to fully taste the nectar for which we are always anxious."



Therefore, the best performance of yajña given to us is the saṅkīrtana-yajña. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ (Bhāg. 11.5.32). Those who are intelligent take advantage of the greatest yajña in this age by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra in congregation. When the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is chanted by many men together, the chanting is called saṅkīrtana, and as a result of such a yajña there will be clouds in the sky (yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]). In these days of drought, people can gain relief from scarcity of rain and food by the simple method of the Hare Kṛṣṇa yajña. Indeed, this can relieve all of human society. At present there are droughts throughout Europe and America, and people are suffering, but if people take this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement seriously, if they stop their sinful activities and chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, all their problems will be solved without difficulty. In other processes of yajña there are difficulties because there are no learned scholars who can chant the mantras perfectly well, nor is it possible to secure the ingredients to perform the yajña. Because human society is poverty-stricken and men are devoid of Vedic knowledge and the power to chant the Vedic mantras, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is the only shelter. people should be intelligent enough to chant it. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Those whose brains are dull cannot understand this chanting, nor can they take to it.





TEXT 18



yūyaṁ brahma-vido yuktās

tapasā dagdha-kilbiṣāḥ

kutaḥ saṅkalpa-vaiṣamyam

anṛtaṁ vibudheṣv iva

SYNONYMS



yūyam-of all you; brahma-vidaḥ-completely in awareness of the Absolute Truth; yuktāḥ-self-controlled and well balanced; tapasā-by dint of austerity and penances; dagdha-kilbiṣāḥ-all kinds of material contamination having been burnt out; kutaḥ-then how; saṅkalpa-vaiṣamyam-discrepancy in the matter of determination; anṛtam-false promise, false statement; vibudheṣu-in the society of the demigods; iva-or.





You are all self-controlled, well balanced in mind, and aware of the Absolute Truth. And because of austerities and penances you are completely cleansed of all material contamination. Your words, like those of the demigods, are never baffled. Then how is it possible that your determination has failed?





We have learned from many Vedic literatures that a benediction or curse given by the demigods never proves false. By performing austerities and penances, by controlling the senses and mind, and by achieving full knowledge of the Absolute Truth, one is fully cleansed of material contamination. Then one's words and blessings, like those of the demigods, are never a failure.





TEXT 19



niśamya tad vacas tasya

bhagavān prapitāmahaḥ

hotur vyatikramaṁ jñātvā

babhāṣe ravi-nandanam

SYNONYMS



niśamya-after hearing; tat vacaḥ-those words; tasya-of him (Manu); bhagavān-the most powerful; prapitāmahaḥ-the great-grandfather Vasiṣṭha; hotuḥ vyatikramam-discrepancy on the part of the hotā priest; jñātvā-understanding; babhāṣe-spoke; ravi-nandanam-unto Vaivasvata Manu, son of the sun-god.





The most powerful great-grandfather Vasiṣṭha, after hearing these words of Manu, understood the discrepancy on the part of the priest. Thus he spoke as follows to the son of the sun-god.





TEXT 20



etat saṅkalpa-vaiṣamyaṁ

hotus te vyabhicārataḥ

tathāpi sādhayiṣye te

suprajāstvaṁ sva-tejasā

SYNONYMS



etat-this; saṅkalpa-vaiṣamyam-discrepancy in the objective; hotuḥ-of the priest; te-your; vyabhicārataḥ-from deviating from the prescribed purpose; tathā api-still; sādhayiṣye-I shall execute; te-for you; su-prajāstvam-a very nice son; sva-tejasā-by my own prowess.





This discrepancy in the objective is due to your priest's deviation from the original purpose. However, by my own prowess I shall give you a good son.





TEXT 21



evaṁ vyavasito rājan

bhagavān sa mahā-yaśāḥ

astauṣīd ādi-puruṣam

ilāyāḥ puṁstva-kāmyayā

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; vyavasitaḥ-deciding; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; bhagavān-the most powerful; saḥ-Vasiṣṭha; mahā-yaśāḥ-very famous; astauṣīt-offered prayers; ādi-puruṣam-unto the Supreme Person, Lord Viṣṇu; ilāyāḥ-of Ilā; puṁstva-kāmyayā-for the transformation into a male.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, after the most famous and powerful Vasiṣṭha made this decision, he offered prayers to the Supreme Person, Viṣṇu, to transform Ilā into a male.





TEXT 22



tasmai kāma-varaṁ tuṣṭo

bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

dadāv ilābhavat tena

sudyumnaḥ puruṣarṣabhaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto him (Vasiṣṭha); kāma-varam-the desired benediction; tuṣṭaḥ-being pleased; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality; hariḥ īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller, the Lord; dadau-gave; ilā-the girl, Ilā; abhavat-became; tena-because of this benediction; sudyumnaḥ-by the name Sudyumna; puruṣa-ṛṣabhaḥ-a nice male.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, being pleased with Vasiṣṭha, gave him the benediction he desired. Thus Ilā was transformed into a very fine male named Sudyumna.





TEXTS 23–24



sa ekadā mahārāja

vicaran mṛgayāṁ vane

vṛtaḥ katipayāmātyair

aśvam āruhya saindhavam

pragṛhya ruciraṁ cāpaṁ



śarāṁś ca paramādbhutān

daṁśito 'numṛgaṁ vīro

jagāma diśam uttarām

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Sudyumna; ekadā-once upon a time; mahārāja-O King Parīkṣit; vicaran-touring; mṛgayām-for hunting; vane-in the forest; vṛtaḥ-accompanied; katipaya-a few; amātyaiḥ-by ministers or associates; aśvam-upon a horse; āruhya-riding; saindhavam-born in the Sindhupradeśa; pragṛhya-holding in hand; ruciram-beautiful; cāpam-bow; śarān ca-and arrows; parama-adbhutān-very wonderful, uncommon; daṁśitaḥ-wearing armor; anumṛgam-behind the animals; vīraḥ-the hero; jagāma-went toward; diśam uttarām-the north.





O King Parīkṣit, that hero Sudyumna, accompanied by a few ministers and associates and riding on a horse brought from Sindhupradeśa, once went into the forest to hunt. He wore armor and was decorated with bows and arrows, and he was very beautiful. While following the animals and killing them, he reached the northern part of the forest.





TEXT 25



sukumāra-vanaṁ meror

adhastāt praviveśa ha

yatrāste bhagavāñ charvo

ramamāṇaḥ sahomayā

SYNONYMS



sukumāra-vanam-the forest known as Sukumāra; meroḥ adhastāt-at the foot of Mount Meru; praviveśa ha-he entered; yatra-wherein; āste-was; bhagavān-the most powerful (demigod); śarvaḥ-Lord Śiva; ramamāṇaḥ-engaged in enjoyment; saha umayā-with Umā, his wife.





There in the north, at the bottom of Mount Meru, is a forest known as Sukumāra where Lord Śiva always enjoys with Umā. Sudyumna entered that forest.





TEXT 26



tasmin praviṣṭa evāsau

sudyumnaḥ para-vīra-hā

apaśyat striyam ātmānam

aśvaṁ ca vaḍavāṁ nṛpa

SYNONYMS



tasmin-in that forest; praviṣṭaḥ-having entered; eva-indeed; asau-he; sudyumnaḥ-Prince Sudyumna; para-vīra-hā-who could very well subdue his enemies; apaśyat-observed; striyam-female; ātmānam-himself; aśvam ca-and his horse; vaḍavām-a mare; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit.





O King Parīkṣit, as soon as Sudyumna, who was expert in subduing enemies, entered the forest, he saw himself transformed into a female and his horse transformed into a mare.





TEXT 27



tathā tad-anugāḥ sarve

ātma-liṅga-viparyayam

dṛṣṭvā vimanaso 'bhūvan

vīkṣamāṇāḥ parasparam

SYNONYMS



tathā-similarly; tat-anugāḥ-the companions of Sudyumna; sarve-all of them; ātma-liṅga-viparyayam-the transformation of their sex into the opposite; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; vimanasaḥ-morose; abhūvan-they became; vīkṣamāṇāḥ-looking over; parasparam-one another.





When his followers also saw their identities transformed and their sex reversed, they were all very morose and just looked at one another.





TEXT 28



śrī-rājovāca

katham evaṁ guṇo deśaḥ

kena vā bhagavan kṛtaḥ

praśnam enaṁ samācakṣva

paraṁ kautūhalaṁ hi naḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-Mahārāja Parīkṣit said; katham-how; evam-this; guṇaḥ-quality; deśaḥ-the country; kena-why; vā-either; bhagavan-O most powerful; kṛtaḥ-it was so done; praśnam-question; enam-this; samācakṣva-just deliberate; param-very much; kautūhalam-eagerness; hi-indeed; naḥ-our.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: O most powerful brāhmaṇa, why was this place so empowered, and who made it so powerful? Kindly answer this question, for I am very eager to hear about this.





TEXT 29



śrī-śuka uvāca

ekadā giriśaṁ draṣṭum

ṛṣayas tatra suvratāḥ

diśo vitimirābhāsāḥ

kurvantaḥ samupāgaman

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ekadā-once upon a time; giriśam-Lord Śiva; draṣṭum-to see; ṛṣayaḥ-very saintly persons; tatra-in that forest; su-vratāḥ-highly elevated in spiritual power; diśaḥ-all directions; vitimira-ābhāsāḥ-having been cleared of all darkness whatsoever; kurvantaḥ-doing so; samupāgaman-arrived.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī answered: Great saintly persons who strictly observed the spiritual rules and regulations and whose own effulgence dissipated all the darkness of all directions once came to see Lord Śiva in that forest.





TEXT 30



tān vilokyāmbikā devī

vivāsā vrīḍitā bhṛśam

bhartur aṅkāt samutthāya

nīvīm āśv atha paryadhāt

SYNONYMS



tān-all the saintly persons; vilokya-seeing them; ambikā-mother Durgā; devī-the goddess; vivāsā-because she was naked; vrīḍitā-ashamed; bhṛśam-highly; bhartuḥ-of her husband; aṅkāt-from the lap; samutthāya-getting up; nīvīm-breast; āśu atha-very quickly; paryadhāt-covered with cloth.





When the goddess Ambikā saw the great saintly persons, she was very much ashamed because at that time she was naked. She immediately got up from the lap of her husband and tried to cover her breast.





TEXT 31



ṛṣayo 'pi tayor vīkṣya

prasaṅgaṁ ramamāṇayoḥ

nivṛttāḥ prayayus tasmān

nara-nārāyaṇāśramam

SYNONYMS



ṛṣayaḥ-all the great saintly persons; api-also; tayoḥ-of both of them; vīkṣya-seeing; prasaṅgam-engagement in sexual matters; ramamāṇayoḥ-who were enjoying in that way; nivṛttāḥ-desisted from going further; prayayuḥ-immediately departed; tasmāt-from that place; nara-nārāyaṇa-āśramam-to the āśrama of Nara-Nārāyaṇa.





Seeing Lord Śiva and Pārvatī engaged in sexual affairs, all the great saintly persons immediately desisted from going further and departed for the āśrama of Nara-Nārāyaṇa.





TEXT 32



tad idaṁ bhagavān āha

priyāyāḥ priya-kāmyayā

sthānaṁ yaḥ praviśed etat

sa vai yoṣid bhaved iti

SYNONYMS



tat-because; idam-this; bhagavān-Lord Śiva; āha-said; priyāyāḥ-of his dear wife; priya-kāmyayā-for the pleasure; sthānam-place; yaḥ-anyone who; praviśet-will enter; etat-here; saḥ-that person; vai-indeed; yoṣit-female; bhavet-shall become; iti-thus.





Thereupon, just to please his wife, Lord Śiva said, "Any male entering this place shall immediately become a female!"





TEXT 33



tata ūrdhvaṁ vanaṁ tad vai

puruṣā varjayanti hi

sā cānucara-saṁyuktā

vicacāra vanād vanam

SYNONYMS



tataḥ ūrdhvam-from that time onward; vanam-forest; tat-that; vai-in particular; puruṣāḥ-males; varjayanti-do not enter; hi-indeed; sā-Sudyumna in the form of a woman; ca-also; anucara-saṁyuktā-accompanied by his companions; vicacāra-walked; vanāt vanam-within the forest from one place to another.





Since that time, no male had entered that forest. But now King Sudyumna, having been transformed into a female, began to walk with his associates from one forest to another.





In Bhagavad-gītā (2.22) it is said:



vāsāṁsi jīrṇāni yathā vihāya

navāni gṛhṇāti naro 'parāṇi

tathā sarīrāṇi vihāya jīrṇāny

anyāni saṁyāti navāni dehī





"As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones."



The body is just like a dress, and here this is proved. Sudyumna and his associates were all male, which means that their souls were covered by male dress, but now they became female, which means that their dress was changed. The soul, however, remains the same. It is said that by modern medical treatment a male can be transformed into a female, and a female into a male. The body, however, has no connection with the soul. The body can be changed, either in this life or the next. Therefore, one who has knowledge of the soul and how the soul transmigrates from one body to another does not pay attention to the body, which is nothing but a covering dress. Paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]. Such a person sees the soul, which is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. Therefore he is a sama-darśi, a learned person.





TEXT 34



atha tām āśramābhyāśe

carantīṁ pramadottamām

strībhiḥ parivṛtāṁ vīkṣya

cakame bhagavān budhaḥ

SYNONYMS



atha-in this way; tām-her; āśrama-abhyāśe-in the neighborhood of his āśrama; carantīm-loitering; pramadā-uttamām-the best of beautiful women who excite sex; strībhiḥ-by other women; parivṛtām-surrounded; vīkṣya-seeing her; cakame-desired sex; bhagavān-the most powerful; budhaḥ-Budha, the son of the moon and predominating deity of the planet known as Budha, or Mercury.





Sudyumna had been transformed into the best of beautiful women who excite sexual desire and was surrounded by other women. Upon seeing this beautiful woman loitering near his āśrama, Budha, the son of the moon, immediately desired to enjoy her.





TEXT 35



sāpi taṁ cakame subhrūḥ

somarāja-sutaṁ patim

sa tasyāṁ janayām āsa

purūravasam ātmajam

SYNONYMS



sā-Sudyumna, transformed into a woman; api-also; tam-unto him (Budha); cakame-desired sex; su-bhrūḥ-very beautiful; somarāja-sutam-unto the son of the king of the moon; patim-as her husband; saḥ-he (Budha); tasyām-in her womb; janayām āsa-begot; purūravasam-named Purūravā; ātma-jam-a son.





The beautiful woman also desired to accept Budha, the son of the king of the moon, as her husband. Thus Budha begot in her womb a son named Purūravā.





TEXT 36



evaṁ strītvam anuprāptaḥ

sudyumno mānavo nṛpaḥ

sasmāra sa kulācāryaṁ

vasiṣṭham iti śuśruma

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; strītvam-femininity; anuprāptaḥ-having achieved in that way; sudyumnaḥ-the male named Sudyumna; mānavaḥ-the son of Manu; nṛpaḥ-the king; sasmāra-remembered; saḥ-he; kula-ācāryam-the familial spiritual master; vasiṣṭham-the most powerful Vasiṣṭha; iti śuśruma-I have heard it (from reliable sources).





I heard from reliable sources that King Sudyumna, the son of Manu, having thus achieved femininity, remembered his familial spiritual master, Vasiṣṭha.





TEXT 37



sa tasya tāṁ daśāṁ dṛṣṭvā

kṛpayā bhṛśa-pīḍitaḥ

sudyumnasyāśayan puṁstvam

upādhāvata śaṅkaram

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Vasiṣṭha; tasya-of Sudyumna; tām-that; daśām-condition; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; kṛpayā-out of mercy; bhṛśa-pīḍitaḥ-being very much aggrieved; sudyumnasya-of Sudyumna; āśayan-desiring; puṁstvam-the maleness; upādhāvata-began to worship; śaṅkaram-Lord Śiva.





Upon seeing Sudyumna's deplorable condition, Vasiṣṭha was very much aggrieved. Desiring for Sudyumna to regain his maleness, Vasiṣṭha again began to worship Lord Śaṅkara [Śiva].





TEXTS 38–39



tuṣṭas tasmai sa bhagavān

ṛṣaye priyam āvahan

svāṁ ca vācam ṛtāṁ kurvann

idam āha viśāmpate

māsaṁ pumān sa bhavitā



māsaṁ strī tava gotrajaḥ

itthaṁ vyavasthayā kāmaṁ

sudyumno 'vatu medinīm

SYNONYMS



tuṣṭaḥ-being pleased; tasmai-unto Vasiṣṭha; saḥ-he (Lord Śiva); bhagavān-the most powerful; ṛṣaye-unto the great sage; priyam āvahan-just to please him; svām ca-his own; vācam-word; ṛtām-true; kurvan-and keeping; idam-this; āha-said; viśāmpate-O King Parīkṣit; māsam-one month; pumān-male; saḥ-Sudyumna; bhavitā-will become; māsam-an other month; strī-female; tava-your; gotra-jaḥ-disciple born in your disciplic succession; ittham-in this way; vyavasthayā-by settlement; kāmam-according to desire; sudyumnaḥ-King Sudyumna; avatu-may rule; medinīm-the world.





O King Parīkṣit, Lord Śiva was pleased with Vasiṣṭha. Therefore, to satisfy him and to keep his own word to Pārvatī, Lord Śiva said to that saintly person, "Your disciple Sudyumna may remain a male for one month and a female for the next. In this way he may rule the world as he likes."





The word gotrajaḥ is significant in this connection. Brāhmaṇas generally act as spiritual masters of two dynasties. One is their disciplic succession, and the other is the dynasty born of their semen. Both descendants belong to the same gotra, or dynasty. In the Vedic system we sometimes find that both brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas and even vaiśyas come in the disciplic succession of the same ṛṣis. Because the gotra and dynasty are one, there is no difference between the disciples and the family born of the semen. The same system still prevails in Indian society, especially in regard to marriage, for which the gotra is calculated. Here the word gotrajaḥ refers to those born in the same dynasty, whether they be disciples or members of the family.





TEXT 40



ācāryānugrahāt kāmaṁ

labdhvā puṁstvaṁ vyavasthayā

pālayām āsa jagatīṁ

nābhyanandan sma taṁ prajāḥ

SYNONYMS



ācārya-anugrahāt-by the mercy of the spiritual master; kāmam-desired; labdhvā-having achieved; puṁstvam-maleness; vyavasthayā-by this settlement of Lord Śiva; pālayām āsa-he ruled; jagatīm-the whole world; na abhyanandan sma-were not satisfied with; tam-to the king; prajāḥ-the citizens.





Thus being favored by the spiritual master, according to the words of Lord Śiva, Sudyumna regained his desired maleness every alternate month and in this way ruled the kingdom, although the citizens were not satisfied with this.





The citizens could understand that the king was transformed into a female every alternate month and therefore could not discharge his royal duty. Consequently they were not very satisfied.





TEXT 41



tasyotkalo gayo rājan

vimalaś ca trayaḥ sutāḥ

dakṣiṇā-patha-rājāno

babhūvur dharma-vatsalāḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Sudyumna; utkalaḥ-by the name Utkala; gayaḥ-by the name Gaya; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; vimalaḥ ca-and Vimala; trayaḥ-three; sutāḥ-sons; dakṣiṇā-patha-of the southern part of the world; rājānaḥ-kings; babhūvuḥ-they became; dharma-vatsalāḥ-very religious.





O King, Sudyumna had three very pious sons, named Utkala, Gaya and Vimala, who became the kings of the Dakṣiṇā-patha.





TEXT 42



tataḥ pariṇate kāle

pratiṣṭhāna-patiḥ prabhuḥ

purūravasa utsṛjya

gāṁ putrāya gato vanam

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; pariṇate kāle-when the time was ripe; pratiṣṭhāna-patiḥ-the master of the kingdom; prabhuḥ-very powerful; purūravase-unto Purūravā; utsṛjya-delivering; gām-the world; putrāya-unto his son; gataḥ-departed; vanam-to the forest.





Thereafter, when the time was ripe, when Sudyumna, the king of the world, was sufficiently old, he delivered the entire kingdom to his son Purūravā and entered the forest.





According to the Vedic system, one within the institution of varṇa and āśrama must leave his family life after he reaches fifty years of age (pañcāśad ūrdhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet). Thus Sudyumna followed the prescribed regulations of varṇāśrama by leaving the kingdom and going to the forest to complete his spiritual life.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, First Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Sudyumna Becomes a Woman."



Chapter Two



The Dynasties of the Sons of Manu





This Second Chapter describes the dynasties of the sons of Manu, headed by Karūṣa.





After Sudyumna accepted the order of vānaprastha and departed for the forest, Vaivasvata Manu, being desirous of sons, worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead and consequently begot ten sons like Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, all of whom were like their father. One of these sons, Pṛṣadhra, was engaged in the duty of protecting cows at night with a sword in his hand. Following the order of his spiritual master, he would stand in this way for the entire night. Once, in the darkness of night, a tiger seized a cow from the cowshed, and when Pṛṣadhra came to know this, he took a sword in his hand and followed the tiger. Unfortunately, when he finally approached the tiger, he could not distinguish between the cow and the tiger in the dark, and thus he killed the cow. Because of this, his spiritual master cursed him to take birth in a śūdra family, but Pṛṣadhra practiced mystic yoga, and in bhakti-yoga he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then he voluntarily entered a blazing forest fire, thus relinquishing his material body and going back home, back to Godhead.





Kavi, the youngest son of Manu, was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from his very childhood. From Manu's son known as Karūṣa, a sect of kṣatriyas known as Kārūṣas was generated. Manu also had a son known as Dhṛṣṭa, from whom another sect of kṣatriyas was generated, but although they were born of one who had the qualities of a kṣatriya, they became brāhmaṇas. From Nṛga, another son of Manu, came the sons and grandsons known as Sumati, Bhūtajyoti and Vasu. From Vasu, in succession, came Pratīka, and from him came Oghavān. Descending in order from the seminal dynasty of Nariṣyanta, another son of Manu, were Citrasena, Ṛkṣa, Mīḍhvān, Pūrṇa, Indrasena, Vītihotra, Satyaśravā, Uruśravā, Devadatta and Agniveśya. From the kṣatriya known as Agniveśya came the celebrated brāhmaṇa dynasty known as Āgniveśyāyana. From the seminal dynasty of Diṣṭa, another son of Manu, came Nābhāga, and from him in succession came Bhalandana, Vatsaprīti, Prāṁśu, Pramati, Khanitra, Cākṣuṣa, Viviṁśati, Rambha, Khanīnetra, Karandhama, Avīkṣit, Marutta, Dama, Rājyavardhana, Sudhṛti, Nara, Kevala, Dhundhumān, Vegavān, Budha and Tṛṇabindu. In this way, many sons and grandsons were born in this dynasty. From Tṛṇabindu came a daughter named Ilavilā, from whom Kuvera took birth. Tṛṇabindu also had three sons, named Viśāla, Śūnyabandhu and Dhūmraketu. The son of Viśāla was Hemacandra, his son was Dhūmrākṣa, and his son was Saṁyama. The sons of Saṁyama were Devaja and Kṛśāśva. Kṛśāśva's son, Somadatta, performed an Aśvamedha sacrifice, and by worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, he achieved the supreme perfection of going back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ gate 'tha sudyumne

manur vaivasvataḥ sute

putra-kāmas tapas tepe

yamunāyāṁ śataṁ samāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; gate-had accepted the order of vānaprastha; atha-thereafter; sudyumne-when Sudyumna; manuḥ vaivasvataḥ-Vaivasvata Manu, known as Śrāddhadeva; sute-his son; putra-kāmaḥ-desiring to get sons; tapaḥ tepe-executed severe austerities; yamunāyām-on the bank of the Yamunā; śatam samāḥ-for one hundred years.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thereafter, when his son Sudyumna had thus gone to the forest to accept the order of vānaprastha, Vaivasvata Manu [Śrāddhadeva], being desirous of getting more sons, performed severe austerities on the bank of the Yamunā for one hundred years.





TEXT 2



tato 'yajan manur devam

apatyārthaṁ hariṁ prabhum

ikṣvāku-pūrvajān putrān

lebhe sva-sadṛśān daśa

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; ayajat-worshiped; manuḥ-Vaivasvata Manu; devam-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; apatya-artham-with a desire to get sons; harim-unto Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prabhum-the Lord; ikṣvāku-pūrva-jān-of whom the eldest was named Ikṣvāku; putrān-sons; lebhe-got; sva-sadṛśān-exactly like himself; daśa-ten.





Then, because of this desire for sons, the Manu known as Śrāddhadeva worshiped the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the demigods. Thus he got ten sons exactly like himself. Among them all, Ikṣvāku was the eldest.





TEXT 3



pṛṣadhras tu manoḥ putro

go-pālo guruṇā kṛtaḥ

pālayām āsa gā yatto

rātryāṁ vīrāsana-vrataḥ

SYNONYMS



pṛṣadhraḥ tu-among them, Pṛṣadhra; manoḥ-of Manu; putraḥ-the son; go-pālaḥ-herding cows; guruṇā-by the order of his spiritual master; kṛtaḥ-having been engaged; pālayām āsa-he protected; gāḥ-cows; yattaḥ-so engaged; rātryām-at night; vīrāsana-vrataḥ-taking the vow of vīrāsana, standing with a sword.





Among these sons, Pṛṣadhra, following the order of his spiritual master, was engaged as a protector of cows. He would stand all night with a sword to give the cows protection.





One who becomes vīrāsana takes the vow to stand all night with a sword to give protection to the cows. Because Pṛṣadhra was engaged in this way, it is to be understood that he had no dynasty. We can further understand from this vow accepted by Pṛṣadhra how essential it is to protect the cows. Some son of a kṣatriya would take this vow to protect the cows from ferocious animals, even at night. What then is to be said of sending cows to slaughterhouses? This is the most sinful activity in human society.





TEXT 4



ekadā prāviśad goṣṭhaṁ

śārdūlo niśi varṣati

śayānā gāva utthāya

bhītās tā babhramur vraje

SYNONYMS



ekadā-once upon a time; prāviśat-entered; goṣṭham-the land of the cowshed; śārdūlaḥ-a tiger; niśi-at night; varṣati-while it was raining; śayānāḥ-lying down; gāvaḥ-cows; utthāya-getting up; bhītāḥ-fearing; tāḥ-all of them; babhramuḥ-scattered here and there; vraje-in the land surrounding the cowshed.





Once at night, while it was raining, a tiger entered the land of the cowshed. Upon seeing the tiger, all the cows, who were lying down, got up in fear and scattered here and there on the land.





TEXTS 5–6



ekāṁ jagrāha balavān

sā cukrośa bhayāturā

tasyās tu kranditaṁ śrutvā

pṛṣadhro 'nusasāra ha

khaḍgam ādāya tarasā



pralīnoḍu-gaṇe niśi

ajānann acchinod babhroḥ

śiraḥ śārdūla-śaṅkayā

SYNONYMS



ekām-one of the cows; jagrāha-seized; balavān-the strong tiger; sā-that cow; cukrośa-began to cry; bhaya-āturā-in distress and fear; tasyāḥ-of her; tu-but; kranditam-the screaming; śrutvā-hearing; pṛṣadhraḥ-Pṛṣadhra; anusasāra ha-followed; khaḍgam-sword; ādāya-taking; tarasā-very hastily; pralīna-uḍu-gaṇe-when the stars were covered by clouds; niśi-at night; ajānan-without knowledge; acchinot-cut off; babhroḥ-of the cow; śiraḥ-the head; śārdūla-śaṅkayā-mistaking it for the head of the tiger.





When the very strong tiger seized the cow, the cow screamed in distress and fear, and Pṛṣadhra, hearing the screaming, immediately followed the sound. He took up his sword, but because the stars were covered by clouds, he mistook the cow for the tiger and mistakenly cut off the cows' head with great force.





TEXT 7



vyāghro 'pi vṛkṇa-śravaṇo

nistriṁśāgrāhatas tataḥ

niścakrāma bhṛśaṁ bhīto

raktaṁ pathi samutsṛjan

SYNONYMS



vyāghraḥ-the tiger; api-also; vṛkṇa-śravaṇaḥ-its ear being cut off; nistriṁśa-agra-āhataḥ-because of being cut by the tip of the sword; tataḥ-thereafter; niścakrāma-fled (from that place); bhṛśam-very much; bhītaḥ-being afraid; raktam-blood; pathi-on the road; samutsṛjan-discharging.





Because the tiger's ear had been cut by the edge of the sword, the tiger was very afraid, and it fled from that place, while bleeding on the street.





TEXT 8



manyamāno hataṁ vyāghraṁ

pṛṣadhraḥ para-vīra-hā

adrākṣīt sva-hatāṁ babhruṁ

vyuṣṭāyāṁ niśi duḥkhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



manyamānaḥ-thinking that; hatam-has been killed; vyāghram-the tiger; pṛṣadhraḥ-Manu's son Pṛṣadhra; para-vīra-hā-although quite able to punish the enemy; adrākṣīt-saw; sva-hatām-had been killed by him; babhrum-the cow; vyuṣṭāyām niśi-when the night had passed (in the morning); duḥkhitaḥ-became very much unhappy.





In the morning, when Pṛṣadhra, who was quite able to subdue his enemy, saw that he had killed the cow although at night he thought he had killed the tiger, he was very unhappy.





TEXT 9



taṁ śaśāpa kulācāryaḥ

kṛtāgasam akāmataḥ

na kṣatra-bandhuḥ śūdras tvaṁ

karmaṇā bhavitāmunā

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Pṛṣadhra); śaśāpa-cursed; kula-ācāryaḥ-the family priest, Vasiṣṭha; kṛta-āgasam-because of committing the great sin of killing a cow; akāmataḥ-although he did not want to do it; na-not; kṣatra-bandhuḥ-the family member of a kṣatriya; śūdraḥ tvam-you have behaved like a śūdra; karmaṇā-therefore by your fruitive reaction; bhavitā-you shall become a śūdra; amunā-because of killing the cow.





Although Pṛṣadhra had committed the sin unknowingly, his family priest, Vasiṣṭha, cursed him, saying, "In your next life you shall not be able to become a kṣatriya. Instead, you shall take birth as a śūdra because of killing the cow."





It appears that Vasiṣṭha was not free from tamo-guṇa, the mode of ignorance. As the family priest or spiritual master of Pṛṣadhra, Vasiṣṭha should have taken Pṛṣadhra's offense very lightly, but instead Vasiṣṭha cursed him to become a śūdra. It is the duty of a family priest not to curse a disciple but to give him relief through the performance of some sort of atonement. Vasiṣṭha, however, did just the opposite. Therefore Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that he was durmati; in other words, his intelligence was not very good.





TEXT 10



evaṁ śaptas tu guruṇā

pratyagṛhṇāt kṛtāñjaliḥ

adhārayad vrataṁ vīra

ūrdhva-retā muni-priyam

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; śaptaḥ-having been cursed; tu-but; guruṇā-by his spiritual master; pratyagṛhṇāt-he (Pṛṣadhra) accepted; kṛta-añjaliḥ-with folded hands; adhārayat-took up, assumed; vratam-the vow of brahmacarya; vīraḥ-that hero; ūrdhva-retāḥ-having controlled his senses; muni-priyam-which is approved by the great sages.





When the hero Pṛṣadhra was thus cursed by his spiritual master, he accepted the curse with folded hands. Then, having controlled his senses, he took the vow of brahmacarya, which is approved by all great sages.





TEXTS 11–13



vāsudeve bhagavati

sarvātmani pare 'male

ekāntitvaṁ gato bhaktyā

sarva-bhūta-suhṛt samaḥ

vimukta-saṅgaḥ śāntātmā



saṁyatākṣo 'parigrahaḥ

yad-ṛcchayopapannena

kalpayan vṛttim ātmanaḥ

ātmany ātmānam ādhāya



jñāna-tṛptaḥ samāhitaḥ

vicacāra mahīm etāṁ

jaḍāndha-badhirākṛtiḥ

SYNONYMS



vāsudeve-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavati-unto the Lord; sarva-ātmani-unto the Supersoul; pare-unto the Transcendence; amale-unto the Supreme person, who is without material contamination; ekāntitvam-rendering devotional service without diversion; gataḥ-being situated in that position; bhaktyā-because of pure devotion; sarva-bhūta-suhṛt samaḥ-because of being a devotee, friendly and equal to everyone; vimukta-saṅgaḥ-without material contamination; śānta-ātmā-a peaceful attitude; saṁyata-self-controlled; akṣaḥ-the vision of whom; aparigrahaḥ-without accepting any charity from anyone else; yat-ṛcchayā-by the grace of the Lord; upapannena-by whatever was available for bodily necessities; kalpayan-in this way arranging; vṛttim-the necessities of the body; ātmanaḥ-for the benefit of the soul; ātmani-within the mind; ātmānam-the Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead; ādhāya-keeping always; jñāna-tṛptaḥ-fully satisfied in transcendental knowledge; samāhitaḥ-always in trance; vicacāra-traveled all over; mahīm-the earth; etām-this; jaḍa-dumb; andha-blind; badhira-deaf; ākṛtiḥ-appearing as if.





Thereafter, Pṛṣadhra gained relief from all responsibilities, became peaceful in mind, and established control over all his senses. Being unaffected by material conditions, being pleased with whatever was available by the grace of the Lord to maintain body and soul together, and being equal toward everyone, he gave full attention to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, who is the transcendental Supersoul, free from material contamination. Thus Pṛṣadhra, fully satisfied in pure knowledge, always keeping his mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, achieved pure devotional service to the Lord and began traveling all over the world, without affection for material activities, as if he were deaf, dumb and blind.





TEXT 14



evaṁ vṛtto vanaṁ gatvā

dṛṣṭvā dāvāgnim utthitam

tenopayukta-karaṇo

brahma prāpa paraṁ muniḥ

SYNONYMS



evam vṛttaḥ-being situated in such an order of life; vanam-to the forest; gatvā-after going; dṛṣṭvā-when he saw; dāva-agnim-a forest fire; utthitam-existing there; tena-by that (fire); upayukta-karaṇaḥ-engaging all the senses of the body by burning; brahma-transcendence; prāpa-he achieved; param-the ultimate goal; muniḥ-as a great saintly person.





With this attitude, Pṛṣadhra became a great saint, and when he entered the forest and saw a blazing forest fire, he took this opportunity to burn his body in the fire. Thus he achieved the transcendental, spiritual world.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Pṛṣadhra, because of his karma, was cursed to take his next birth as a śūdra, but because he took to saintly life, specifically concentrating his mind always upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became a pure devotee. Immediately after giving up his body in the fire, he reached the spiritual world, as mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā (mām eti), as a result of his devotional situation. Devotional service performed by thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is so powerful that although Pṛṣadhra was cursed he avoided the terrible consequence of becoming a śūdra and instead returned home, back to Godhead. As stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.54):



yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





Those who engage in devotional service are unaffected by the results of their material activities. Otherwise, everyone, from the smallest microbe up to the King of heaven, Indra, is subject to the laws of karma. A pure devotee, being always engaged in the service of the Lord, is exempt from these laws.





TEXT 15



kaviḥ kanīyān viṣayeṣu niḥspṛho

visṛjya rājyaṁ saha bandhubhir vanam

niveśya citte puruṣaṁ sva-rociṣaṁ

viveśa kaiśora-vayāḥ paraṁ gataḥ

SYNONYMS



kaviḥ-another son, known as Kavi; kanīyān-who was the youngest; viṣayeṣu-in material enjoyments; niḥspṛhaḥ-being without attachment; visṛjya-after giving up; rājyam-his father's property, the kingdom; saha bandhubhiḥ-accompanied by friends; vanam-the forest; niveśya-keeping always; citte-within the core of the heart; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; sva-rociṣam-self-effulgent; viveśa-entered; kaiśora-vayāḥ-a young man not fully in youth; param-the transcendental world; gataḥ-entered.





Being reluctant to accept material enjoyment, Manu's youngest son, whose name was Kavi, gave up the kingdom before attaining full youth. Accompanied by his friends, he went to the forest, always thinking of the self-effulgent Supreme Personality of Godhead within the core of his heart. Thus he attained perfection.





TEXT 16



karūṣān mānavād āsan

kārūṣāḥ kṣatra-jātayaḥ

uttarā-patha-goptāro

brahmaṇyā dharma-vatsalāḥ

SYNONYMS



karūṣāt-from Karūṣa; mānavāt-from the son of Manu; āsan-there was; kārūṣāḥ-called the Kārūṣas; kṣatra-jātayaḥ-a group of kṣatriyas; uttarā-northern; patha-of the direction; goptāraḥ-kings; brahmaṇyāḥ-celebrated protectors of the brahminical culture; dharma-vatsalāḥ-extremely religious.





From Karūṣa, another son of Manu, came the Kārūṣa dynasty, a family of kṣatriyas. The Kārūṣa kṣatriyas were the kings of the northern direction. They were celebrated protectors of brahminical culture and were all firmly religious.





TEXT 17



dhṛṣṭād dhārṣṭam abhūt kṣatraṁ

brahma-bhūyaṁ gataṁ kṣitau

nṛgasya vaṁśaḥ sumatir

bhūtajyotis tato vasuḥ

SYNONYMS



dhṛṣṭāt-from Dhṛṣṭa, another son of Manu; dhārṣṭam-a caste of the name Dhārṣṭa; abhūt-was produced; kṣatram-belonging to the kṣatriya group; brahma-bhūyam-the position of brāhmaṇas; gatam-had achieved; kṣitau-on the surface of the world; nṛgasya-of Nṛga, another son of Manu; vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty; sumatiḥ-of the name Sumati; bhūtajyotiḥ-of the name Bhūtajyoti; tataḥ-thereafter; vasuḥ-by the name Vasu.





From the son of Manu named Dhṛṣṭa came a kṣatriya caste called Dhārṣṭa, whose members achieved the position of brāhmaṇas in this world. Then, from the son of Manu named Nṛga came Sumati. From Sumati came Bhūtajyoti, and from Bhūtajyoti came Vasu.





Here it is said, kṣatraṁ brahma-bhūyaṁ gataṁ kṣitau: although the Dhārṣṭas belonged to the kṣatriya caste, they were able to convert themselves into brāhmaṇas. This gives clear evidence supporting the following statement by Nārada (Bhāg. 7.11.35):



yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ

puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta

tat tenaiva vinirdiśet





If the qualities of one group are found in the men of another, those men should be recognized by their qualities, by their symptoms, not by the caste of the family in which they were born. Birth is not at all important; it is one's qualities that are stressed in all Vedic literature.





TEXT 18



vasoḥ pratīkas tat-putra

oghavān oghavat-pitā

kanyā caughavatī nāma

sudarśana uvāha tām

SYNONYMS



vasoḥ-of Vasu; pratīkaḥ-named Pratīka; tat-putraḥ-his son; oghavān-named Oghavān; oghavat-pitā-who was the father of Oghavān; kanyā-his daughter; ca-also; oghavatī-Oghavatī; nāma-by the name; sudarśanaḥ-Sudarśana; uvāha-married; tām-that daughter (Oghavatī).





The son of Vasu was Pratīka, whose son was Oghavān. Oghavān's son was also known as Oghavān, and his daughter was Oghavatī. Sudarśana married that daughter.





TEXT 19



citraseno nariṣyantād

ṛkṣas tasya suto 'bhavat

tasya mīḍhvāṁs tataḥ pūrṇa

indrasenas tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



citrasenaḥ-one named Citrasena; nariṣyantāt-from Nariṣyanta, another son of Manu; ṛkṣaḥ-Ṛkṣa; tasya-of Citrasena; sutaḥ-the son; abhavat-became; tasya-of him (Ṛkṣa); mīḍhvān-Mīḍhvān; tataḥ-from him (Mīḍhvān); pūrṇaḥ-Pūrṇa; indrasenaḥ-Indrasena; tu-but; tat-sutaḥ-the son of him (Pūrṇa).





From Nariṣyanta came a son named Citrasena and from him a son named Ṛkṣa. From Ṛkṣa came Mīḍhvān, from Mīḍhvān came Pūrṇa, and from Pūrṇa came Indrasena.





TEXT 20



vītihotras tv indrasenāt

tasya satyaśravā abhūt

uruśravāḥ sutas tasya

devadattas tato 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



vītihotraḥ-Vītihotra; tu-but; indrasenāt-from Indrasena; tasya-of Vītihotra; satyaśravāḥ-known by the name Satyaśravā; abhūt-there was; uruśravāḥ-Uruśravā; sutaḥ-was the son; tasya-of him (Satyaśravā); devadattaḥ-Devadatta; tataḥ-from Uruśravā; abhavat-there was.





From Indrasena came Vītihotra, from Vītihotra came Satyaśravā, from Satyaśravā came the son named Uruśravā, and from Uruśravā came Devadatta.





TEXT 21



tato 'gniveśyo bhagavān

agniḥ svayam abhūt sutaḥ

kānīna iti vikhyāto

jātūkarṇyo mahān ṛṣiḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Devadatta; agniveśyaḥ-a son named Agniveśya; bhagavān-the most powerful; agniḥ-the fire-god; svayam-personally; abhūt-became; sutaḥ-the son; kānīnaḥ-Kānīna; iti-thus; vikhyātaḥ-was celebrated; jātūkarṇyaḥ-Jātūkarṇya; mahān ṛṣiḥ-the great saintly person.





From Devadatta came a son known as Agniveśya, who was the fire-god Agni himself. This son, who was a celebrated saint, was well known as Kānīna and Jātūkarṇya.





Agniveśya was also known as Kānīna and Jātūkarṇya.





TEXT 22



tato brahma-kulaṁ jātam

āgniveśyāyanaṁ nṛpa

nariṣyantānvayaḥ prokto

diṣṭa-vaṁśam ataḥ śṛṇu

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Agniveśya; brahma-kulam-a dynasty of brāhmaṇas; jātam-was generated; āgniveśyāyanam-known as Āgniveśyāyana; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; nariṣyanta-of Nariṣyanta; anvayaḥ-descendants; proktaḥ-have been explained; diṣṭa-vaṁśam-the dynasty of Diṣṭa; ataḥ-hereafter; śṛṇu-hear.





O King, from Agniveśya came a brahminical dynasty known as Āgniveśyāyana. Now that I have described the descendants of Nariṣyanta, let me describe the descendants of Diṣṭa. Please hear from me.





TEXTS 23–24



nābhāgo diṣṭa-putro 'nyaḥ

karmaṇā vaiśyatāṁ gataḥ

bhalandanaḥ sutas tasya

vatsaprītir bhalandanāt

vatsaprīteḥ sutaḥ prāṁśus



tat-sutaṁ pramatiṁ viduḥ

khanitraḥ pramates tasmāc

cākṣuṣo 'tha viviṁśatiḥ

SYNONYMS



nābhāgaḥ-by the name Nābhāga; diṣṭa-putraḥ-the son of Diṣṭa; anyaḥ-another; karmaṇā-by occupation; vaiśyatām-the order of the vaiśyas; gataḥ-achieved; bhalandanaḥ-by the name Bhalandana; sutaḥ-son; tasya-of him (Nābhāga); vatsaprītiḥ-by the name Vatsaprīti; bhalandanāt-from Bhalandana; vatsaprīteḥ-from Vatsaprīti; sutaḥ-the son; prāṁśuḥ-was named Prāṁśu; tat-sutam-the son of him (Prāṁśu); pramatim-was named Pramati; viduḥ-you should understand; khanitraḥ-was named Khanitra; pramateḥ-from Pramati; tasmāt-from him (Khanitra); cākṣuṣaḥ-was named Cākṣuṣa; atha-thus (from Cākṣuṣa); viviṁśatiḥ-the son named Viviṁśati.





Diṣṭa had a son by the name Nābhāga. This Nābhāga, who was different from the Nābhāga described later, became a vaiśya by occupational duty. The son of Nābhāga was known as Bhalandana, the son of Bhalandana was Vatsaprīti, and his son was Prāṁśu. Prāṁśu's son was Pramati, Pramati's son was Khanitra, Khanitra's son was Cākṣuṣa, and his son was Viviṁśati.





From Manu, one son became a kṣatriya, another a brāhmaṇa, and another a vaiśya. This confirms the statement by Nārada Muni, yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam (Bhāg. 7.11.35). One should always remember that brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas should never be regarded as members of a caste by birth. A brāhmaṇa may be changed into a kṣatriya, and a kṣatriya into a brāhmaṇa. Similarly, a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya may be changed into a vaiśya, and a vaiśya into a brāhmaṇa or kṣatriya. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]). So one is a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya never by birth, but by quality. There is a great need of brāhmaṇas. Therefore, in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we are trying to train some brāhmaṇas to guide human society. Because at present there is a scarcity of brāhmaṇas, the brain of human society is lost. Because practically everyone is a śūdra, no one at the present moment can guide the members of society to the proper path by which to achieve perfection in life.





TEXT 25



viviṁśateḥ suto rambhaḥ

khanīnetro 'sya dhārmikaḥ

karandhamo mahārāja

tasyāsīd ātmajo nṛpa

SYNONYMS



viviṁśateḥ-from Viviṁśati; sutaḥ-the son; rambhaḥ-named Rambha; khanīnetraḥ-named Khanīnetra; asya-of Rambha; dhārmikaḥ-very religious; karandhamaḥ-named Karandhama; mahārāja-O King; tasya-of him (Khanīnetra); āsīt-was; ātmajaḥ-the son; nṛpa-O King.





The son of Viviṁśati was Rambha, whose son was the great and religious King Khanīnetra. O King, the son of Khanīnetra was King Karandhama.





TEXT 26



tasyāvīkṣit suto yasya

maruttaś cakravarty abhūt

saṁvarto 'yājayad yaṁ vai

mahā-yogy aṅgiraḥ-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Karandhama); avīkṣit-named Avīkṣit; sutaḥ-the son; yasya-of whom (Avīkṣit); maruttaḥ-(the son) named Marutta; cakravartī-the emperor; abhūt-became; saṁvartaḥ-Saṁvarta; ayājayat-engaged in performing sacrifice; yam-unto whom (Marutta); vai-indeed; mahā-yogī-the great mystic; aṅgiraḥ-sutaḥ-the son of Aṅgirā.





From Karandhama came a son named Avīkṣit, and from Avīkṣit a son named Marutta, who was the emperor. The great mystic Saṁvarta, the son of Aṅgirā, engaged Marutta in performing a sacrifice [yajña].





TEXT 27



maruttasya yathā yajño

na tathānyo 'sti kaścana

sarvaṁ hiraṇmayaṁ tv āsīd

yat kiñcic cāsya śobhanam

SYNONYMS



maruttasya-of Marutta; yathā-as; yajñaḥ-performance of sacrifice; na-not; tathā-like that; anyaḥ-any other; asti-there is; kaścana-anything; sarvam-everything; hiraṇ-mayam-made of gold; tu-indeed; āsīt-there was; yat kiñcit-whatever he had; ca-and; asya-of Marutta; śobhanam-extremely beautiful.





The sacrificial paraphernalia of King Marutta was extremely beautiful, for everything was made of gold. Indeed, no other sacrifice could compare to his.





TEXT 28



amādyad indraḥ somena

dakṣiṇābhir dvijātayaḥ

marutaḥ pariveṣṭāro

viśvedevāḥ sabhā-sadaḥ

SYNONYMS



amādyat-became intoxicated; indraḥ-the King of heaven, Lord Indra; somena-by drinking the intoxicant soma-rasa; dakṣiṇābhiḥ-by receiving sufficient contributions; dvijātayaḥ-the brahminical group; marutaḥ-the airs; pariveṣṭāraḥ-offering the foodstuffs; viśvedevāḥ-universal demigods; sabhā-sadaḥ-members of the assembly.





In that sacrifice, King Indra became intoxicated by drinking a large quantity of soma-rasa. The brāhmaṇas received ample contributions, and therefore they were satisfied. For that sacrifice, the various demigods who control the winds offered foodstuffs, and the Viśvedevas were members of the assembly.





Because of the yajña performed by Marutta, everyone was pleased, especially the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas. Brāhmaṇas are interested in receiving contributions as priests, and kṣatriyas are interested in drinking. All of them, therefore, were satisfied with their different engagements.





TEXT 29



maruttasya damaḥ putras

tasyāsīd rājyavardhanaḥ

sudhṛtis tat-suto jajñe

saudhṛteyo naraḥ sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



maruttasya-of Marutta; damaḥ-(was named) Dama; putraḥ-the son; tasya-of him (Dama); āsīt-there was; rājya-vardhanaḥ-named Rājyavardhana, or one who can expand the kingdom; sudhṛtiḥ-was named Sudhṛti; tat-sutaḥ-the son of him (Rājyavardhana); jajñe-was born; saudhṛteyaḥ-from Sudhṛti; naraḥ-named Nara; sutaḥ-the son.





Marutta's son was Dama, Dama's son was Rājyavardhana, Rājyavardhana's son was Sudhṛti, and his son was Nara.





TEXT 30



tat-sutaḥ kevalas tasmād

dhundhumān vegavāṁs tataḥ

budhas tasyābhavad yasya

tṛṇabindur mahīpatiḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-sutaḥ-the son of him (Nara); kevalaḥ-was named Kevala; tasmāt-from him (Kevala); dhundhumān-a son was born named Dhundhumān; vegavān-named Vegavān; tataḥ-from him (Dhundhumān); budhaḥ-named Budha; tasya-of him (Vegavān); abhavat-there was; yasya-of whom (Budha); tṛṇabinduḥ-a son named Tṛṇabindu; mahīpatiḥ-the king.





The son of Nara was Kevala, and his son was Dhundhumān, whose son was Vegavān. Vegavān's son was Budha, and Budha's son was Tṛṇabindu, who became the king of this earth.





TEXT 31



taṁ bheje 'lambuṣā devī

bhajanīya-guṇālayam

varāpsarā yataḥ putrāḥ

kanyā celavilābhavat

SYNONYMS



tam-him (Tṛṇabindu); bheje-accepted as husband; alambuṣā-the girl Alambuṣā; devī-goddess; bhajanīya-worthy of accepting; guṇa-ālayam-the reservoir of all good qualities; vara-apsarāḥ-the best of the Apsarās; yataḥ-from whom (Tṛṇabindu); putrāḥ-some sons; kanyā-a daughter; ca-and; ilavilā-named Ilavilā; abhavat-was born.





The best of the Apsarās, the highly qualified girl named Alambuṣā, accepted the similarly qualified Tṛṇabindu as her husband. She gave birth to a few sons and a daughter known as Ilavilā.





TEXT 32



yasyām utpādayām āsa

viśravā dhanadaṁ sutam

prādāya vidyāṁ paramām

ṛṣir yogeśvaraḥ pituḥ

SYNONYMS



yasyām-in whom (Ilavilā); utpādayām āsa-gave birth; viśravāḥ-Viśravā; dhana-dam-Kuvera, or one who gives money; sutam-to a son; prādāya-after receiving; vidyām-absolute knowledge; paramām-supreme; ṛṣiḥ-the great saintly person; yoga-īśvaraḥ-master of mystic yoga; pituḥ-from his father.





After the great saint Viśravā, the master of mystic yoga, received absolute knowledge from his father, he begot in the womb of Ilavilā the greatly celebrated son known as Kuvera, the giver of money.





TEXT 33



viśālaḥ śūnyabandhuś ca

dhūmraketuś ca tat-sutāḥ

viśālo vaṁśa-kṛd rājā

vaiśālīṁ nirmame purīm

SYNONYMS



viśālaḥ-named Viśāla; śūnyabandhuḥ-named Śūnyabandhu; ca-also; dhūmraketuḥ-named Dhūmraketu; ca-also; tat-sutāḥ-the sons of Tṛṇabindu; viśālaḥ-among the three, King Viśāla; vaṁśa-kṛt-made a dynasty; rājā-the king; vaiśālīm-by the name Vaiśālī; nirmame-constructed; purīm-a palace.





Tṛṇabindu had three sons, named Viśāla, Śūnyabandhu and Dhūmraketu. Among these three, Viśāla created a dynasty and constructed a palace called Vaiśālī.





TEXT 34



hemacandraḥ sutas tasya

dhūmrākṣas tasya cātmajaḥ

tat-putrāt saṁyamād āsīt

kṛśāśvaḥ saha-devajaḥ

SYNONYMS



hemacandraḥ-was named Hemacandra; sutaḥ-the son; tasya-of him (Viśāla); dhūmrākṣaḥ-was named Dhūmrākṣa; tasya-of him (Hemacandra); ca-also; ātmajaḥ-the son; tat-putrāt-from the son of him (Dhūmrākṣa); saṁyamāt-from he who was named Saṁyama; āsīt-there was; kṛśāśvaḥ-Kṛśāśva; saha-along with; devajaḥ-Devaja.





The son of Viśāla was known as Hemacandra, his son was Dhūmrākṣa, and his son was Saṁyama, whose sons were Devaja and Kṛśāśva.





TEXTS 35–36



kṛśāśvāt somadatto 'bhūd

yo 'śvamedhair iḍaspatim

iṣṭvā puruṣam āpāgryāṁ

gatiṁ yogeśvarāśritām

saumadattis tu sumatis



tat-putro janamejayaḥ

ete vaiśāla-bhūpālās

tṛṇabindor yaśodharāḥ

SYNONYMS



kṛśāśvāt-from Kṛśāśva; somadattaḥ-a son named Somadatta; abhūt-there was; yaḥ-he who (Somadatta); aśvamedhaiḥ-by the performance of aśvamedha sacrifices; iḍaspatim-unto Lord Viṣṇu; iṣṭvā-after worshiping; puruṣam-Lord Viṣṇu; āpa-achieved; agryām-the best of all; gatim-the destination; yogeśvara-āśritām-the place occupied by great mystic yogīs; saumadattiḥ-the son of Somadatta; tu-but; sumatiḥ-a son named Sumati; tat-putraḥ-the son of him (Sumati); janamejayaḥ-was named Janamejaya; ete-all of them; vaiśāla-bhūpālāḥ-the kings in the dynasty of Vaiśāla; tṛṇabindoḥ yaśaḥ-dharāḥ-continued the fame of King Tṛṇabindu.





The son of Kṛśāśva was Somadatta, who performed aśvamedha sacrifices and thus satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. By worshiping the Supreme Lord, he achieved the most exalted post, a residence on the planet to which great mystic yogīs are elevated. The son of Somadatta was Sumati, whose son was Janamejaya. All these kings appearing in the dynasty of Viśāla properly maintained the celebrated position of King Tṛṇabindu.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Second Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasties of the Sons of Manu."



Chapter Three



The Marriage of Sukanyā and Cyavana Muni





This chapter describes the dynasty of Śaryāti, another son of Manu, and also tells about Sukanyā and Revatī.





Devajña Śaryāti gave instructions about what to do in the ritualistic ceremony observed on the second day of the yajña of the Aṅgirasas. One day, Śaryāti, along with his daughter, known as Sukanyā, went to the āśrama of Cyavana Muni. There Sukanyā saw two glowing substances within a hole of earthworms, and by chance she pierced those two glowing substances. As soon as she did this, blood began to ooze from that hole. Consequently, King Śaryāti and his companions suffered from constipation and inability to pass urine. When the King asked why circumstances had suddenly changed, he found that Sukanyā was the cause of this misfortune. Then they all offered prayers to Cyavana Muni just to satisfy him according to his own desire, and Devajña Śaryāti offered his daughter to Cyavana Muni, who was a very old man.





When the heavenly physicians the Aśvinī-kumāra brothers once visited Cyavana Muni, the muni requested them to give him back his youth. These two physicians took Cyavana Muni to a particular lake, in which they bathed and regained full youth. After this, Sukanyā could not distinguish her husband. She then surrendered unto the Aśvinī-kumāras, who were very satisfied with her chastity and who therefore introduced her again to her husband. Cyavana Muni then engaged King Śaryāti in performing the soma-yajña and gave the Aśvinī-kumāras the privilege to drink soma-rasa. The King of heaven, Lord Indra, became very angry at this, but he could do no harm to Śaryāti. Henceforward, the Aśvinī-kumāra physicians were able to share in the soma-rasa.



Śaryāti later had three sons, named Uttānabarhi, Ānarta and Bhūriṣeṇa. Ānarta had one son, whose name was Revata. Revata had one hundred sons, of whom the eldest was Kakudmī. Kakudmī was advised by Lord Brahmā to offer his beautiful daughter, Revatī, to Baladeva, who belongs to the viṣṇu-tattva category. After doing this, Kakudmī retired from family life and entered the forest of Badarikāśrama to execute austerities and penances.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

śaryātir mānavo rājā

brahmiṣṭhaḥ sambabhūva ha

yo vā aṅgirasāṁ satre

dvitīyam ahar ūcivān

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; śaryātiḥ-the king named Śaryāti; mānavaḥ-the son of Manu; rājā-ruler; brahmiṣṭhaḥ-completely in awareness of Vedic knowledge; sambabhūva ha-so he became; yaḥ-one who; vā-either; aṅgirasām-of the descendants of Aṅgirā; satre-in the arena of sacrifice; dvitīyam ahaḥ-the functions to be performed on the second day; ūcivān-narrated.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, Śaryāti, another son of Manu, was a ruler completely aware of Vedic knowledge. He gave instructions about the functions for the second day of the yajña to be performed by the descendants of Aṅgirā.





TEXT 2



sukanyā nāma tasyāsīt

kanyā kamala-locanā

tayā sārdhaṁ vana-gato

hy agamac cyavanāśramam

SYNONYMS



sukanyā-Sukanyā; nāma-by name; tasya-of him (Śaryāti); āsīt-there was; kanyā-a daughter; kamala-locanā-lotus-eyed; tayā sārdham-with her; vana-gataḥ-having entered the forest; hi-indeed; agamat-he went; cyavana-āśramam-to the āśrama cottage of Cyavana Muni.





Śaryāti had a beautiful lotus-eyed daughter named Sukanyā, with whom he went to the forest to see the āśrama of Cyavana Muni.





TEXT 3



sā sakhībhiḥ parivṛtā

vicinvanty aṅghripān vane

valmīka-randhre dadṛśe

khadyote iva jyotiṣī

SYNONYMS



sā-that Sukanyā; sakhībhiḥ-by her friends; parivṛtā-surrounded; vicinvantī-collecting; aṅghripān-fruits and flowers from the trees; vane-in the forest; valmīka-randhre-in the hole of an earthworm; dadṛśe-observed; khadyote-two luminaries; iva-like; jyotiṣī-two shining things.





While that Sukanyā, surrounded by her friends, was collecting various types of fruits from the trees in the forest, she saw within the hole of an earthworm two things glowing like luminaries.





TEXT 4



te daiva-coditā bālā

jyotiṣī kaṇṭakena vai

avidhyan mugdha-bhāvena

susrāvāsṛk tato bahiḥ

SYNONYMS



te-those two; daiva-coditā-as if impelled by providence; bālā-that young daughter; jyotiṣī-two glowworms within the hole of the earthworm; kaṇṭakena-with a thorn; vai-indeed; avidhyat-pierced; mugdha-bhāvena-as if without knowledge; susrāva-came out; asṛk-blood; tataḥ-from there; bahiḥ-outside.





As if induced by providence, the girl ignorantly pierced those two glowworms with a thorn, and when they were pierced, blood began to ooze out of them.





TEXT 5



śakṛn-mūtra-nirodho 'bhūt

sainikānāṁ ca tat-kṣaṇāt

rājarṣis tam upālakṣya

puruṣān vismito 'bravīt

SYNONYMS



śakṛt-of stool; mūtra-and of urine; nirodhaḥ-stoppage; abhūt-so became; sainikānām-of all the soldiers; ca-and; tat-kṣaṇāt-immediately; rājarṣiḥ-the King; tam upālakṣya-seeing the incident; puruṣān-to his men; vismitaḥ-being surprised; abravīt-began to speak.





Thereupon, all the soldiers of Śaryāti were immediately obstructed from passing urine and stool. Upon perceiving this, Śaryāti spoke to his associates in surprise.





TEXT 6



apy abhadraṁ na yuṣmābhir

bhārgavasya viceṣṭitam

vyaktaṁ kenāpi nas tasya

kṛtam āśrama-dūṣaṇam

SYNONYMS



api-alas; abhadram-something mischievous; naḥ-among us; yuṣmābhiḥ-by ourselves; bhārgavasya-of Cyavana Muni; viceṣṭitam-has been attempted; vyaktam-now it is clear; kena api-by someone; naḥ-among ourselves; tasya-of him (Cyavana Muni); kṛtam-has been done; āśrama-dūṣaṇam-pollution of the āśrama.





How strange it is that one of us has attempted to do something wrong to Cyavana Muni, the son of Bhṛgu. It certainly appears that someone among us has polluted this āśrama.





TEXT 7



sukanyā prāha pitaraṁ

bhītā kiñcit kṛtaṁ mayā

dve jyotiṣī ajānantyā

nirbhinne kaṇṭakena vai

SYNONYMS



sukanyā-the girl Sukanyā; prāha-said; pitaram-unto her father; bhītā-being afraid; kiñcit-something; kṛtam-has been done; mayā-by me; dve-two; jyotiṣī-luminous objects; ajānantyā-because of ignorance; nirbhinne-have been pierced; kaṇṭakena-with a thorn; vai-indeed.





Being very much afraid, the girl Sukanyā said to her father: I have done something wrong, for I have ignorantly pierced these two luminous substances with a thorn.





TEXT 8



duhitus tad vacaḥ śrutvā

śaryātir jāta-sādhvasaḥ

muniṁ prasādayām āsa

valmīkāntarhitaṁ śanaiḥ

SYNONYMS



duhituḥ-of his daughter; tat vacaḥ-that statement; śrutvā-after hearing; śaryātiḥ-King Śaryāti; jāta-sādhvasaḥ-becoming afraid; munim-unto Cyavana Muni; prasādayām āsa-tried to appease; valmīka-antarhitam-who was sitting within the hole of the earthworm; śanaiḥ-gradually.





After hearing this statement by his daughter, King Śaryāti was very much afraid. In various ways, he tried to appease Cyavana Muni, for it was he who sat within the hole of the earthworm.





TEXT 9



tad-abhiprāyam ājñāya

prādād duhitaraṁ muneḥ

kṛcchrān muktas tam āmantrya

puraṁ prāyāt samāhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-of Cyavana Muni; abhiprāyam-the purpose; ājñāya-understanding; prādāt-delivered; duhitaram-his daughter; muneḥ-unto Cyavana Muni; kṛcchrāt-with great difficulty; muktaḥ-released; tam-the muni; āmantrya-taking permission; puram-to his own place; prāyāt-went away; samāhitaḥ-being very contemplative.





King Śaryāti, being very contemplative and thus understanding Cyavana Muni's purpose, gave his daughter in charity to the sage. Thus released from danger with great difficulty, he took permission from Cyavana Muni and returned home.





The King, after hearing the statement of his daughter, certainly told the great sage Cyavana Muni everything about how his daughter had ignorantly committed such an offense. The muni, however, inquired from the King whether the daughter was married. In this way, the King, understanding the purpose of the great sage Cyavana Muni (tad-abhiprāyam ājñāya), immediately gave the muni his daughter in charity and escaped the danger of being cursed. Thus with the permission of the great sage the King returned home.





TEXT 10



sukanyā cyavanaṁ prāpya

patiṁ parama-kopanam

prīṇayām āsa citta-jñā

apramattānuvṛttibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



sukanyā-the girl named Sukanyā, the daughter of King Śaryāti; cyavanam-the great sage Cyavana Muni; prāpya-after obtaining; patim-as her husband; parama-kopanam-who was always very angry; prīṇayām āsa-she satisfied him; citta-jñā-understanding the mind of her husband; apramattā anuvṛttibhiḥ-by executing services without being bewildered.





Cyavana Muni was very irritable, but since Sukanyā had gotten him as her husband, she dealt with him carefully, according to his mood. Knowing his mind, she performed service to him without being bewildered.





This is an indication of the relationship between husband and wife. A great personality like Cyavana Muni has the temperament of always wanting to be in a superior position. Such a person cannot submit to anyone. Therefore, Cyavana Muni had an irritable temperament. His wife, Sukanyā, could understand his attitude, and under the circumstances she treated him accordingly. If any wife wants to be happy with her husband, she must try to understand her husband's temperament and please him. This is victory for a woman. Even in the dealings of Lord Kṛṣṇa with His different queens, it has been seen that although the queens were the daughters of great kings, they placed themselves before Lord Kṛṣṇa as His maidservants. However great a woman may be, she must place herself before her husband in this way; that is to say, she must be ready to carry out her husband's orders and please him in all circumstances. Then her life will be successful. When the wife becomes as irritable as the husband, their life at home is sure to be disturbed or ultimately completely broken. In the modern day, the wife is never submissive, and therefore home life is broken even by slight incidents. Either the wife or the husband may take advantage of the divorce laws. According to the Vedic law, however, there is no such thing as divorce laws, and a woman must be trained to be submissive to the will of her husband. Westerners contend that this is a slave mentality for the wife, but factually it is not; it is the tactic by which a woman can conquer the heart of her husband, however irritable or cruel he may be. In this case we clearly see that although Cyavana Muni was not young but indeed old enough to be Sukanyā's grandfather and was also very irritable, Sukanyā, the beautiful young daughter of a king, submitted herself to her old husband and tried to please him in all respects. Thus she was a faithful and chaste wife.





TEXT 11



kasyacit tv atha kālasya

nāsatyāv āśramāgatau

tau pūjayitvā provāca

vayo me dattam īśvarau

SYNONYMS



kasyacit-after some (time); tu-but; atha-in this way; kālasya-time having passed; nāsatyau-the two Aśvinī-kumāras; āśrama-that place of Cyavana Muni; āgatau-reached; tau-unto those two; pūjayitvā-offering respectful obeisances; provāca-said; vayaḥ-youth; me-unto me; dattam-please give; īśvarau-because you two are able to do so.





Thereafter, some time having passed, the Aśvinī-kumāra brothers, the heavenly physicians, happened to come to Cyavana Muni's āśrama. After offering them respectful obeisances, Cyavana Muni requested them to give him youthful life, for they were able to do so.





The heavenly physicians like the Aśvinī-kumāras could give youthful life even to one who was advanced in age. Indeed, great yogīs, with their mystic powers, can even bring a dead body back to life if the structure of the body is in order. We have already discussed this in connection with Bali Mahārāja's soldiers and their treatment by Śukrācārya. Modern medical science has not yet discovered how to bring a dead body back to life or bring youthful energy to an old body, but from these verses we can understand that such treatment is possible if one is able to take knowledge from the Vedic information. The Aśvinī-kumāras were expert in Āyur-veda, as was Dhanvantari. In every department of material science, there is a perfection to be achieved, and to achieve it one must consult the Vedic literature. The highest perfection is to become a devotee of the Lord. To attain this perfection, one must consult Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is understood to be the ripe fruit of the Vedic desire tree (nigama-kalpa-taror galitaṁ phalam [SB 1.1.3]).





TEXT 12



grahaṁ grahīṣye somasya

yajñe vām apy asoma-poḥ

kriyatāṁ me vayo-rūpaṁ

pramadānāṁ yad īpsitam

SYNONYMS



graham-a full pot; grahīṣye-I shall give; somasya-of soma-rasa; yajñe-in sacrifice; vām-of both of you; api-although; asoma-poḥ-of you two, who are not eligible to drink soma-rasa; kriyatām-just execute; me-my; vayaḥ-young age; rūpam-beauty of a young man; pramadānām-of women as a class; yat-which is; īpsitam-desirable.





Cyavana Muni said: Although you are ineligible to drink soma-rasa in sacrifices, I promise to give you a full pot of it. Kindly arrange beauty and youth for me, because they are attractive to young women.





TEXT 13



bāḍham ity ūcatur vipram

abhinandya bhiṣaktamau

nimajjatāṁ bhavān asmin

hrade siddha-vinirmite

SYNONYMS



bāḍham-yes, we shall act; iti-thus; ūcatuḥ-they both replied, accepting the proposal of Cyavana; vipram-unto the brāhmaṇa (Cyavana Muni); abhinandya-congratulating him; bhiṣak-tamau-the two great physicians, the Aśvinī-kumāras; nimajjatām-just dive; bhavān-yourself; asmin-in this; hrade-lake; siddha-vinirmite-which is especially meant for all kinds of perfection.





The great physicians, the Aśvinī-kumāras, very gladly accepted Cyavana Muni's proposal. Thus they told the brāhmaṇa, "Just dive into this lake of successful life." [One who bathes in this lake has his desires fulfilled.]





TEXT 14



ity ukto jarayā grasta-

deho dhamani-santataḥ

hradaṁ praveśito 'śvibhyāṁ

valī-palita-vigrahaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti uktaḥ-thus being addressed; jarayā-by old age and invalidity; grasta-dehaḥ-the body being so diseased; dhamani-santataḥ-whose veins were visible everywhere on the body; hradam-the lake; praveśitaḥ-entered; aśvibhyām-helped by the Aśvinī-kumāras; valī-palita-vigrahaḥ-whose body had loose skin and white hair.





After saying this, the Aśvinī-kumāras caught hold of Cyavana Muni, who was an old, diseased invalid with loose skin, white hair, and veins visible all over his body, and all three of them entered the lake.





Cyavana Muni was so old that he could not enter the lake alone. Thus the Aśvinī-kumāras caught hold of his body, and the three of them entered the lake.





TEXT 15



puruṣās traya uttasthur

apīvyā vanitā-priyāḥ

padma-srajaḥ kuṇḍalinas

tulya-rūpāḥ suvāsasaḥ

SYNONYMS



puruṣāḥ-men; trayaḥ-three; uttasthuḥ-arose (from the lake); apīvyāḥ-extremely beautiful; vanitā-priyāḥ-as a man becomes very attractive to women; padma-srajaḥ-decorated with garlands of lotuses; kuṇḍalinaḥ-with earrings; tulya-rūpāḥ-all of them had the same bodily features; su-vāsasaḥ-very nicely dressed.





Thereafter, three men with very beautiful bodily features emerged from the lake. They were nicely dressed and decorated with earrings and garlands of lotuses. All of them were of the same standard of beauty.





TEXT 16



tān nirīkṣya varārohā

sarūpān sūrya-varcasaḥ

ajānatī patiṁ sādhvī

aśvinau śaraṇaṁ yayau

SYNONYMS



tān-unto them; nirīkṣya-after observing; vara-ārohā-that beautiful Sukanyā; sa-rūpān-all of them equally beautiful; sūrya-varcasaḥ-with a bodily effulgence like the effulgence of the sun; ajānatī-not knowing; patim-her husband; sādhvī-that chaste woman; aśvinau-unto the Aśvinī-kumāras; śaraṇam-shelter; yayau-took.





The chaste and very beautiful Sukanyā could not distinguish her husband from the two Aśvinī-kumāras, for they were equally beautiful. Not understanding who her real husband was, she took shelter of the Aśvinī-kumāras.





Sukanyā could have selected any one of them as her husband, for one could not distinguish among them, but because she was chaste, she took shelter of the Aśvinī-kumāras so that they could inform her who her actual husband was. A chaste woman will never accept any man other than her husband, even if there be someone equally as handsome and qualified.





TEXT 17



darśayitvā patiṁ tasyai

pāti-vratyena toṣitau

ṛṣim āmantrya yayatur

vimānena triviṣṭapam

SYNONYMS



darśayitvā-after showing; patim-her husband; tasyai-unto Sukanyā; pāti-vratyena-because of her strong faith in her husband; toṣitau-being very pleased with her; ṛṣim-unto Cyavana Muni; āmantrya-taking his permission; yayatuḥ-they went away; vimānena-taking their own airplane; triviṣṭapam-to the heavenly planets.





The Aśvinī-kumāras were very pleased to see Sukanyā's chastity and faithfulness. Thus they showed her Cyavana Muni, her husband, and after taking permission from him, they returned to the heavenly planets in their plane.





TEXT 18



yakṣyamāṇo 'tha śaryātiś

cyavanasyāśramaṁ gataḥ

dadarśa duhituḥ pārśve

puruṣaṁ sūrya-varcasam

SYNONYMS



yakṣyamāṇaḥ-desiring to perform a yajña; atha-thus; śaryātiḥ-King Śaryāti; cyavanasya-of Cyavana Muni; āśramam-to the residence; gataḥ-having gone; dadarśa-he saw; duhituḥ-of his daughter; pārśve-by the side; puruṣam-a man; sūrya-varcasam-beautiful and effulgent like the sun.





Thereafter, King Śaryāti, desiring to perform a sacrifice, went to the residence of Cyavana Muni. There he saw by the side of his daughter a very beautiful young man, as bright as the sun.





TEXT 19



rājā duhitaraṁ prāha

kṛta-pādābhivandanām

āśiṣaś cāprayuñjāno

nātiprīti-manā iva

SYNONYMS



rājā-the King (Śaryāti); duhitaram-unto the daughter; prāha-said; kṛta-pāda-abhivandanām-who had already finished offering respectful obeisances to her father; āśiṣaḥ-blessings upon her; ca-and; aprayuñjānaḥ-without offering to the daughter; na-not; atiprīti-manāḥ-very much pleased; iva-like that.





After receiving obeisances from his daughter, the King, instead of offering blessings to her, appeared very displeased and spoke as follows.





TEXT 20



cikīrṣitaṁ te kim idaṁ patis tvayā

pralambhito loka-namaskṛto muniḥ

yat tvaṁ jarā-grastam asaty asammataṁ

vihāya jāraṁ bhajase 'mum adhvagam

SYNONYMS



cikīrṣitam-which you desire to do; te-of you; kim idam-what is this; patiḥ-your husband; tvayā-by you; pralambhitaḥ-has been cheated; loka-namaskṛtaḥ-who is honored by all people; muniḥ-a great sage; yat-because; tvam-you; jarā-grastam-very old and invalid; asati-O unchaste daughter; asammatam-not very attractive; vihāya-giving up; jāram-paramour; bhajase-you have accepted; amum-this man; adhvagam-comparable to a street beggar.





O unchaste girl, what is this that you have desired to do? You have cheated the most respectable husband, who is honored by everyone, for I see that because he was old, diseased and therefore unattractive, you have left his company to accept as your husband this young man, who appears to be a beggar from the street.





This shows the values of Vedic culture. According to the circumstances, Sukanyā had been given a husband who was too old to be compatible with her. Because Cyavana Muni was diseased and very old, he was certainly unfit for the beautiful daughter of King Śaryāti. Nonetheless, her father expected her to be faithful to her husband. When he suddenly saw that his daughter had accepted someone else, even though the man was young and handsome, he immediately chastised her as asatī, unchaste, because he assumed that she had accepted another man in the presence of her husband. According to Vedic culture, even if a young woman is given an old husband, she must respectfully serve him. This is chastity. It is not that because she dislikes her husband she may give him up and accept another. This is against Vedic culture. According to Vedic culture, a woman must accept the husband given to her by her parents and remain chaste and faithful to him. Therefore King Śaryāti was surprised to see a young man by the side of Sukanyā.





TEXT 21



kathaṁ matis te 'vagatānyathā satāṁ

kula-prasūte kula-dūṣaṇaṁ tv idam

bibharṣi jāraṁ yad apatrapā kulaṁ

pituś ca bhartuś ca nayasy adhas tamaḥ

SYNONYMS



katham-how; matiḥ te-your consciousness; avagatā-has gone down; anyathā-otherwise; satām-of the most respectable; kula-prasūte-O my daughter, born in the family; kula-dūṣaṇam-who are the degradation of the family; tu-but; idam-this; bibharṣi-you are maintaining; jāram-a paramour; yat-as it is; apatrapā-without shame; kulam-the dynasty; pituḥ-of your father; ca-and; bhartuḥ-of your husband; ca-and; nayasi-you are bringing down; adhaḥ tamaḥ-downward into darkness or hell.





O my daughter, who were born in a respectable family, how have you degraded your consciousness in this way? How is it that you are shamelessly maintaining a paramour? You will thus degrade the dynasties of both your father and your husband to hellish life.





It is quite clear that according to Vedic culture a woman who accepts a paramour or second husband in the presence of the husband she has married is certainly responsible for the degradation of her father's family and the family of her husband. The rules of Vedic culture in this regard are strictly observed in the respectable families of brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas even today; only the śūdras are degraded in this matter. For a woman of the brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya class to accept another husband in the presence of the husband she has married, or to file for divorce or accept a boyfriend or paramour, is unacceptable in the Vedic culture. Therefore King Śaryāti, who did not know the real facts of Cyavana Muni's transformation, was surprised to see the behavior of his daughter.





TEXT 22



evaṁ bruvāṇaṁ pitaraṁ

smayamānā śuci-smitā

uvāca tāta jāmātā

tavaiṣa bhṛgu-nandanaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; bruvāṇam-who was talking and chastising her; pitaram-unto her father; smayamānā-smiling (because she was chaste); śuci-smitā-laughingly; uvāca-replied; tāta-O my dear father; jāmātā-son-in-law; tava-your; eṣaḥ-this young man; bhṛgu-nandanaḥ-is Cyavana Muni (and no one else).





Sukanyā, however, being very proud of her chastity, smiled upon hearing the rebukes of her father. She smilingly told him, "My dear father, this young man by my side is your actual son-in-law, the great sage Cyavana, who was born in the family of Bhṛgu."





Although the father chastised the daughter, assuming that she had accepted another husband, the daughter knew that she was completely honest and chaste, and therefore she was smiling. When she explained that her husband, Cyavana Muni, had now been transformed into a young man, she was very proud of her chastity, and thus she smiled as she talked with her father.





TEXT 23



śaśaṁsa pitre tat sarvaṁ

vayo-rūpābhilambhanam

vismitaḥ parama-prītas

tanayāṁ pariṣasvaje

SYNONYMS



śaśaṁsa-she described; pitre-unto her father; tat-that; sarvam-everything; vayaḥ-of the change of age; rūpa-and of beauty; abhilambhanam-how there was achievement (by her husband); vismitaḥ-being surprised; parama-prītaḥ-was extremely pleased; tanayām-unto his daughter; pariṣasvaje-embraced with pleasure.





Thus Sukanyā explained how her husband had received the beautiful body of a young man. When the King heard this he was very surprised, and in great pleasure he embraced his beloved daughter.





TEXT 24



somena yājayan vīraṁ

grahaṁ somasya cāgrahīt

asoma-por apy aśvinoś

cyavanaḥ svena tejasā

SYNONYMS



somena-with the soma; yājayan-causing to perform the sacrifice; vīram-the King (Śaryāti); graham-the full pot; somasya-of the soma-rasa; ca-also; agrahīt-delivered; asoma-poḥ-who were not allowed to drink the soma-rasa; api-although; aśvinoḥ-of the Aśvinī-kumāras; cyavanaḥ-Cyavana Muni; svena-his own; tejasā-by prowess.





Cyavana Muni, by his own prowess, enabled King Śaryāti to perform the soma-yajña. The muni offered a full pot of soma-rasa to the Aśvinī-kumāras, although they were unfit to drink it.





TEXT 25



hantuṁ tam ādade vajraṁ

sadyo manyur amarṣitaḥ

savajraṁ stambhayām āsa

bhujam indrasya bhārgavaḥ

SYNONYMS



hantum-to kill; tam-him (Cyavana); ādade-Indra took up; vajram-his thunderbolt; sadyaḥ-immediately; manyuḥ-because of great anger, without consideration; amarṣitaḥ-being very much perturbed; sa-vajram-with the thunderbolt; stambhayām āsa-paralyzed; bhujam-the arm; indrasya-of Indra; bhārgavaḥ-Cyavana Muni, the descendant of Bhṛgu.





King Indra, being perturbed and angry, wanted to kill Cyavana Muni, and therefore he impetuously took up his thunderbolt. But Cyavana Muni, by his powers, paralyzed Indra's arm that held the thunderbolt.





TEXT 26



anvajānaṁs tataḥ sarve

grahaṁ somasya cāśvinoḥ

bhiṣajāv iti yat pūrvaṁ

somāhutyā bahiṣ-kṛtau

SYNONYMS



anvajānan-with their permission; tataḥ-thereafter; sarve-all the demigods; graham-a full pot; somasya-of soma-rasa; ca-also; aśvinoḥ-of the Aśvinī-kumāras; bhiṣajau-although only physicians; iti-thus; yat-because; pūrvam-before this; soma-āhutyā-with a share in the soma-yajña; bahiḥ-kṛtau-who had been disallowed or excluded.





Although the Aśvinī-kumāras were only physicians and were therefore excluded from drinking soma-rasa in sacrifices, the demigods agreed to allow them henceforward to drink it.





TEXT 27



uttānabarhir ānarto

bhūriṣeṇa iti trayaḥ

śaryāter abhavan putrā

ānartād revato 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



uttānabarhiḥ-Uttānabarhi; ānartaḥ-Ānarta; bhūriṣeṇaḥ-Bhūriṣeṇa; iti-thus; trayaḥ-three; śaryāteḥ-of King Śaryāti; abhavan-were begotten; putrāḥ-sons; ānartāt-from Ānarta; revataḥ-Revata; abhavat-was born.





King Śaryāti begot three sons, named Uttānabarhi, Ānarta and Bhūriṣeṇa. From Ānarta came a son named Revata.





TEXT 28



so 'ntaḥ-samudre nagarīṁ

vinirmāya kuśasthalīm

āsthito 'bhuṅkta viṣayān

ānartādīn arindama

tasya putra-śataṁ jajñe

kakudmi-jyeṣṭham uttamam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Revata; antaḥ-samudre-in the depths of the ocean; nagarīm-a town; vinirmāya-after constructing; kuśasthalīm-named Kuśasthalī; āsthitaḥ-lived there; abhuṅkta-enjoyed material happiness; viṣayān-kingdoms; ānarta-ādīn-Ānarta and others; arim-dama-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, subduer of enemies; tasya-his; putra-śatam-one hundred sons; jajñe-were born; kakudmi-jyeṣṭham-of whom the eldest was Kakudmī; uttamam-most powerful and opulent.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, subduer of enemies, this Revata constructed a kingdom known as Kuśasthalī in the depths of the ocean. There he lived and ruled such tracts of land as Ānarta, etc. He had one hundred very nice sons, of whom the eldest was Kakudmī.





TEXT 29



kakudmī revatīṁ kanyāṁ

svām ādāya vibhuṁ gataḥ

putryā varaṁ paripraṣṭuṁ

brahmalokam apāvṛtam

SYNONYMS



kakudmī-King Kakudmī; revatīm-named Revatī; kanyām-the daughter of Kakudmī; svām-his own; ādāya-taking; vibhum-before Lord Brahmā; gataḥ-he went; putryāḥ-of his daughter; varam-a husband; paripraṣṭum-to inquire about; brahmalokam-Brahmaloka; apāvṛtam-transcendental to the three qualities.





Taking his own daughter, Revatī, Kakudmī went to Lord Brahmā in Brahmaloka, which is transcendental to the three modes of material nature, and inquired about a husband for her.





It appears that Brahmaloka, the abode of Lord Brahmā, is also transcendental, above the three modes of material nature (apāvṛtam).





TEXT 30



āvartamāne gāndharve

sthito 'labdha-kṣaṇaḥ kṣaṇam

tad-anta ādyam ānamya

svābhiprāyaṁ nyavedayat

SYNONYMS



āvartamāne-because of being engaged; gāndharve-in hearing songs from the Gandharvas; sthitaḥ-situated; alabdha-kṣaṇaḥ-there was no time to talk; kṣaṇam-even a moment; tat-ante-when it ended; ādyam-unto the original teacher of the universe (Lord Brahmā); ānamya-after offering obeisances; sva-abhiprāyam-his own desire; nyavedayat-Kakudmī submitted.





When Kakudmī arrived there, Lord Brahmā was engaged in hearing musical performances by the Gandharvas and had not a moment to talk with him. Therefore Kakudmī waited, and at the end of the musical performances he offered his obeisances to Lord Brahmā and thus submitted his long-standing desire.





TEXT 31



tac chrutvā bhagavān brahmā

prahasya tam uvāca ha

aho rājan niruddhās te

kālena hṛdi ye kṛtāḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-that; śrutvā-hearing; bhagavān-the most powerful; brahmā-Lord Brahmā; prahasya-after laughing; tam-unto King Kakudmī; uvāca ha-said; aho-alas; rājan-O King; niruddhāḥ-all gone; te-all of them; kālena-by the course of time; hṛdi-within the core of the heart; ye-all of them; kṛtāḥ-who have been decided upon for acceptance as your son-in-law.





After hearing his words, Lord Brahmā, who is most powerful, laughed loudly and said to Kakudmī: O King, all those whom you may have decided within the core of your heart to accept as your son-in-law have passed away in the course of time.





TEXT 32



tat putra-pautra-naptṝṇāṁ

gotrāṇi ca na śṛṇmahe

kālo 'bhiyātas tri-ṇava-

catur-yuga-vikalpitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-there; putra-of the sons; pautra-of the grandsons; naptṝṇām-and of the descendants; gotrāṇi-the family dynasties; ca-also; na-not; śṛṇmahe-we do hear of; kālaḥ-time; abhiyātaḥ-have passed; tri-three; nava-nine; catur-yuga-four yugas (Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali); vikalpitaḥ-thus measured.





Twenty-seven catur-yugas have already passed. Those upon whom you may have decided are now gone, and so are their sons, grandsons and other descendants. You cannot even hear about their names.





During Lord Brahmā's day, fourteen Manus or one thousand mahā-yugas pass away. Brahmā informed King Kakudmī that twenty-seven mahā-yugas, each consisting of the four periods Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali, had already passed. All the kings and other great personalities born in those yugas had now departed from memory into obscurity. This is the way of time as it moves through past, present and future.





TEXT 33



tad gaccha deva-devāṁśo

baladevo mahā-balaḥ

kanyā-ratnam idaṁ rājan

nara-ratnāya dehi bhoḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-therefore; gaccha-you go; deva-deva-aṁśaḥ-whose plenary portion is Lord Viṣṇu; baladevaḥ-known as Baladeva; mahā-balaḥ-the supreme powerful; kanyā-ratnam-your beautiful daughter; idam-this; rājan-O King; nara-ratnāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always youthful; dehi-just give to Him (in charity); bhoḥ-O King.





O King, leave here and offer your daughter to Lord Baladeva, who is still present. He is most powerful. Indeed, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose plenary portion is Lord Viṣṇu. Your daughter is fit to be given to Him in charity.





TEXT 34



bhuvo bhārāvatārāya

bhagavān bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

avatīrṇo nijāṁśena

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

SYNONYMS



bhuvaḥ-of the world; bhāra-avatārāya-to lessen the burden; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ-always the well-wisher of all the living entities; avatīrṇaḥ-now He has descended; nija-aṁśena-with all the paraphernalia that is part of Him; puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ-He is simply worshiped by hearing and chanting, by which one becomes purified.





Lord Baladeva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who hears and chants about Him is purified. Because He is always the well-wisher of all living entities, He has descended with all His paraphernalia to purify the entire world and lessen its burden.





TEXT 35



ity ādiṣṭo 'bhivandyājaṁ

nṛpaḥ sva-puram āgataḥ

tyaktaṁ puṇya-jana-trāsād

bhrātṛbhir dikṣv avasthitaiḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; ādiṣṭaḥ-being ordered by Lord Brahmā; abhivandya-after offering obeisances; ajam-unto Lord Brahmā; nṛpaḥ-the King; sva-puram-to his own residence; āgataḥ-returned; tyaktam-which was vacant; puṇya-jana-of higher living entities; trāsāt-because of their fear; bhrātṛbhiḥ-by his brothers; dikṣu-in different directions; avasthitaiḥ-who were residing.





Having received this order from Lord Brahmā, Kakudmī offered obeisances unto him and returned to his own residence. He then saw that his residence was vacant, having been abandoned by his brothers and other relatives, who were living in all directions because of fear of such higher living beings as the Yakṣas.





TEXT 36



sutāṁ dattvānavadyāṅgīṁ

balāya bala-śāline

badary-ākhyaṁ gato rājā

taptuṁ nārāyaṇāśramam

SYNONYMS



sutām-his daughter; dattvā-after delivering; anavadya-aṅgīm-having a perfect body; balāya-unto Lord Baladeva; bala-śāline-unto the most powerful, the supreme powerful; badarī-ākhyam-named Badarikāśrama; gataḥ-he went; rājā-the King; taptum-to perform austerities; nārāyaṇa-āśramam-to the place of Nara-Nārāyaṇa.





Thereafter, the King gave his most beautiful daughter in charity to the supremely powerful Baladeva and then retired from worldly life and went to Badarikāśrama to please Nara-Nārāyaṇa.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Third Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Marriage of Sukanyā and Cyavana Muni."



Chapter Four



Ambarīṣa Mahārāja Offended by Durvāsā Muni





This chapter describes the history of Mahārāja Nabhaga, of his son Nābhāga, and of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa.





The son of Manu was Nabhaga, and his son Nābhāga lived for many years in the gurukula. In Nābhāga's absence, his brothers did not consider his share of the kingdom, but instead divided the property among themselves. When Nābhāga returned home, his brothers bestowed upon him their father as his share, but when Nābhāga went to his father and told him about the dealings of the brothers, his father informed him that this was cheating and advised him that for his livelihood he should go to the sacrificial arena and describe two mantras to be chanted there. Nābhāga executed the order of his father, and thus Aṅgirā and other great saintly persons gave him all the money collected in that sacrifice. To test Nābhāga, Lord Śiva challenged his claim to the wealth, but when Lord Śiva was satisfied by Nābhāga's behavior, Lord Śiva offered him all the riches.





From Nābhāga was born Ambarīṣa, the most powerful and celebrated devotee. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was the emperor of the entire world, but he considered his opulence temporary. Indeed, knowing that such material opulence is the cause of downfall into conditional life, he was unattached to this opulence. He engaged his senses and mind in the service of the Lord. This process is called yukta-vairāgya, or feasible renunciation, which is quite suitable for worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, as the emperor, was immensely opulent, he performed devotional service with great opulence, and therefore, despite his wealth, he had no attachment to his wife, children or kingdom. He constantly engaged his senses and mind in the service of the Lord. Therefore, to say nothing of enjoying material opulence, he never desired even liberation.





Once Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Vṛndāvana, observing the vow of Dvādaśī. On Dvādaśī, the day after Ekādaśī, when he was about to break his Ekādaśī fast, the great mystic yogī Durvāsā appeared in his house and became his guest. King Ambarīṣa respectfully received Durvāsā Muni, and Durvāsā Muni, after accepting his invitation to eat there, went to bathe in the Yamunā River at noontime. Because he was absorbed in samādhi, he did not come back very soon. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, however, upon seeing that the time to break the fast was passing, drank a little water, in accordance with the advice of learned brāhmaṇas, just to observe the formality of breaking the fast. By mystic power, Durvāsā Muni could understand that this had happened, and he was very angry. When he returned he began to chastise Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, but he was not satisfied, and finally he created from his hair a demon appearing like the fire of death. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, is always the protector of His devotee, and to protect Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, He sent His disc, the Sudarśana cakra, which immediately vanquished the fiery demon and then pursued Durvāsā, who was so envious of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Durvāsā fled to Brahmaloka, Śivaloka and all the other higher planets, but he could not protect himself from the wrath of the Sudarśana cakra. Finally he went to the spiritual world and surrendered to Lord Nārāyaṇa, but Lord Nārāyaṇa could not excuse a person who had offended a Vaiṣṇava. To be excused from such an offense, one must submit to the Vaiṣṇava whom he has offended. There is no other way to be excused. Thus Lord Nārāyaṇa advised Durvāsā to return to Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and beg his pardon.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

nābhāgo nabhagāpatyaṁ

yaṁ tataṁ bhrātaraḥ kavim

yaviṣṭhaṁ vyabhajan dāyaṁ

brahmacāriṇam āgatam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; nābhāgaḥ-Nābhāga; nabhaga-apatyam-was the son of Mahārāja Nabhaga; yam-unto whom; tatam-the father; bhrātaraḥ-the elder brothers; kavim-the learned; yaviṣṭham-the youngest; vyabhajan-divided; dāyam-the property; brahmacāriṇam-having accepted the life of a brahmacārī perpetually (naiṣṭhika); āgatam-returned.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The son of Nabhaga named Nābhāga lived for a long time at the place of his spiritual master. Therefore, his brothers thought that he was not going to become a gṛhastha and would not return. Consequently, without providing a share for him, they divided the property of their father among themselves. When Nābhāga returned from the place of his spiritual master, they gave him their father as his share.





There are two kinds of brahmacārīs. One may return home, marry and become a householder, whereas the other, known as bṛhad-vrata, takes a vow to remain a brahmacārī perpetually. The bṛhad-vrata brahmacārī does not return from the place of the spiritual master; he stays there, and later he directly takes sannyāsa. Because Nābhāga did not return from the place of his spiritual master, his brothers thought that he had taken bṛhadvrata-brahmacarya. Therefore, they did not preserve his share, and when he returned they gave him their father as his share.





TEXT 2



bhrātaro 'bhāṅkta kiṁ mahyaṁ

bhajāma pitaraṁ tava

tvāṁ mamāryās tatābhāṅkṣur

mā putraka tad ādṛthāḥ

SYNONYMS



bhrātaraḥ-O my brothers; abhāṅkta-have you given as the share of our father's property; kim-what; mahyam-unto me; bhajāma-we allot; pitaram-the father himself; tava-as your share; tvām-you; mama-unto me; āryāḥ-my elder brothers; tata-O my father; abhāṅkṣuḥ-have given the share; mā-do not; putraka-O my dear son; tat-to this statement; ādṛthāḥ-give any importance.





Nābhāga inquired, "My dear brothers, what have you given to me as my share of our father's property?" His elder brothers answered, "We have kept our father as your share." But when Nābhāga went to his father and said, "My dear father, my elder brothers have given you as my share of property," the father replied, "My dear son, do not rely upon their cheating words. I am not your property."





TEXT 3



ime aṅgirasaḥ satram

āsate 'dya sumedhasaḥ

ṣaṣṭhaṁ ṣaṣṭham upetyāhaḥ

kave muhyanti karmaṇi

SYNONYMS



ime-all these; aṅgirasaḥ-descendants of the dynasty of Aṅgirā; satram-sacrifice; āsate-are performing; adya-today; sumedhasaḥ-who are all very intelligent; ṣaṣṭham-sixth; ṣaṣṭham-sixth; upetya-after achieving; ahaḥ-day; kave-O best of learned men; muhyanti-become bewildered; karmaṇi-in discharging fruitive activities.





Nābhāga's father said: All the descendants of Aṅgirā are now going to perform a great sacrifice, but although they are very intelligent, on every sixth day they will be bewildered in performing sacrifice and will make mistakes in their daily duties.





Nābhāga was very simple hearted. Therefore when he went to his father, the father, in compassion for his son, suggested that as a means of livelihood Nābhāga could go to the descendants of Aṅgirā and take advantage of their misgivings in performing yajña.





TEXTS 4–5



tāṁs tvaṁ śaṁsaya sūkte dve

vaiśvadeve mahātmanaḥ

te svar yanto dhanaṁ satra-

pariśeṣitam ātmanaḥ

dāsyanti te 'tha tān arccha



tathā sa kṛtavān yathā

tasmai dattvā yayuḥ svargaṁ

te satra-pariśeṣaṇam

SYNONYMS



tān-to all of them; tvam-yourself; śaṁsaya-describe; sūkte-Vedic hymns; dve-two; vaiśvadeve-in connection with Vaiśvadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahātmanaḥ-to all of those great souls; te-they; svaḥ yantaḥ-while going to their respective destinations in the heavenly planets; dhanam-the wealth; satra-pariśeṣitam-which remains after the end of the yajña; ātmanaḥ-their own property; dāsyanti-will deliver; te-unto you; atha-therefore; tān-to them; arccha-go there; tathā-in that way (according to his father's orders); saḥ-he (Nābhāga); kṛtavān-executed; yathā-as advised by his father; tasmai-unto him; dattvā-after giving; yayuḥ-went; svargam-to the heavenly planets; te-all of them; satra-pariśeṣaṇam-remnants of yajña.





Nābhāga's father continued: "Go to those great souls and describe two Vedic hymns pertaining to Vaiśvadeva. When the great sages have completed the sacrifice and are going to the heavenly planets, they will give you the remnants of the money they have received from the sacrifice. Therefore, go there immediately." Thus Nābhāga acted exactly according to the advice of his father, and the great sages of the Aṅgirā dynasty gave him all their wealth and then went to the heavenly planets.





TEXT 6



taṁ kaścit svīkariṣyantaṁ

puruṣaḥ kṛṣṇa-darśanaḥ

uvācottarato 'bhyetya

mamedaṁ vāstukaṁ vasu

SYNONYMS



tam-unto Nābhāga; kaścit-someone; svīkariṣyantam-while accepting the riches given by the great sages; puruṣaḥ-a person; kṛṣṇa-darśanaḥ-black-looking; uvāca-said; uttarataḥ-from the north; abhyetya-coming; mama-my; idam-these; vāstukam-remnants of the sacrifice; vasu-all the riches.





Thereafter, while Nābhāga was accepting the riches, a black-looking person from the north came to him and said, "All the wealth from this sacrificial arena belongs to me."





TEXT 7



mamedam ṛṣibhir dattam

iti tarhi sma mānavaḥ

syān nau te pitari praśnaḥ

pṛṣṭavān pitaraṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



mama-my; idam-all these; ṛṣibhiḥ-by the great saintly persons; dattam-have been delivered; iti-thus; tarhi-therefore; sma-indeed; mānavaḥ-Nābhāga; syāt-let there be; nau-of ourselves; te-your; pitari-unto the father; praśnaḥ-an inquiry; pṛṣṭavān-he also inquired; pitaram-from his father; yathā-as requested.





Nābhāga then said, "These riches belong to me. The great saintly persons have delivered them to me." When Nābhāga said this, the black-looking person replied, "Let us go to your father and ask him to settle our disagreement." In accordance with this, Nābhāga inquired from his father.





TEXT 8



yajña-vāstu-gataṁ sarvam

ucchiṣṭam ṛṣayaḥ kvacit

cakrur hi bhāgaṁ rudrāya

sa devaḥ sarvam arhati

SYNONYMS



yajña-vāstu-gatam-things belonging to the sacrificial arena; sarvam-everything; ucchiṣṭam-remnants; ṛṣayaḥ-the great sages; kvacit-sometimes, in the Dakṣa-yajña; cakruḥ-did so; hi-indeed; bhāgam-share; rudrāya-unto Lord Śiva; saḥ-that; devaḥ-demigod; sarvam-everything; arhati-deserves.





The father of Nābhāga said: Whatever the great sages sacrificed in the arena of the Dakṣa-yajña, they offered to Lord Śiva as his share. Therefore, everything in the sacrificial arena certainly belongs to Lord Śiva.





TEXT 9



nābhāgas taṁ praṇamyāha

taveśa kila vāstukam

ity āha me pitā brahmañ

chirasā tvāṁ prasādaye

SYNONYMS



nābhāgaḥ-Nābhāga; tam-unto him (Lord Śiva); praṇamya-offering obeisances; āha-said; tava-yours; īśa-O lord; kila-certainly; vāstukam-everything in the arena of sacrifice; iti-thus; āha-said; me-my; pitā-father; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; śirasā-bowing my head; tvām-unto you; prasādaye-I am begging your mercy.





Thereupon, after offering obeisances to Lord Śiva, Nābhāga said: O worshipable lord, everything in this arena of sacrifice is yours. This is the assertion of my father. Now, with great respect, I bow my head before you, begging your mercy.





TEXT 10



yat te pitāvadad dharmaṁ

tvaṁ ca satyaṁ prabhāṣase

dadāmi te mantra-dṛśo

jñānaṁ brahma sanātanam

SYNONYMS



yat-whatever; te-your; pitā-father; avadat-explained; dharmam-truth; tvam ca-you also; satyam-truth; prabhāṣase-are speaking; dadāmi-I shall give; te-unto you; mantra-dṛśaḥ-who know the science of mantra; jñānam-knowledge; brahma-transcendental; sanātanam-eternal.





Lord Śiva said: Whatever your father has said is the truth, and you also are speaking the same truth. Therefore, I, who know the Vedic mantras, shall explain transcendental knowledge to you.





TEXT 11



gṛhāṇa draviṇaṁ dattaṁ

mat-satra-pariśeṣitam

ity uktvāntarhito rudro

bhagavān dharma-vatsalaḥ

SYNONYMS



gṛhāṇa-please take now; draviṇam-all the wealth; dattam-is given (to you by me); mat-satra-pariśeṣitam-the remnants of the sacrifice executed on my behalf; iti uktvā-after speaking like this; antarhitaḥ-disappeared; rudraḥ-Lord Śiva; bhagavān-the most powerful demigod; dharma-vatsalaḥ-adherent to the principles of religion.





Lord Śiva said, "Now you may take all the wealth remaining from the sacrifice, for I give it to you." After saying this, Lord Śiva, who is most adherent to the religious principles, disappeared from that place.





TEXT 12



ya etat saṁsmaret prātaḥ

sāyaṁ ca susamāhitaḥ

kavir bhavati mantra-jño

gatiṁ caiva tathātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-anyone who; etat-about this incident; saṁsmaret-may remember; prātaḥ-in the morning; sāyam ca-and in the evening; susamāhitaḥ-with great attention; kaviḥ-learned; bhavati-becomes; mantra-jñaḥ-well aware of all Vedic mantras; gatim-the destination; ca-also; eva-indeed; tathā ātmanaḥ-like that of the self-realized soul.





If one hears and chants or remembers this narration in the morning and evening with great attention, he certainly becomes learned, experienced in understanding the Vedic hymns, and expert in self-realization.





TEXT 13



nābhāgād ambarīṣo 'bhūn

mahā-bhāgavataḥ kṛtī

nāspṛśad brahma-śāpo 'pi

yaṁ na pratihataḥ kvacit

SYNONYMS



nābhāgāt-from Nābhāga; ambarīṣaḥ-Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; abhūt-took birth; mahā-bhāgavataḥ-the most exalted devotee; kṛtī-very celebrated; na aspṛśat-could not touch; brahma-śāpaḥ api-even the curse of a brāhmaṇa; yam-unto whom (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); na-neither; pratihataḥ-failed; kvacit-at any time.





From Nābhāga, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa took birth. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was an exalted devotee, celebrated for his great merits. Although he was cursed by an infallible brāhmaṇa, the curse could not touch him.





TEXT 14



śrī-rājovāca

bhagavañ chrotum icchāmi

rājarṣes tasya dhīmataḥ

na prābhūd yatra nirmukto

brahma-daṇḍo duratyayaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit inquired; bhagavan-O great brāhmaṇa; śrotum icchāmi-I wish to hear (from you); rājarṣeḥ-of the great King Ambarīṣa; tasya-of him; dhīmataḥ-who was such a greatly sober personality; na-not; prābhūt-could act; yatra-upon whom (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); nirmuktaḥ-being released; brahma-daṇḍaḥ-the curse of a brāhmaṇa; duratyayaḥ-which is insurmountable.





King Parīkṣit inquired: O great personality, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was certainly most exalted and meritorious in character. I wish to hear about him. How surprising it is that the curse of a brāhmaṇa, which is insurmountable, could not act upon him.





TEXTS 15–16



śrī-śuka uvāca

ambarīṣo mahā-bhāgaḥ

sapta-dvīpavatīṁ mahīm

avyayāṁ ca śriyaṁ labdhvā

vibhavaṁ cātulaṁ bhuvi

mene 'tidurlabhaṁ puṁsāṁ



sarvaṁ tat svapna-saṁstutam

vidvān vibhava-nirvāṇaṁ

tamo viśati yat pumān

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ambarīṣaḥ-King Ambarīṣa; mahā-bhāgaḥ-the greatly fortunate king; sapta-dvīpavatīm-consisting of seven islands; mahīm-the whole world; avyayām ca-and inexhaustible; śriyam-beauty; labdhvā-after achieving; vibhavam ca-and opulences; atulam-unlimited; bhuvi-in this earth; mene-he decided; ati-durlabham-which is rarely obtained; puṁsām-of many persons; sarvam-everything (he had obtained); tat-that which; svapna-saṁstutam-as if imagined in a dream; vidvān-completely understanding; vibhava-nirvāṇam-the annihilation of that opulence; tamaḥ-ignorance; viśati-fallen into; yat-because of which; pumān-a person.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the most fortunate personality, achieved the rule of the entire world, consisting of seven islands, and achieved inexhaustible, unlimited opulence and prosperity on earth. Although such a position is rarely obtained, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa did not care for it at all, for he knew very well that all such opulence is material. Like that which is imagined in a dream, such opulence will ultimately be destroyed. The King knew that any nondevotee who attains such opulence merges increasingly into material nature's mode of darkness.





For a devotee material opulence is insignificant, whereas for a nondevotee material opulence is the cause of increasing bondage, for a devotee knows that anything material is temporary, whereas a nondevotee regards the temporary so-called happiness as everything and forgets the path of self-realization. Thus for the nondevotee material opulence is a disqualification for spiritual advancement.





TEXT 17



vāsudeve bhagavati

tad-bhakteṣu ca sādhuṣu

prāpto bhāvaṁ paraṁ viśvaṁ

yenedaṁ loṣṭravat smṛtam

SYNONYMS



vāsudeve-unto the all-pervading Supreme Personality; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-bhakteṣu-unto His devotees; ca-also; sādhuṣu-unto the saintly persons; prāptaḥ-one who has achieved; bhāvam-reverence and devotion; param-transcendental; viśvam-the whole material universe; yena-by which (spiritual consciousness); idam-this; loṣṭra-vat-as insignificant as a piece of stone; smṛtam-is accepted (by such devotees).





Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, and of the saintly persons who are the Lord's devotees. Because of this devotion, he thought of the entire universe as being as insignificant as a piece of stone.





TEXTS 18–20



sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau



tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe 'ṅga-saṅgamam

ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe

śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite

pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe



śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane

kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); vai-indeed; manaḥ-his mind; kṛṣṇa-pada-aravindayoḥ-(fixed) upon the two lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vacāṁsi-his words; vaikuṇṭha-guṇa-anuvarṇane-describing the glories of Kṛṣṇa; karau-his two hands; hareḥ mandira-mārjana-ādiṣu-in activities like cleansing the temple of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śrutim-his ear; cakāra-engaged; acyuta-of or about Kṛṣṇa, who never falls down; sat-kathā-udaye-in hearing the transcendental narrations; mukunda-liṅga-ālaya-darśane-in seeing the Deity and temples and holy dhāmas of Mukunda; dṛśau-his two eyes; tat-bhṛtya-of the servants of Kṛṣṇa; gātra-sparśe-in touching the bodies; aṅga-saṅgamam-contact of his body; ghrāṇam ca-and his sense of smell; tat-pāda-of His lotus feet; saroja-of the lotus flower; saurabhe-in (smelling) the fragrance; śrīmat-tulasyāḥ-of the tulasī leaves; rasanām-his tongue; tat-arpite-in the prasāda offered to the Lord; pādau-his two legs; hareḥ-of the Personality of Godhead; kṣetra-holy places like the temple or Vṛndāvana and Dvārakā; pada-anusarpaṇe-walking to those places; śiraḥ-the head; hṛṣīkeśa-of Kṛṣṇa, the master of the senses; pada-abhivandane-in offering obeisances to the lotus feet; kāmam ca-and his desires; dāsye-in being engaged as a servant; na-not; tu-indeed; kāma-kāmyayā-with a desire for sense gratification; yathā-as; uttamaśloka-jana-āśrayā-if one takes shelter of a devotee such as Prahlāda; ratiḥ-attachment.





Mahārāja Ambarīṣa always engaged his mind in meditating upon the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, his words in describing the glories of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the Lord's temple, and his ears in hearing the words spoken by Kṛṣṇa or about Kṛṣṇa. He engaged his eyes in seeing the Deity of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's temples and Kṛṣṇa's places like Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, he engaged his sense of touch in touching the bodies of the Lord's devotees, he engaged his sense of smell in smelling the fragrance of tulasī offered to the Lord, and he engaged his tongue in tasting the Lord's prasāda. He engaged his legs in walking to the holy places and temples of the Lord, his head in bowing down before the Lord, and all his desires in serving the Lord, twenty-four hours a day. Indeed, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa never desired anything for his own sense gratification. He engaged all his senses in devotional service, in various engagements related to the Lord. This is the way to increase attachment for the Lord and be completely free from all material desires.





In Bhagavad-gītā (7.1) the Lord recommends, mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ. This indicates that one must execute devotional service under the guidance of a devotee or directly under the guidance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is not possible, however, to train oneself without guidance from the spiritual master. Therefore, according to the instructions of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the first business of a devotee is to accept a bona fide spiritual master who can train him to engage his various senses in rendering transcendental service to the Lord. The Lord also says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.1), asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu. In other words, if one wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead in completeness, one must follow the prescriptions given by Kṛṣṇa by following in the footsteps of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. It is said, hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] bhakti means to engage the senses in the service of the master of the senses, Kṛṣṇa, who is called Hṛṣīkeśa or Acyuta. These words are used in these verses. Acyuta-sat-kathodaye, hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane. The words Acyuta and Hṛṣīkeśa are also used in Bhagavad-gītā. Bhagavad-gītā is kṛṣṇa-kathā spoken directly by Kṛṣṇa, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is also kṛṣṇa-kathā because everything described in the Bhāgavatam is in relationship with Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 21



evaṁ sadā karma-kalāpam ātmanaḥ

pare 'dhiyajñe bhagavaty adhokṣaje

sarvātma-bhāvaṁ vidadhan mahīm imāṁ

tan-niṣṭha-viprābhihitaḥ śaśāsa ha

SYNONYMS



evam-thus (living a devotional life); sadā-always; karma-kalāpam-the prescribed occupational duties as a kṣatriya king; ātmanaḥ-of himself, personally (the head of the state); pare-unto the supreme transcendence; adhiyajñe-unto the supreme proprietor, the supreme enjoyer; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhokṣaje-unto He who is beyond material sense perception; sarva-ātma-bhāvam-all different varieties of devotional service; vidadhat-executing, offering; mahīm-the planet earth; imām-this; tat-niṣṭha-who are faithful devotees of the Lord; vipra-by such brāhmaṇas; abhihitaḥ-directed; śaśāsa-ruled; ha-in the past.





In performing his prescribed duties as king, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa always offered the results of his royal activities to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who is the enjoyer of everything and is beyond the perception of material senses. He certainly took advice from brāhmaṇas who were faithful devotees of the Lord, and thus he ruled the planet earth without difficulty.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (5.29):



bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati





People are very much anxious to live in peace and prosperity in this material world, and here in Bhagavad-gītā the peace formula is given personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead: everyone should understand that Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the ultimate proprietor of all the planets and is therefore the enjoyer of all activities, political, social, cultural, religious, economic and so on. The Lord has given perfect advice in Bhagavad-gītā, and Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, as the ideal executive head, ruled the entire world as a Vaiṣṇava, taking advice from Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇas. The śāstras enjoin that even though a brāhmaṇa may be well versed in the occupational brahminical duties and may be very learned in Vedic knowledge, he cannot give advice as a guru until he is a Vaiṣṇava.



ṣaṭ-karma-nipuṇo vipro

mantra-tantra-viśāradaḥ

avaiṣṇavo gurur na syād

vaiṣṇavaḥ śva-paco guruḥ





Therefore, as indicated here by the words tan-niṣṭha-viprābhihitaḥ, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa took advice from brāhmaṇas who were pure devotees of the Lord, for ordinary brāhmaṇas who are merely learned scholars or experts in performing ritualistic ceremonies are not competent to give advice.



In modern times, there are legislative assemblies whose members are authorized to make laws for the welfare of the state, but according to this description of the kingdom of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the country or the world should be ruled by a chief executive whose advisors are all devotee brāhmaṇas. Such advisors or members of the legislative assembly should not be professional politicians, nor should they be selected by the ignorant public. Rather, they should be appointed by the king. When the king, the executive head of the state, is a devotee and he follows the instructions of devotee brāhmaṇas in ruling the country, everyone will be peaceful and prosperous. When the king and his advisors are perfect devotees, nothing can be wrong in the state. All the citizens should become devotees of the Lord, and then their good character will automatically follow.



yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ





"One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all the good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord has only material qualifications that are of little value. This is because he is hovering on the mental plane and is certain to be attracted by the glaring material energy." (Bhāg. 5.18.12) Citizens under the guidance of a Kṛṣṇa conscious king will become devotees, and then there will be no need to enact new laws every day to reform the way of life in the state. If the citizens are trained to become devotees, they will automatically become peaceful and honest, and if they are guided by a devoted king advised by devotees, the state will not be in the material world but in the spiritual world. All the states of the world should therefore follow the ideal of the rule or administration of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, as described here.





TEXT 22



īje 'śvamedhair adhiyajñam īśvaraṁ

mahā-vibhūtyopacitāṅga-dakṣiṇaiḥ

tatair vasiṣṭhāsita-gautamādibhir

dhanvany abhisrotam asau sarasvatīm

SYNONYMS



īje-worshiped; aśvamedhaiḥ-by performing the horse sacrifice yajñas; adhiyajñam-to satisfy the master of all yajñas; īśvaram-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-vibhūtyā-with great opulence; upacita-aṅga-dakṣiṇaiḥ-with all prescribed paraphernalia and contributions of dakṣiṇā to the brāhmaṇas; tataiḥ-executed; vasiṣṭha-asita-gautama-ādibhiḥ-by such brāhmaṇas as Vasiṣṭha, Asita and Gautama; dhanvani-in the desert; abhisrotam-inundated by the water of the river; asau-Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; sarasvatīm-on the bank of the Sarasvatī.





In desert countries where there flowed the River Sarasvatī, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa performed great sacrifices like the aśvamedha-yajña and thus satisfied the master of all yajñas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such sacrifices were performed with great opulence and suitable paraphernalia and with contributions of dakṣiṇā to the brāhmaṇas, who were supervised by great personalities like Vasiṣṭha, Asita and Gautama, representing the king, the performer of the sacrifices.





When one performs ritualistic sacrifices as prescribed in the Vedas, one needs expert brāhmaṇas known as yājñika-brāhmaṇas. In Kali-yuga, however, there is a scarcity of such brāhmaṇas. Therefore in Kali-yuga the sacrifice recommended in śāstra is saṅkīrtana-yajña (yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]). Instead of spending money unnecessarily on performing yajñas impossible to perform in this age of Kali because of the scarcity of yājñika-brāhmaṇas, one who is intelligent performs saṅkīrtana-yajña. Without properly performed yajñas to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there will be scarcity of rain (yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]). Therefore the performance of yajña is essential. Without yajña there will be a scarcity of rain, and because of this scarcity, no food grains will be produced, and there will be famines. It is the duty of the king, therefore, to perform different types of yajñas, such as the aśvamedha-yajña, to maintain the production of food grains. Annād bhavanti bhūtāni. Without food grains, both men and animals will starve. Therefore yajña is necessary for the state to perform because by yajña the people in general will be fed sumptuously. The brāhmaṇas and yājñika priests should be sufficiently paid for their expert service. This payment is called dakṣiṇā. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, as the head of the state, performed all these yajñas through great personalities like Vasiṣṭha, Gautama and Asita. Personally, however, he was engaged in devotional service, as mentioned before (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ). The king or head of state must see that things go on well under proper guidance, and he must be an ideal devotee, as exemplified by Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. It is the duty of the king to see that food grains are produced even in desert countries, what to speak of elsewhere.





TEXT 23



yasya kratuṣu gīrvāṇaiḥ

sadasyā ṛtvijo janāḥ

tulya-rūpāś cānimiṣā

vyadṛśyanta suvāsasaḥ

SYNONYMS



yasya-of whom (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); kratuṣu-in sacrifices (performed by him); gīrvāṇaiḥ-with the demigods; sadasyāḥ-members for executing the sacrifice; ṛtvijaḥ-the priests; janāḥ-and other expert men; tulya-rūpāḥ-appearing exactly like; ca-and; animiṣāḥ-with unblinking eyes like those of the demigods; vyadṛśyanta-being seen; su-vāsasaḥ-well dressed with valuable garments.





In the sacrifice arranged by Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the members of the assembly and the priests [especially hotā, udgātā, brahmā and adhvaryu] were gorgeously dressed, and they all looked exactly like demigods. They eagerly saw to the proper performance of the yajña.





TEXT 24



svargo na prārthito yasya

manujair amara-priyaḥ

śṛṇvadbhir upagāyadbhir

uttamaśloka-ceṣṭitam

SYNONYMS



svargaḥ-life in the heavenly planets; na-not; prārthitaḥ-a subject for aspiration; yasya-of whom (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); manujaiḥ-by the citizens; amara-priyaḥ-very dear even to the demigods; śṛṇvadbhiḥ-who were accustomed to hear; upagāyadbhiḥ-and accustomed to chant; uttamaśloka-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ceṣṭitam-about the glorious activities.





The citizens of the state of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa were accustomed to chanting and hearing about the glorious activities of the Personality of Godhead. Thus they never aspired to be elevated to the heavenly planets, which are extremely dear even to the demigods.





A pure devotee who has been trained in the practice of chanting and hearing the holy name of the Lord and His fame, qualities, form, paraphernalia and so on is never interested in elevation to the heavenly planets, even though such places are extremely dear even to the demigods.



nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve

na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narakeṣv

api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ





"Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, never fear any condition of life. The heavenly planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same to a devotee." (Bhāg. 6.17.28) A devotee is always situated in the spiritual world. Therefore he does not desire anything. He is known as akāma, or desireless, because he has nothing to desire except to render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was a most exalted devotee of the Lord, he trained his subjects in such a way that the citizens in his state were not interested in anything material, including even the happiness of the heavenly planets.





TEXT 25



saṁvardhayanti yat kāmāḥ

svārājya-paribhāvitāḥ

durlabhā nāpi siddhānāṁ

mukundaṁ hṛdi paśyataḥ

SYNONYMS



saṁvardhayanti-increase happiness; yat-because; kāmāḥ-such aspirations; svā-rājya-situated in his own constitutional position of rendering service to the Lord; paribhāvitāḥ-saturated with such aspirations; durlabhāḥ-very rarely obtained; na-not; api-also; siddhānām-of the great mystics; mukundam-Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hṛdi-within the core of the heart; paśyataḥ-persons always accustomed to seeing Him.





Those who are saturated with the transcendental happiness of rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead are uninterested even in the achievements of great mystics, for such achievements do not enhance the transcendental bliss felt by a devotee who always thinks of Kṛṣṇa within the core of his heart.





A pure devotee is uninterested not only in elevation to the higher planetary systems but even in the perfections of mystic yoga. Real perfection is devotional service. The happiness derived from merging in the impersonal Brahman and the happiness derived from the eight perfections of mystic yoga (aṇimā, laghimā, prāpti and so on) do not give any pleasure to the devotee. As stated by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī:



kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tridaśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate

durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate

viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate

yat kāruṇya-kaṭākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ





(Caitanya-candrāmṛta 5)



When a devotee has achieved the position of rendering transcendental loving service to the Lord through the mercy of Lord Caitanya, he thinks the impersonal Brahman to be no better than hell, and he regards material happiness in the heavenly planets to be like a will-o'-the-wisp. As far as the perfection of mystic powers is concerned, a devotee compares it to a venomous snake with no teeth. A mystic yogī is especially concerned with controlling the senses, but because the senses of a devotee are engaged in the service of the Lord (hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]) there is no need for separate control of the senses. For those who are materially engaged, control of the senses is required, but a devotee's senses are all engaged in the service of the Lord, which means that they are already controlled. paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate (Bg. 2.59). A devotee's senses are not attracted by material enjoyment. And even though the material world is full of misery, the devotee considers this material world to be also spiritual because everything is engaged in the service of the Lord. The difference between the spiritual world and material world is the mentality of service. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. When there is no mentality of service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one's activities are material.



prāpañci-katayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate





(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.256)



That which is not engaged in the service of the Lord is material, and nothing thus engaged should be given up. In the construction of a high skyscraper and the construction of a temple, there may be the same enthusiasm, but the endeavors are different, for one is material and the other spiritual. Spiritual activities should not be confused with material activities and given up. Nothing connected with Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is material. A devotee who considers all this is always situated in spiritual activities, and therefore he is no longer attracted by material activities (paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate).





TEXT 26



sa itthaṁ bhakti-yogena

tapo-yuktena pārthivaḥ

sva-dharmeṇa hariṁ prīṇan

sarvān kāmān śanair jahau

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); ittham-in this way; bhakti-yogena-by performing transcendental loving service to the Lord; tapaḥ-yuktena-which is simultaneously the best process of austerity; pārthivaḥ-the King; sva-dharmeṇa-by his constitutional activities; harim-unto the Supreme Lord; prīṇan-satisfying; sarvān-all varieties of; kāmān-material desires; śanaiḥ-gradually; jahau-gave up.





The king of this planet, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, thus performed devotional service to the Lord and in this endeavor practiced severe austerity. Always satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his constitutional activities, he gradually gave up all material desires.





Severe austerities in the practice of devotional service are of many varieties. For example, in worshiping the Deity in the temple there are certainly laborious activities. Śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau . One must decorate the Deity, cleanse the temple, bring water from the Ganges and Yamunā, continue the routine work, perform ārati many times, prepare first-class food for the Deity, prepare dresses and so on. In this way, one must constantly be engaged in various activities, and the hard labor involved is certainly an austerity. Similarly, the hard labor involved in preaching, preparing literature, preaching to atheistic men and distributing literature door to door is of course an austerity (tapo-yuktena). Tapo divyaṁ putrakā. Such austerity is necessary. Yena sattvaṁ śuddhyet. By such austerity in devotional service, one is purified of material existence (kāmān śanair jahau). Indeed, such austerity leads one to the constitutional position of devotional service. In this way one can give up material desires, and as soon as one is freed from material desires, he is free from the repetition of birth and death, old age and disease.





TEXT 27



gṛheṣu dāreṣu suteṣu bandhuṣu

dvipottama-syandana-vāji-vastuṣu

akṣayya-ratnābharaṇāmbarādiṣv

ananta-kośeṣv akarod asan-matim

SYNONYMS



gṛheṣu-in the homes; dāreṣu-in wives; suteṣu-in children; bandhuṣu-in friends and relatives; dvipa-uttama-in the best of powerful elephants; syandana-in nice chariots; vāji-in first-class horses; vastuṣu-in all such things; akṣayya-whose value never decreases; ratna-in jewels; ābharaṇa-in ornaments; ambara-ādiṣu-in such dresses and ornaments; ananta-kośeṣu-in an inexhaustible treasury; akarot-accepted; asat-matim-no attachment.





Mahārāja Ambarīṣa gave up all attachment to household affairs, wives, children, friends and relatives, to the best of powerful elephants, to beautiful chariots, carts, horses and inexhaustible jewels, and to ornaments, garments and an inexhaustible treasury. He gave up attachment to all of them, regarding them as temporary and material.





Anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. Material possessions can be accepted as far as they can be used in devotional service. Ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanam. In preaching, many things considered material are needed. A devotee should not have any attachment for such material involvements as house, wife, children, friends and cars. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, for example, had all such things, but he was not attached to them. This is the effect of bhakti-yoga. Bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir anyatra ca (Bhāg. 11.2.42). One who is advanced in devotional service has no attachment for material things for sense enjoyment, but for preaching, to spread the glories of the Lord, he accepts such things without attachment. Anāsaktasya viṣayān yathārham upayuñjataḥ. Everything can be used to the extent that it can be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service.





TEXT 28



tasmā adād dhariś cakraṁ

pratyanīka-bhayāvaham

ekānta-bhakti-bhāvena

prīto bhaktābhirakṣaṇam

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto him (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); adāt-gave; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; cakram-His disc; pratyanīka-bhaya-āvaham-the Lord's disc, which was extremely fearful to the enemies of the Lord and His devotees; ekānta-bhakti-bhāvena-because of his performing unalloyed devotional service; prītaḥ-the Lord being so pleased; bhakta-abhirakṣaṇam-for the protection of His devotees.





Being very pleased by the unalloyed devotion of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gave the King His disc, which is fearful to enemies and which always protects the devotee from enemies and adversities.





A devotee, being always engaged in the service of the Lord, may not be expert in self-defense, but because a devotee fully depends on the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is always sure of protection by the Lord. Prahlāda Mahārāja said:



naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaraṇyās

tvad-vīrya-gāyana-mahāmṛta-magna-cittaḥ





(Bhāg. 7.9.43)



A devotee is always merged in the ocean of the transcendental bliss of rendering service to the Lord. Therefore he is not at all afraid of any adverse situation in the material world. The Lord also promises, kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: "O Arjuna, you may declare to the world that the devotees of the Lord are never vanquished." (Bg. 9.31) For the protection of the devotees, Kṛṣṇa's disc, the Sudarśana cakra, is always ready. This disc is extremely fearful to the nondevotees (pratyanīka-bhayāvaham). Therefore although Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was fully engaged in devotional service, his kingdom was free of all fear of adversity.





TEXT 29



ārirādhayiṣuḥ kṛṣṇaṁ

mahiṣyā tulya-śīlayā

yuktaḥ sāṁvatsaraṁ vīro

dadhāra dvādaśī-vratam

SYNONYMS



ārirādhayiṣuḥ-aspiring to worship; kṛṣṇam-the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa; mahiṣyā-with his queen; tulya-śīlayā-who was equally as qualified as Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; yuktaḥ-together; sāṁvatsaram-for one year; vīraḥ-the King; dadhāra-accepted; dvādaśī-vratam-the vow for observing Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī.





To worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, along with his queen, who was equally qualified, observed the vow of Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī for one year.





To observe Ekādaśī-vrata and Dvādaśī-vrata means to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those interested in advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness must observe Ekādaśī-vrata regularly. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa's queen was equally as qualified as the King. Therefore it was possible for Mahārāja Ambarīṣa to engage his life in household affairs. In this regard, the word tulya-śīlayā is very significant. Unless a wife is equally as qualified as her husband, household affairs are very difficult to continue. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita advises that a person in such a situation should immediately give up household life and become a vānaprastha or sannyāsī:



mātā yasya gṛhe nāsti

bhāryā cāpriya-vādinī

araṇyaṁ tena gantavyaṁ

yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham





A person who has no mother at home and whose wife is not agreeable with him should immediately go away to the forest. Because human life is meant for spiritual advancement only, one's wife must be helpful in this endeavor. Otherwise there is no need of household life.





TEXT 30



vratānte kārtike māsi

tri-rātraṁ samupoṣitaḥ

snātaḥ kadācit kālindyāṁ

hariṁ madhuvane 'rcayat

SYNONYMS



vrata-ante-at the end of observing the vow; kārtike-in the month of Kārtika (October–November); māsi-in that month; tri-rātram-for three nights; samupoṣitaḥ-after completely observing the fast; snātaḥ-after bathing; kadācit-once upon a time; kālindyām-on the bank of the Yamunā; harim-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; madhuvane-in that part of the Vṛndāvana area known as Madhuvana; arcayat-worshiped the Lord.





In the month of Kārtika, after observing that vow for one year, after observing a fast for three nights and after bathing in the Yamunā, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in Madhuvana.





TEXTS 31–32



mahābhiṣeka-vidhinā

sarvopaskara-sampadā

abhiṣicyāmbarākalpair

gandha-mālyārhaṇādibhiḥ

tad-gatāntara-bhāvena



pūjayām āsa keśavam

brāhmaṇāṁś ca mahā-bhāgān

siddhārthān api bhaktitaḥ

SYNONYMS



mahā-abhiṣeka-vidhinā-by the regulative principles for bathing the Deity; sarva-upaskara-sampadā-by all the paraphernalia for worshiping the Deity; abhiṣicya-after bathing; ambara-ākalpaiḥ-with nice clothing and ornaments; gandha-mālya-with fragrant flower garlands; arhaṇa-ādibhiḥ-and with other paraphernalia to worship the Deity; tat-gata-antara-bhāvena-his mind saturated with devotional service; pūjayām āsa-he worshiped; keśavam-unto Kṛṣṇa; brāhmaṇān ca-and the brāhmaṇas; mahā-bhāgān-who were greatly fortunate; siddha-arthān-self-satisfied, without waiting for any worship; api-even; bhaktitaḥ-with great devotion.





Following the regulative principles of mahābhiṣeka, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa performed the bathing ceremony for the Deity of Lord Kṛṣṇa with all paraphernalia, and then he dressed the Deity with fine clothing, ornaments, fragrant flower garlands and other paraphernalia for worship of the Lord. With attention and devotion, he worshiped Kṛṣṇa and all the greatly fortunate brāhmaṇas who were free from material desires.





TEXTS 33–35



gavāṁ rukma-viṣāṇīnāṁ

rūpyāṅghrīṇāṁ suvāsasām

payaḥśīla-vayo-rūpa-

vatsopaskara-sampadām

prāhiṇot sādhu-viprebhyo



gṛheṣu nyarbudāni ṣaṭ

bhojayitvā dvijān agre

svādv annaṁ guṇavattamam

labdha-kāmair anujñātaḥ



pāraṇāyopacakrame

tasya tarhy atithiḥ sākṣād

durvāsā bhagavān abhūt

SYNONYMS



gavām-cows; rukma-viṣāṇīnām-whose horns were covered with gold plate; rūpya-aṅghrīṇām-whose hooves were covered with silver plate; su-vāsasām-very nicely decorated with garments; payaḥ-śīla-with full milk bags; vayaḥ-young; rūpa-beautiful; vatsa-upaskara-sampadām-with nice calves; prāhiṇot-gave in charity; sādhu-viprebhyaḥ-unto the brāhmaṇas and saintly persons; gṛheṣu-(who arrived) in his house; nyarbudāni-ten crores (one hundred million); ṣaṭ-six times; bhojayitvā-feeding them; dvijān agre-first the brāhmaṇas; svādu annam-very tasteful eatables; guṇavat-tamam-highly delicious; labdha-kāmaiḥ-by those brāhmaṇas, being fully satisfied; anujñātaḥ-by their permission; pāraṇāya-for completing the Dvādaśī; upacakrame-was just about to observe the final ceremony; tasya-of him (Ambarīṣa); tarhi-immediately; atithiḥ-unwanted or uncalled-for guest; sākṣāt-directly; durvāsāḥ-the great mystic Durvāsā; bhagavān-very powerful; abhūt-appeared on the scene as a guest.





Thereafter, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa satisfied all the guests who arrived at his house, especially the brāhmaṇas. He gave in charity sixty crores of cows whose horns were covered with gold plate and whose hooves were covered with silver plate. All the cows were well decorated with garments and had full milk bags. They were mild-natured, young and beautiful and were accompanied by their calves. After giving these cows, the King first sumptuously fed all the brāhmaṇas, and when they were fully satisfied, he was about to observe the end of Ekādaśī, with their permission, by breaking the fast. Exactly at that time, however, Durvāsā Muni, the great and powerful mystic, appeared on the scene as an uninvited guest.





TEXT 36



tam ānarcātithiṁ bhūpaḥ

pratyutthānāsanārhaṇaiḥ

yayāce 'bhyavahārāya

pāda-mūlam upāgataḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-unto him (Durvāsā); ānarca-worshiped; atithim-although an uninvited guest; bhūpaḥ-the King (Ambarīṣa); pratyutthāna-by standing up; āsana-by offering a seat; arhaṇaiḥ-and by paraphernalia for worship; yayāce-requested; abhyavahārāya-for eating; pāda-mūlam-at the root of his feet; upāgataḥ-fell down.





After standing up to receive Durvāsā Muni, King Ambarīṣa offered him a seat and paraphernalia of worship. Then, sitting at his feet, the King requested the great sage to eat.





TEXT 37



pratinandya sa tāṁ yācñāṁ

kartum āvaśyakaṁ gataḥ

nimamajja bṛhad dhyāyan

kālindī-salile śubhe

SYNONYMS



pratinandya-gladly accepting; saḥ-Durvāsā Muni; tām-that; yācñām-request; kartum-to perform; āvaśyakam-the necessary ritualistic ceremonies; gataḥ-went; nimamajja-dipped his body in the water; bṛhat-the Supreme Brahman; dhyāyan-meditating on; kālindī-of the Yamunā; salile-in the water; śubhe-very auspicious.





Durvāsā Muni gladly accepted the request of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, but to perform the regulative ritualistic ceremonies he went to the River Yamunā. There he dipped into the water of the auspicious Yamunā and meditated upon the impersonal Brahman.





TEXT 38



muhūrtārdhāvaśiṣṭāyāṁ

dvādaśyāṁ pāraṇaṁ prati

cintayām āsa dharma-jño

dvijais tad-dharma-saṅkaṭe

SYNONYMS



muhūrta-ardha-avaśiṣṭāyām-was remaining only for half a moment; dvādaśyām-when the Dvādaśī day; pāraṇam-the breaking of the fast; prati-to observe; cintayām āsa-began to think about; dharma-jñaḥ-one who knows the principles of religion; dvijaiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; tat-dharma-concerning that religious principle; saṅkaṭe-in such a dangerous condition.





In the meantime, only a muhūrta of the Dvādaśī day was left on which to break the fast. Consequently, it was imperative that the fast be broken immediately. In this dangerous situation, the King consulted learned brāhmaṇas.





TEXTS 39–40



brāhmaṇātikrame doṣo

dvādaśyāṁ yad apāraṇe

yat kṛtvā sādhu me bhūyād

adharmo vā na māṁ spṛśet

ambhasā kevalenātha



kariṣye vrata-pāraṇam

āhur ab-bhakṣaṇaṁ viprā

hy aśitaṁ nāśitaṁ ca tat

SYNONYMS



brāhmaṇa-atikrame-in surpassing the rules of respect to the brāhmaṇas; doṣaḥ-there is a fault; dvādaśyām-on the Dvādaśī day; yat-because; apāraṇe-in not breaking the fast in due time; yat kṛtvā-after doing which action; sādhu-what is auspicious; me-unto me; bhūyāt-may so become; adharmaḥ-what is irreligious; vā-either; na-not; mām-unto me; spṛśet-may touch; ambhasā-by water; kevalena-only; atha-therefore; kariṣye-I shall execute; vrata-pāraṇam-the completion of the vow; āhuḥ-said; ap-bhakṣaṇam-drinking water; viprāḥ-O brāhmaṇas; hi-indeed; aśitam-eating; na aśitam ca-as well as not eating; tat-such an action.





The King said: "To transgress the laws of respectful behavior toward the brāhmaṇas is certainly a great offense. On the other hand, if one does not observe the breaking of the fast within the time of Dvādaśī, there is a flaw in one's observance of the vow. Therefore, O brāhmaṇas, if you think that it will be auspicious and not irreligious, I shall break the fast by drinking water." In this way, after consulting with the brāhmaṇas, the King reached this decision, for according to brahminical opinion, drinking water may be accepted as eating and also as not eating.





When Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, in his dilemma, consulted the brāhmaṇas about whether he should break the fast or wait for Durvāsā Muni, apparently they could not give a definite answer about what to do. A Vaiṣṇava, however, is the most intelligent personality. Therefore Mahārāja Ambarīṣa himself decided, in the presence of the brāhmaṇas, that he would drink a little water, for this would confirm that the fast was broken but would not transgress the laws for receiving a brāhmaṇa. In the Vedas it is said, apo 'śnāti tan naivāśitaṁ naivānaśitam. This Vedic injunction declares that the drinking of water may be accepted as eating or as not eating. Sometimes in our practical experience we see that some political leader adhering to satyāgraha will not eat but will drink water. Considering that drinking water would not be eating, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa decided to act in this way.





TEXT 41



ity apaḥ prāśya rājarṣiś

cintayan manasācyutam

pratyacaṣṭa kuru-śreṣṭha

dvijāgamanam eva saḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; apaḥ-water; prāśya-after drinking; rājarṣiḥ-the great King Ambarīṣa; cintayan-meditating upon; manasā-by the mind; acyutam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyacaṣṭa-began to wait; kuru-śreṣṭha-O best of the Kuru kings; dvija-āgamanam-the return of Durvāsā Muni, the great mystic brāhmaṇa; eva-indeed; saḥ-the King.





O best of the Kuru dynasty, after he drank some water, King Ambarīṣa, meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead within his heart, waited for the return of the great mystic Durvāsā Muni.





TEXT 42



durvāsā yamunā-kūlāt

kṛtāvaśyaka āgataḥ

rājñābhinanditas tasya

bubudhe ceṣṭitaṁ dhiyā

SYNONYMS



durvāsāḥ-the great sage; yamunā-kūlāt-from the bank of the River Yamunā; kṛta-had been performed; āvaśyakaḥ-he by whom the necessary ritualistic ceremonies; āgataḥ-returned; rājñā-by the King; abhinanditaḥ-being well received; tasya-his; bubudhe-could understand; ceṣṭitam-performance; dhiyā-by intelligence.





After executing the ritualistic ceremonies to be performed at noon, Durvāsā returned from the bank of the Yamunā. The King received him well, offering all respects, but Durvāsā Muni, by his mystic power, could understand that King Ambarīṣa had drunk water without his permission.





TEXT 43



manyunā pracalad-gātro

bhru-kuṭī-kuṭilānanaḥ

bubhukṣitaś ca sutarāṁ

kṛtāñjalim abhāṣata

SYNONYMS



manyunā-agitated by great anger; pracalat-gātraḥ-his body trembling; bhru-kuṭī-by the eyebrows; kuṭila-curved; ānanaḥ-face; bubhukṣitaḥ ca-and hungry at the same time; sutarām-very much; kṛta-añjalim-to Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, who stood there with folded hands; abhāṣata-he addressed.





Still hungry, Durvāsā Muni, his body trembling, his face curved and his eyebrows crooked in a frown, angrily spoke as follows to King Ambarīṣa, who stood before him with folded hands.





TEXT 44



aho asya nṛ-śaṁsasya

śriyonmattasya paśyata

dharma-vyatikramaṁ viṣṇor

abhaktasyeśa-māninaḥ

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; asya-of this man; nṛ-śaṁsasya-who is so cruel; śriyā unmattasya-puffed up because of great opulence; paśyata-everyone just see; dharma-vyatikramam-the transgression of the regulative principles of religion; viṣṇoḥ abhaktasya-who is not a devotee of Lord Viṣṇu; īśa-māninaḥ-considering himself the Supreme Lord, independent of everything.





Alas, just see the behavior of this cruel man! He is not a devotee of Lord Viṣṇu. Being proud of his material opulence and his position, he considers himself God. Just see how he has transgressed the laws of religion.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has diverted the entire meaning of this verse as spoken by Durvāsā Muni. Durvāsā Muni used the word nṛ-śaṁsasya to indicate that the King was cruel, but Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura interprets it to mean that the King's character was glorified by all the local people. He says that the word nṛ means "by all the local people" and that śaṁsasya means "of he (Ambarīṣa) whose character was glorified." Similarly, one who is very rich becomes mad because of his wealth and is therefore called śriyā-unmattasya, but Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura interprets these words to mean that although Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was such an opulent king, he was not mad after money, for he had already surpassed the madness of material opulence. Similarly, the word īśa-māninaḥ is interpreted to mean that he was so respectful to the Supreme Personality of Godhead that he did not transgress the laws for observing Ekādaśī-pāraṇa, despite the thinking of Durvāsā Muni, for he only took water. In this way, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has supported Ambarīṣa Mahārāja and all his activities.





TEXT 45



yo mām atithim āyātam

ātithyena nimantrya ca

adattvā bhuktavāṁs tasya

sadyas te darśaye phalam

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-this man who; mām-unto me; atithim-who, being an uninvited guest; āyātam-had come here; ātithyena-with the reception of a guest; nimantrya-after inviting me; ca-also; adattvā-without giving (food); bhuktavān-has himself eaten; tasya-of him; sadyaḥ-immediately; te-of you; darśaye-I shall show; phalam-the result.





Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, you have invited me to eat as a guest, but instead of feeding me, you yourself have eaten first. Because of your misbehavior, I shall show you something to punish you.





A devotee cannot be defeated by a so-called mystic yogī. This will be proved by the failure of Durvāsā Muni's endeavor to chastise Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇāḥ (Bhāg. 5.18.12). One who is not a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord has no good qualifications, however great a mystic, philosopher or fruitive worker he may be. Only a devotee emerges victorious in all circumstances, as will be shown in this incident involving the rivalry between Durvāsā and Mahārāja Ambarīṣa.





TEXT 46



evaṁ bruvāṇa utkṛtya

jaṭāṁ roṣa-pradīpitaḥ

tayā sa nirmame tasmai

kṛtyāṁ kālānalopamām

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; bruvāṇaḥ-speaking (Durvāsā Muni); utkṛtya-uprooting; jaṭām-a bunch of hair; roṣa-pradīpitaḥ-being reddish because he was very angry; tayā-by that bunch of hair from his head; saḥ-Durvāsā Muni; nirmame-created; tasmai-to punish Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; kṛtyām-a demon; kāla-anala-upamām-appearing just like the blazing fire of devastation.





As Durvāsā Muni said this, his face became red with anger. Uprooting a bunch of hair from his head, he created a demon resembling the blazing fire of devastation to punish Mahārāja Ambarīṣa.





TEXT 47



tām āpatantīṁ jvalatīm

asi-hastāṁ padā bhuvam

vepayantīṁ samudvīkṣya

na cacāla padān nṛpaḥ

SYNONYMS



tām-that (demon); āpatantīm-coming forward to attack him; jvalatīm-blazing like fire; asi-hastām-with a trident in his hand; padā-with his footstep; bhuvam-the surface of the earth; vepayantīm-causing to tremble; samudvīkṣya-seeing him perfectly; na-not; cacāla-moved; padāt-from his place; nṛpaḥ-the King.





Taking a trident in his hand and making the surface of the earth tremble with his footsteps, that blazing creature came before Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. But the King, upon seeing him, was not at all disturbed and did not move even slightly from his position.





Nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati (Bhāg. 6.17.28). A pure devotee of Nārāyaṇa is never afraid of any material danger. There are many examples of devotees such as Prahlāda Mahārāja, who was tortured by his father but was not at all afraid, although he was only a five-year-old boy. Therefore, following the examples of Ambarīṣa Mahārāja and Prahlāda Mahārāja, a devotee should learn how to tolerate all such awkward positions in this world. Devotees are often tortured by nondevotees, yet the pure devotee, depending fully on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is never disturbed by such inimical activities.





TEXT 48



prāg diṣṭaṁ bhṛtya-rakṣāyāṁ

puruṣeṇa mahātmanā

dadāha kṛtyāṁ tāṁ cakraṁ

kruddhāhim iva pāvakaḥ

SYNONYMS



prāk diṣṭam-as previously arranged; bhṛtya-rakṣāyām-for the protection of his servants; puruṣeṇa-by the Supreme Person; mahā-ātmanā-by the Supersoul; dadāha-burnt to ashes; kṛtyām-that created demon; tām-him; cakram-the disc; kruddha-angry; ahim-a serpent; iva-like; pāvakaḥ-fire.





As fire in the forest immediately burns to ashes an angry snake, so, by the previous order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His disc, the Sudarśana cakra, immediately burnt to ashes the created demon to protect the Lord's devotee.





As a pure devotee, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, although in such danger, did not move an inch from his position, nor did he request the Supreme Personality of Godhead to give him protection. He was fixed in understanding, and it was certain that he was simply thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the core of his heart. A devotee is never fearful of his death, for he meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead always, not for any material profit, but as his duty. The Lord, however, knows how to protect His devotee. As indicated by the words prāg diṣṭam, the Lord knew everything. Therefore, before anything happened, He had already arranged for His cakra to protect Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. This protection is offered to a devotee even from the very beginning of his devotional service. Kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati (Bg. 9.31). If one simply begins devotional service, he is immediately protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66): ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi. Protection begins immediately. The Lord is so kind and merciful that He gives the devotee proper guidance and all protection, and thus the devotee very peacefully makes solid progress in Kṛṣṇa consciousness without outward disturbances. A serpent may be very angry and ready to bite, but the furious snake is helpless when faced by a blazing fire in the forest. Although an enemy of a devotee may be very strong, he is compared to an angry serpent before the fire of devotional service.





TEXT 49



tad-abhidravad udvīkṣya

sva-prayāsaṁ ca niṣphalam

durvāsā dudruve bhīto

dikṣu prāṇa-parīpsayā

SYNONYMS



tat-of that disc; abhidravat-moving toward him; udvīkṣya-after seeing; sva-prayāsam-his own attempt; ca-and; niṣphalam-having failed; durvāsāḥ-Durvāsā Muni; dudruve-began to run; bhītaḥ-full of fear; dikṣu-in every direction; prāṇa-parīpsayā-with a desire to save his life.





Upon seeing that his own attempt had failed and that the Sudarśana cakra was moving toward him, Durvāsā Muni became very frightened and began to run in all directions to save his life.





TEXT 50



tam anvadhāvad bhagavad-rathāṅgaṁ

dāvāgnir uddhūta-śikho yathāhim

tathānuṣaktaṁ munir īkṣamāṇo

guhāṁ vivikṣuḥ prasasāra meroḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-unto Durvāsā; anvadhāvat-began to follow; bhagavat-ratha-aṅgam-the disc appearing from the wheel of the Lord's chariot; dāva-agniḥ-like a forest fire; uddhūta-blazing high; śikhaḥ-having flames; yathā ahim-as it follows a snake; tathā-in the same way; anuṣaktam-as if touching Durvāsā Muni's back; muniḥ-the sage; īkṣamāṇaḥ-seeing like that; guhām-a cave; vivikṣuḥ-wanted to enter; prasasāra-began to move quickly; meroḥ-of Meru Mountain.





As the blazing flames of a forest fire pursue a snake, the disc of the Supreme Personality of Godhead began following Durvāsā Muni. Durvāsā Muni saw that the disc was almost touching his back, and thus he ran very swiftly, desiring to enter a cave of Sumeru Mountain.





TEXT 51



diśo nabhaḥ kṣmāṁ vivarān samudrān

lokān sapālāṁs tridivaṁ gataḥ saḥ

yato yato dhāvati tatra tatra

sudarśanaṁ duṣprasahaṁ dadarśa

SYNONYMS



diśaḥ-all directions; nabhaḥ-in the sky; kṣmām-on the surface of the earth; vivarān-within the holes; samudrān-within the seas; lokān-all places; sa-pālān-as well as their rulers; tridivam-the heavenly planets; gataḥ-gone; saḥ-Durvāsā Muni; yataḥ yataḥ-wheresoever; dhāvati-he went; tatra tatra-there, everywhere; sudarśanam-the disc of the Lord; duṣprasaham-extremely fearful; dadarśa-Durvāsā Muni saw.





Just to protect himself, Durvāsā Muni fled everywhere, in all directions-in the sky, on the surface of the earth, in caves, in the ocean, on different planets of the rulers of the three worlds, and even on the heavenly planets-but wherever he went he immediately saw following him the unbearable fire of the Sudarśana cakra.





TEXT 52



alabdha-nāthaḥ sa sadā kutaścit

santrasta-citto 'raṇam eṣamāṇaḥ

devaṁ viriñcaṁ samagād vidhātas

trāhy ātma-yone 'jita-tejaso mām

SYNONYMS



alabdha-nāthaḥ-without getting the shelter of a protector; saḥ-Durvāsā Muni; sadā-always; kutaścit-somewhere; santrasta-cittaḥ-with a fearful heart; araṇam-a person who can give shelter; eṣamāṇaḥ-seeking; devam-at last to the chief demigod; viriñcam-Lord Brahmā; samagāt-approached; vidhātaḥ-O my lord; trāhi-kindly protect; ātma-yone-O Lord Brahmā; ajita-tejasaḥ-from the fire released by Ajita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mām-unto me.





With a fearful heart, Durvāsā Muni went here and there seeking shelter, but when he could find no shelter, he finally approached Lord Brahmā and said, "O my lord, O Lord Brahmā, kindly protect me from the blazing Sudarśana cakra sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead."





TEXTS 53–54



śrī-brahmovāca

sthānaṁ madīyaṁ saha-viśvam etat

krīḍāvasāne dvi-parārdha-saṁjñe

bhrū-bhaṅga-mātreṇa hi sandidhakṣoḥ

kālātmano yasya tirobhaviṣyati

ahaṁ bhavo dakṣa-bhṛgu-pradhānāḥ



prajeśa-bhūteśa-sureśa-mukhyāḥ

sarve vayaṁ yan-niyamaṁ prapannā

mūrdhnyārpitaṁ loka-hitaṁ vahāmaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-brahmā uvāca-Lord Brahmā said; sthānam-the place where I am; madīyam-my residence, Brahmaloka; saha-with; viśvam-the whole universe; etat-this; krīḍā-avasāne-at the end of the period for the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dvi-parārdha-saṁjñe-the time known as the end of a dvi-parārdha; bhrū-bhaṅga-mātreṇa-simply by the flicking of the eyebrows; hi-indeed; sandidhakṣoḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, when He desires to burn the whole universe; kāla-ātmanaḥ-of the form of destruction; yasya-of whom; tirobhaviṣyati-will be vanquished; aham-I; bhavaḥ-Lord Śiva; dakṣa-Prajāpati Dakṣa; bhṛgu-the great saint Bhṛgu; pradhānāḥ-and others headed by them; prajā-īśa-the controllers of the prajās; bhūta-īśa-the controllers of the living entities; sura-īśa-the controllers of the demigods; mukhyāḥ-headed by them; sarve-all of them; vayam-we also; yat-niyamam-whose regulative principle; prapannāḥ-are surrendered; mūrdhnyā arpitam-bowing our heads; loka-hitam-for the benefit of all living entities; vahāmaḥ-carry out the orders ruling over the living entities.





Lord Brahmā said: At the end of the dvi-parārdha, when the pastimes of the Lord come to an end, Lord Viṣṇu, by a flick of His eyebrows, vanquishes the entire universe, including our places of residence. Such personalities as me and Lord Śiva, as well as Dakṣa, Bhṛgu and similar great saints of which they are the head, and also the rulers of the living entities, the rulers of human society and the rulers of the demigods-all of us surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, bowing our heads, to carry out His orders for the benefit of all living entities.





In Bhagavad-gītā (10.34) it is said, mṛtyuḥ sama-haraś cāham: when the Supreme Personality of Godhead approaches as death, or the supreme controller of time, He takes everything away. In other words, all opulence, prestige and everything we possess is given by the Supreme Lord for some purpose. It is the duty of the surrendered soul to execute the orders of the Supreme. No one can disregard Him. Under the circumstances, Lord Brahmā refused to give shelter to Durvāsā Muni from the powerful Sudarśana cakra sent by the Lord.





TEXT 55



pratyākhyāto viriñcena

viṣṇu-cakropatāpitaḥ

durvāsāḥ śaraṇaṁ yātaḥ

śarvaṁ kailāsa-vāsinam

SYNONYMS



pratyākhyātaḥ-being refused; viriñcena-by Lord Brahmā; viṣṇu-cakra-upatāpitaḥ-being scorched by the blazing fire of Lord Viṣṇu's disc; durvāsāḥ-the great mystic named Durvāsā; śaraṇam-f or shelter; yātaḥ-went; śarvam-unto Lord Śiva; kailāsa-vāsinam-the resident of the place known as Kailāsa.





When Durvāsā, who was greatly afflicted by the blazing fire of the Sudarśana cakra, was thus refused by Lord Brahmā, he tried to take shelter of Lord Śiva, who always resides on his planet, known as Kailāsa.





TEXT 56



śrī-śaṅkara uvāca

vayaṁ na tāta prabhavāma bhūmni

yasmin pare 'nye 'py aja-jīva-kośāḥ

bhavanti kāle na bhavanti hīdṛśāḥ

sahasraśo yatra vayaṁ bhramāmaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śaṅkaraḥ uvāca-Lord Śiva said; vayam-we; na-not; tāta-O my dear son; prabhavāmaḥ-sufficiently able; bhūmni-unto the great Supreme Personality of Godhead; yasmin-in whom; pare-in the Transcendence; anye-others; api-even; aja-Lord Brahmā; jīva-living entities; kośāḥ-the universes; bhavanti-can become; kāle-in due course of time; na-not; bhavanti-can become; hi-indeed; īdṛśāḥ-like this; sahasraśaḥ-many thousands and millions; yatra-wherein; vayam-all of us; bhramāmaḥ-are rotating.





Lord Śiva said: My dear son, I, Lord Brahmā and the other demigods, who rotate within this universe under the misconception of our greatness, cannot exhibit any power to compete with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for innumerable universes and their inhabitants come into existence and are annihilated by the simple direction of the Lord.





There are innumerable universes in the material world, and there are innumerable Lord Brahmās, Lord Śivas and other demigods. All of them rotate within this material world under the supreme direction of the Personality of Godhead. Therefore no one is able to compete with the strength of the Lord. Lord Śiva also refused to protect Durvāsā, for Lord Śiva also was under the rays of the Sudarśana cakra sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXTS 57–59



ahaṁ sanat-kumāraś ca

nārado bhagavān ajaḥ

kapilo 'pāntaratamo

devalo dharma āsuriḥ

marīci-pramukhāś cānye



siddheśāḥ pāra-darśanāḥ

vidāma na vayaṁ sarve

yan-māyāṁ māyayāvṛtāḥ

tasya viśveśvarasyedaṁ



śastraṁ durviṣahaṁ hi naḥ

tam evaṁ śaraṇaṁ yāhi

haris te śaṁ vidhāsyati

SYNONYMS



aham-I; sanat-kumāraḥ ca-and the four Kumāras (Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanat-kumāra and Sananda); nāradaḥ-the heavenly sage Nārada; bhagavān ajaḥ-the supreme creature of the universe, Lord Brahmā; kapilaḥ-the son of Devahūti; apāntaratamaḥ-Vyāsadeva; devalaḥ-the great sage Devala; dharmaḥ-Yamarāja; āsuriḥ-the great saint Āsuri; marīci-the great saint Marīci; pramukhāḥ-headed by; ca-also; anye-others; siddha-īśāḥ-all of them perfect in their knowledge; pāra-darśanāḥ-they have seen the end of all knowledge; vidāmaḥ-can understand; na-not; vayam-all of us; sarve-totally; yat-māyām-the illusory energy of whom; māyayā-by that illusory energy; āvṛtāḥ-being covered; tasya-His; viśva-īśvarasya-of the Lord of the universe; idam-this; śastram-weapon (the disc); durviṣaham-even intolerable; hi-indeed; naḥ-of us; tam-to Him; evam-therefore; śaraṇam yāhi-go to take shelter; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; te-for you; śam-auspiciousness; vidhāsyati-certainly will perform.





Past, present and future are known to me [Lord Śiva], Sanat-kumāra, Nārada, the most revered Lord Brahmā, Kapila [the son of Devahūti], Apāntaratama [Lord Vyāsadeva], Devala, Yamarāja, Āsuri, Marīci and many saintly persons headed by him, as well as many others who have achieved perfection. Nonetheless, because we are covered by the illusory energy of the Lord, we cannot understand how expansive that illusory energy is. You should simply approach that Supreme Personality of Godhead to get relief, for this Sudarśana cakra is intolerable even to us. Go to Lord Viṣṇu. He will certainly be kind enough to bestow all good fortune upon you.





TEXT 60



tato nirāśo durvāsāḥ

padaṁ bhagavato yayau

vaikuṇṭhākhyaṁ yad adhyāste

śrīnivāsaḥ śriyā saha

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; nirāśaḥ-disappointed; durvāsāḥ-the great mystic Durvāsā; padam-to the place; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; yayau-went; vaikuṇṭha-ākhyam-the place known as Vaikuṇṭha; yat-wherein; adhyāste-lives perpetually; śrīnivāsaḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; śriyā-with the goddess of fortune; saha-with.





Thereafter, being disappointed even in taking shelter of Lord Śiva, Durvāsā Muni went to Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, where the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, resides with His consort, the goddess of fortune.





TEXT 61



sandahyamāno 'jita-śastra-vahninā

tat-pāda-mūle patitaḥ savepathuḥ

āhācyutānanta sad-īpsita prabho

kṛtāgasaṁ māvahi viśva-bhāvana

SYNONYMS



sandahyamānaḥ-being burned by the heat; ajita-śastra-vahninā-by the blazing fire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead's weapon; tat-pāda-mūle-at His lotus feet; patitaḥ-falling down; sa-vepathuḥ-with trembling of the body; āha-said; acyuta-O my Lord, O infallible one; ananta-O You of unlimited prowess; sat-īpsita-O Lord desired by saintly persons; prabho-O Supreme; kṛta-āgasam-the greatest offender; mā-to me; avahi-give protection; viśva-bhāvana-O well-wisher of the whole universe.





Durvāsā Muni, the great mystic, scorched by the heat of the Sudarśana cakra, fell at the lotus feet of Nārāyaṇa. His body trembling, he spoke as follows: O infallible, unlimited Lord, protector of the entire universe, You are the only desirable objective for all devotees. I am a great offender, my Lord. Please give me protection.





TEXT 62



ajānatā te paramānubhāvaṁ

kṛtaṁ mayāghaṁ bhavataḥ priyāṇām

vidhehi tasyāpacitiṁ vidhātar

mucyeta yan-nāmny udite nārako 'pi

SYNONYMS



ajānatā-without knowledge; te-of Your Lordship; parama-anubhāvam-the inconceivable prowess; kṛtam-has been committed; mayā-by me; agham-a great offense; bhavataḥ-of Your Lordship; priyāṇām-at the feet of the devotees; vidhehi-now kindly do the needful; tasya-of such an offense; apacitim-counteraction; vidhātaḥ-O supreme controller; mucyeta-can be delivered; yat-of whose; nāmni-when the name; udite-is awakened; nārakaḥ api-even a person fit for going to hell.





O my Lord, O supreme controller, without knowledge of Your unlimited prowess I have offended Your most dear devotee. Very kindly save me from the reaction of this offense. You can do everything, for even if a person is fit for going to hell, You can deliver him simply by awakening within his heart the holy name of Your Lordship.





TEXT 63



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīno

hy asvatantra iva dvija

sādhubhir grasta-hṛdayo

bhaktair bhakta-jana-priyaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aham-I; bhakta-parādhīnaḥ-am dependent on the will of My devotees; hi-indeed; asvatantraḥ-am not independent; iva-exactly like that; dvija-O brāhmaṇa; sādhubhiḥ-by pure devotees, completely free from all material desires; grasta-hṛdayaḥ-My heart is controlled; bhaktaiḥ-because they are devotees; bhakta-jana-priyaḥ-I am dependent not only on My devotee but also on My devotee's devotee (the devotee's devotee is extremely dear to Me).





The Supreme Personality of Godhead said to the brāhmaṇa: I am completely under the control of My devotees. Indeed, I am not at all independent. Because My devotees are completely devoid of material desires, I sit only within the cores of their hearts. What to speak of My devotee, even those who are devotees of My devotee are very dear to Me.





All the great stalwart personalities in the universe, including Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, are fully under the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is fully under the control of His devotee. Why is this? Because the devotee is anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya; in other words, he has no material desires in his heart. His only desire is to think always of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and how to serve Him best. Because of this transcendental qualification, the Supreme Lord is extremely favorable to the devotees-indeed, not only the devotees, but also the devotees of the devotees. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says, chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: without being a devotee of a devotee, one cannot be released from material entanglement. Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu identified Himself as gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ. Thus he instructed us to become not directly servants of Kṛṣṇa but servants of the servant of Kṛṣṇa. Devotees like Brahmā, Nārada, Vyāsadeva and Śukadeva Gosvāmī are directly servants of Kṛṣṇa, and one who becomes a servant of Nārada, Vyāsadeva and Śukadeva, like the six Gosvāmīs, is still more devoted. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura therefore says, yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādaḥ: if one very sincerely serves the spiritual master, Kṛṣṇa certainly becomes favorable to such a devotee. Following the instructions of a devotee is more valuable than following the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead directly.



TEXT 64



nāham ātmānam āśāse

mad-bhaktaiḥ sādhubhir vinā

śriyaṁ cātyantikīṁ brahman

yeṣāṁ gatir ahaṁ parā

SYNONYMS



na-not; aham-I; ātmānam-transcendental bliss; āśāse-desire; mat-bhaktaiḥ-with My devotees; sādhubhiḥ-with the saintly persons; vinā-without them; śriyam-all My six opulences; ca-also; ātyantikīm-the supreme; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; yeṣām-of whom; gatiḥ-destination; aham-I am; parā-the ultimate.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, without saintly persons for whom I am the only destination, I do not desire to enjoy My transcendental bliss and My supreme opulences.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is self-sufficient, but to enjoy His transcendental bliss He requires the cooperation of His devotees. In Vṛndāvana, for example, although Lord Kṛṣṇa is full in Himself, He wants the cooperation of His devotees like the cowherd boys and the gopīs to increase His transcendental bliss. Such pure devotees, who can increase the pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are certainly most dear to Him. Not only does the Supreme Personality of Godhead enjoy the company of His devotees, but because He is unlimited He wants to increase His devotees unlimitedly. Thus, He descends to the material world to induce the nondevotees and rebellious living entities to return home, back to Godhead. He requests them to surrender unto Him because, unlimited as He is, He wants to increase His devotees unlimitedly. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is an attempt to increase the number of pure devotees of the Supreme Lord more and more. It is certain that a devotee who helps in this endeavor to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead becomes indirectly a controller of the Supreme Lord. Although the Supreme Lord is full in six opulences, He does not feel transcendental bliss without His devotees. An example that may be cited in this regard is that if a very rich man does not have sons in a family he does not feel happiness. Indeed, sometimes a rich man adopts a son to complete his happiness. The science of transcendental bliss is known to the pure devotee. Therefore the pure devotee is always engaged in increasing the transcendental happiness of the Lord.





TEXT 65



ye dārāgāra-putrāpta-

prāṇān vittam imaṁ param

hitvā māṁ śaraṇaṁ yātāḥ

kathaṁ tāṁs tyaktum utsahe

SYNONYMS



ye-those devotees of Mine who; dāra-wife; agāra-house; putra-children, sons; āpta-relatives, society; prāṇān-even life; vittam-wealth; imam-all these; param-elevation to the heavenly planets or becoming one by merging into Brahman; hitvā-giving up (all these ambitions and paraphernalia); mām-unto Me; śaraṇam-shelter; yātāḥ-having taken; katham-how; tān-such persons; tyaktum-to give them up; utsahe-I can be enthusiastic in that way (it is not possible).





Since pure devotees give up their homes, wives, children, relatives, riches and even their lives simply to serve Me, without any desire for material improvement in this life or in the next, how can I give up such devotees at any time?





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by the words brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. Thus He is the well-wisher of the brāhmaṇas. Durvāsā Muni was certainly a very great brāhmaṇa, but because he was a nondevotee, he could not sacrifice everything in devotional service. Great mystic yogīs are actually self-interested. The proof is that when Durvāsā Muni created a demon to kill Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the King stayed fixed in his place, praying to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and depending solely and wholly on Him, whereas when Durvāsā Muni was chased by the Sudarśana cakra by the supreme will of the Lord, he was so perturbed that he fled all over the world and tried to take shelter in every nook and corner of the universe. At last, in fear of his life, he approached Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and ultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He was so interested in his own body that he wanted to kill the body of a Vaiṣṇava. Therefore, he did not have very good intelligence, and how can an unintelligent person be delivered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead? The Lord certainly tries to give all protection to His devotees who have given up everything for the sake of serving Him.



Another point in this verse is that attachment to dārāgāra-putrāpta-home, wife, children, friendship, society and love-is not the way to achieve the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who is attached to hearth and home for material pleasure cannot become a pure devotee. Sometimes a pure devotee may have a habit or attraction for wife, children and home but at the same time want to serve the Supreme Lord to the best of his ability. For such a devotee, the Lord makes a special arrangement to take away the objects of his false attachment and thus free him from attachment to wife, home, children, friends and so on. This is special mercy bestowed upon the devotee to bring him back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 66



mayi nirbaddha-hṛdayāḥ

sādhavaḥ sama-darśanāḥ

vaśe kurvanti māṁ bhaktyā

sat-striyaḥ sat-patiṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



mayi-unto Me; nirbaddha-hṛdayāḥ-firmly attached in the core of the heart; sādhavaḥ-the pure devotees; sama-darśanāḥ-who are equal to everyone; vaśe-under control; kurvanti-they make; mām-unto Me; bhaktyā-by devotional service; sat-striyaḥ-chaste women; sat-patim-unto the gentle husband; yathā-as.





As chaste women bring their gentle husbands under control by service, the pure devotees, who are equal to everyone and completely attached to Me in the core of the heart, bring Me under their full control.





In this verse, the word sama-darśanāḥ is significant. The pure devotee is actually equal toward everyone, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (18.54): brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati/ samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu. Universal brotherhood is possible when one is a pure devotee (paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]). A pure devotee is actually learned because he knows his constitutional position, he knows the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he knows the relationship between the living entity and the Supreme Lord. Thus he has full spiritual knowledge and is automatically liberated (brahma-bhūtaḥ). He can therefore see everyone on the spiritual platform. He can comprehend the happiness and distress of all living entities. He understands that what is happiness to him is also happiness to others and that what is distress to him is distressing for others. Therefore he is sympathetic to everyone. As Prahlāda Mahārāja said:



śoce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyārtha-

māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān





(Bhāg. 7.9.43)



People suffer from material distress because they are not attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A pure devotee's chief concern, therefore, is to raise the ignorant mass of people to the sense of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 67



mat-sevayā pratītaṁ te

sālokyādi-catuṣṭayam

necchanti sevayā pūrṇāḥ

kuto 'nyat kāla-viplutam

SYNONYMS



mat-sevayā-by being engaged fully in My transcendental loving service; pratītam-automatically achieved; te-such pure devotees are fully satisfied; sālokya-ādi-catuṣṭayam-the four different types of liberation (sālokya, sārūpya, sāmīpya and sārṣṭi, what to speak of sāyujya); na-not; icchanti-desire; sevayā-simply by devotional service; pūrṇāḥ-fully complete; kutaḥ-where is the question; anyat-other things; kāla-viplutam-which are finished in the course of time.





My devotees, who are always satisfied to be engaged in My loving service, are not interested even in the four principles of liberation [sālokya, sārūpya, sāmīpya and sārṣṭi], although these are automatically achieved by their service. What then is to be said of such perishable happiness as elevation to the higher planetary systems?





Śrīla Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura has estimated the value of liberation as follows:



muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate 'smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ





Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura realized that if one develops his natural devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, mukti stands before him with folded hands to offer all kinds of service. In other words, the devotee is already liberated. There is no need for him to aspire for different types of liberation. The pure devotee automatically achieves liberation, even without desiring it.





TEXT 68



sādhavo hṛdayaṁ mahyaṁ

sādhūnāṁ hṛdayaṁ tv aham

mad-anyat te na jānanti

nāhaṁ tebhyo manāg api

SYNONYMS



sādhavaḥ-the pure devotees; hṛdayam-in the core of the heart; mahyam-of Me; sādhūnām-of the pure devotees also; hṛdayam-in the core of the heart; tu-indeed; aham-I am; mat-anyat-anything else but me; te-they; na-not; jānanti-know; na-not; aham-I; tebhyaḥ-than them; manāk api-even by a little fraction.





The pure devotee is always within the core of My heart, and I am always in the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do not know anything else but Me, and I do not know anyone else but them.





Since Durvāsā Muni wanted to chastise Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, it is to be understood that he wanted to give pain to the heart of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for the Lord says, sādhavo hṛdayaṁ mahyam: "The pure devotee is always within the core of My heart." The Lord's feelings are like those of a father, who feels pain when his child is in pain. Therefore, offenses at the lotus feet of a devotee are serious. Caitanya Mahāprabhu has very strongly recommended that one not commit any offense at the lotus feet of a devotee. Such offenses are compared to a mad elephant because when a mad elephant enters a garden it causes devastation. Therefore one should be extremely careful not to commit offenses at the lotus feet of a pure devotee. Actually Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was not at all at fault; Durvāsā Muni unnecessarily wanted to chastise him on flimsy grounds. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa wanted to complete the Ekādaśī-pāraṇa as part of devotional service to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore he drank a little water. But although Durvāsā Muni was a great mystic brāhmaṇa, he did not know what is what. That is the difference between a pure devotee and a so-called learned scholar of Vedic knowledge. The devotees, being always situated in the core of the Lord's heart, surely get all instructions directly from the Lord, as confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (10.11):



teṣām evānukampārtham

aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ

nāśayāmy ātma-bhāvastho

jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā





"Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance." The devotee does not do anything not sanctioned by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is said, vaiṣṇavera kriyā mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya. Even the most learned or experienced person cannot understand the movements of a Vaiṣṇava, a pure devotee. No one, therefore, should criticize a pure Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava knows his own business; whatever he does is precisely right because he is always guided by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 69



upāyaṁ kathayiṣyāmi

tava vipra śṛṇuṣva tat

ayaṁ hy ātmābhicāras te

yatas taṁ yāhi mā ciram

sādhuṣu prahitaṁ tejaḥ

prahartuḥ kurute 'śivam

SYNONYMS



upāyam-the means of protection in this dangerous position; kathayiṣyāmi-I shall speak to you; tava-of your deliverance from this danger; vipra-O brāhmaṇa; śṛṇuṣva-just hear from me; tat-what I say; ayam-this action taken by you; hi-indeed; ātma-abhicāraḥ-self-envy or envious of yourself (your mind has become your enemy); te-for you; yataḥ-because of whom; tam-to him (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); yāhi-immediately go; mā ciram-do not wait even a moment; sādhuṣu-unto devotees; prahitam-applied; tejaḥ-power; prahartuḥ-of the executor; kurute-does; aśivam-inauspiciousness.





O brāhmaṇa, let Me now advise you for your own protection. Please hear from Me. By offending Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, you have acted with self-envy. Therefore you should go to him immediately, without a moment's delay. One's so-called prowess, when employed against the devotee, certainly harms he who employs it. Thus it is the subject, not the object, who is harmed.





A Vaiṣṇava is always an object of envy for nondevotees, even when the nondevotee happens to be his father. To give a practical example, Hiraṇyakaśipu was envious of Prahlāda Mahārāja, but this envy of the devotee was harmful to Hiraṇyakaśipu, not to Prahlāda. Every action taken by Hiraṇyakaśipu against his son Prahlāda Mahārāja was taken very seriously by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus when Hiraṇyakaśipu was on the verge of killing Prahlāda, the Lord personally appeared and killed Hiraṇyakaśipu. Service to a Vaiṣṇava gradually accumulates and becomes an asset for the devotee. Similarly, harmful activities directed against the devotee gradually become the ultimate cause of the performer's falldown. Even such a great brāhmaṇa and mystic yogī as Durvāsā was in a most dangerous situation because of his offense at the lotus feet of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, a pure devotee.





TEXT 70



tapo vidyā ca viprāṇāṁ

niḥśreyasa-kare ubhe

te eva durvinītasya

kalpete kartur anyathā

SYNONYMS



tapaḥ-austerities; vidyā-knowledge; ca-also; viprāṇām-of the brāhmaṇas; niḥśreyasa-of what is certainly very auspicious for upliftment; kare-are causes; ubhe-both of them; te-such austerity and knowledge; eva-indeed; durvinītasya-when such a person is an upstart; kalpete-become; kartuḥ-of the performer; anyathā-just the opposite.





For a brāhmaṇa, austerity and learning are certainly auspicious, but when acquired by a person who is not gentle, such austerity and learning are most dangerous.





It is said that a jewel is very valuable, but when it is on the hood of a serpent, it is dangerous despite its value. Similarly, when a materialistic nondevotee achieves great success in learning and austerity, that success is dangerous for all of society. So-called learned scientists, for example, invented atomic weapons that are dangerous for all humanity. It is therefore said, maṇinā bhūṣitaḥ sarpaḥ kim asau na bhayaṅkaraḥ. A serpent with a jewel on its hood is as dangerous as a serpent without such a jewel. Durvāsā Muni was a very learned brāhmaṇa equipped with mystic power, but because he was not a gentleman, he did not know how to use his power. He was therefore extremely dangerous. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is never inclined toward a dangerous person who uses his mystic power for some personal design. By the laws of nature, therefore, such misuse of power is ultimately dangerous not for society but for the person who misuses it.





TEXT 71



brahmaṁs tad gaccha bhadraṁ te

nābhāga-tanayaṁ nṛpam

kṣamāpaya mahā-bhāgaṁ

tataḥ śāntir bhaviṣyati

SYNONYMS



brahman-O brāhmaṇa; tat-therefore; gaccha-you go; bhadram-all auspiciousness; te-unto you; nābhāga-tanayam-to the son of Mahārāja Nābhāga; nṛpam-the King (Ambarīṣa); kṣamāpaya-just try to pacify him; mahā-bhāgam-a great personality, a pure devotee; tataḥ-thereafter; śāntiḥ-peace; bhaviṣyati-there will be.





O best of the brāhmaṇas, you should therefore go immediately to King Ambarīṣa, the son of Mahārāja Nābhāga. I wish you all good fortune. If you can satisfy Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, then there will be peace for you.





In this regard, Madhva Muni quotes from the Garuḍa Purāṇa:



brahmādi-bhakti-koṭy-aṁśād

aṁśo naivāmbarīṣake

naivanyasya cakrasyāpi

tathāpi harir īśvaraḥ





tātkālikopaceyatvāt

teṣāṁ yaśasa ādirāṭ

brahmādayaś ca tat-kīrtiṁ

vyañjayām āsur uttamām





mohanāya ca daityānāṁ

brahmāde nindanāya ca

anyārthaṁ ca svayaṁ viṣṇur

brahmādyāś ca nirāśiṣaḥ





mānuṣeṣūttamātvāc ca

teṣāṁ bhaktyādibhir guṇaiḥ

brahmāder viṣṇv-adhīnatva-

jñāpanāya ca kevalam





durvāsāś ca svayaṁ rudras

tathāpy anyāyām uktavān

tasyāpy anugrahārthāya

darpa-nāśārtham eva ca





The lesson to be derived from this narration concerning Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and Durvāsā Muni is that all the demigods, including Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, are under the control of Lord Viṣṇu. Therefore, when a Vaiṣṇava is offended, the offender is punished by Viṣṇu, the Supreme Lord. No one can protect such a person, even Lord Brahmā or Lord Śiva.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Ambarīṣa Mahārāja Offended by Durvāsā Muni."



Chapter Five



Durvāsā Muni's Life Spared





In this chapter we find Mahārāja Ambarīṣa offering prayers to the Sudarśana cakra and we find how the Sudarśana cakra became merciful to Durvāsā Muni.





By the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, Durvāsā Muni immediately went to Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and fell at his lotus feet. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, being naturally very humble and meek, felt shy and ashamed because Durvāsā Muni had fallen at his feet, and thus he began to offer prayers to the Sudarśana cakra just to save Durvāsā. What is this Sudarśana cakra? The Sudarśana cakra is the glance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by which He creates the entire material world. Sa aikṣata, sa asṛjata. This is the Vedic version. The Sudarśana cakra, which is the origin of creation and is most dear to the Lord, has thousands of spokes. This Sudarśana cakra is the killer of the prowess of all other weapons, the killer of darkness, and the manifester of the prowess of devotional service; it is the means of establishing religious principles, and it is the killer of all irreligious activities. Without his mercy, the universe cannot be maintained, and therefore the Sudarśana cakra is employed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Mahārāja Ambarīṣa thus prayed that the Sudarśana cakra be merciful, the Sudarśana cakra, being appeased, refrained from killing Durvāsā Muni, who thus achieved the Sudarśana cakra's mercy. Durvāsā Muni thus learned to give up the nasty idea of considering a Vaiṣṇava an ordinary person (vaiṣṇave jāti-buddhi). Mahārāja Ambarīṣa belonged to the kṣatriya group, and therefore Durvāsā Muni considered him lower than the brāhmaṇas and wanted to exercise brahminical power against him. By this incident, everyone should learn how to stop mischievous ideas of neglecting Vaiṣṇavas. After this incident, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa gave Durvāsā Muni sumptuous food to eat, and then the King, who had been standing in the same place for one year without eating anything, also took prasāda. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa later divided his property among his sons and went to the bank of the Mānasa-sarovara to execute devotional meditation.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ bhagavatādiṣṭo

durvāsāś cakra-tāpitaḥ

ambarīṣam upāvṛtya

tat-pādau duḥkhito 'grahīt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; bhagavatā ādiṣṭaḥ-being ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; durvāsāḥ-the great mystic yogī named Durvāsā; cakra-tāpitaḥ-being very much harassed by the Sudarśana cakra; ambarīṣam-unto Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; upāvṛtya-approaching; tat-pādau-at his lotus feet; duḥkhitaḥ-being very much aggrieved; agrahīt-he caught.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When thus advised by Lord Viṣṇu, Durvāsā Muni, who was very much harassed by the Sudarśana cakra, immediately approached Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Being very much aggrieved, the muni fell down and clasped the King's lotus feet.





TEXT 2



tasya sodyamam āvīkṣya

pāda-sparśa-vilajjitaḥ

astāvīt tad dharer astraṁ

kṛpayā pīḍito bhṛśam

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Durvāsā; saḥ-he, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; udyamam-the endeavor; āvīkṣya-after seeing; pāda-sparśa-vilajjitaḥ-being ashamed because Durvāsā was touching his lotus feet; astāvīt-offered prayers; tat-to that; hareḥ astram-weapon of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛpayā-with mercy; pīḍitaḥ-aggrieved; bhṛśam-very much.





When Durvāsā touched his lotus feet, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was very much ashamed, and when he saw Durvāsā attempting to offer prayers, because of mercy he was aggrieved even more. Thus he immediately began offering prayers to the great weapon of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 3



ambarīṣa uvāca

tvam agnir bhagavān sūryas

tvaṁ somo jyotiṣāṁ patiḥ

tvam āpas tvaṁ kṣitir vyoma

vāyur mātrendriyāṇi ca

SYNONYMS



ambarīṣaḥ-Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; uvāca-said; tvam-you (are); agniḥ-the fire; bhagavān-the most powerful; sūryaḥ-the sun; tvam-you (are); somaḥ-the moon; jyotiṣām-of all the luminaries; patiḥ-the master; tvam-you (are); āpaḥ-water; tvam-you (are); kṣitiḥ-earth; vyoma-sky; vāyuḥ-the air; mātra-the objects of the senses; indriyāṇi-and the senses; ca-also.





Mahārāja Ambarīṣa said: O Sudarśana cakra, you are fire, you are the most powerful sun, and you are the moon, the master of all luminaries. You are water, earth and sky, you are the air, you are the five sense objects [sound, touch, form, taste and smell], and you are the senses also.





TEXT 4



sudarśana namas tubhyaṁ

sahasrārācyuta-priya

sarvāstra-ghātin viprāya

svasti bhūyā iḍaspate

SYNONYMS



sudarśana-O original vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ-respectful obeisances; tubhyam-unto you; sahasra-ara-O you who have thousands of spokes; acyuta-priya-O most favorite of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta; sarva-astra-ghātin-O destroyer of all weapons; viprāya-unto this brāhmaṇa; svasti-very auspicious; bhūyāḥ-just become; iḍaspate-O master of the material world.





O most favorite of Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you have thousands of spokes. O master of the material world, destroyer of all weapons, original vision of the Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you. Kindly give shelter and be auspicious to this brāhmaṇa.





TEXT 5



tvaṁ dharmas tvam ṛtaṁ satyaṁ

tvaṁ yajño 'khila-yajña-bhuk

tvaṁ loka-pālaḥ sarvātmā

tvaṁ tejaḥ pauruṣaṁ param

SYNONYMS



tvam-you; dharmaḥ-religion; tvam-you; ṛtam-encouraging statements; satyam-the ultimate truth; tvam-you; yajñaḥ-sacrifice; akhila-universal; yajña-bhuk-the enjoyer of the fruits resulting from sacrifice; tvam-you; loka-pālaḥ-the maintainer of the various planets; sarva-ātmā-all-pervading; tvam-you; tejaḥ-prowess; pauruṣam-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param-transcendental.





O Sudarśana wheel, you are religion, you are truth, you are encouraging statements, you are sacrifice, and you are the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice. You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and you are the supreme transcendental prowess in the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are the original vision of the Lord, and therefore you are known as Sudarśana. Everything has been created by your activities, and therefore you are all-pervading.





The word sudarśana means "auspicious vision." From Vedic instructions we understand that this material world is created by the glance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (sa aikṣata, sa asṛjata). The Supreme Personality of Godhead glanced over the mahat-tattva, or the total material energy, and when it was agitated, everything came into existence. Western philosophers sometimes think that the original cause of creation was a chunk that exploded. If one thinks of this chunk as the total material energy, the mahat-tattva, one can understand that the chunk was agitated by the glance of the Lord, and thus the Lord's glance is the original cause of material creation.





TEXT 6



namaḥ sunābhākhila-dharma-setave

hy adharma-śīlāsura-dhūma-ketave

trailokya-gopāya viśuddha-varcase

mano-javāyādbhuta-karmaṇe gṛṇe

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-all respectful obeisances unto you; su-nābha-O you who have an auspicious hub; akhila-dharma-setave-whose spokes are considered to be a breech of the entire universe; hi-indeed; adharma-śīla-who are irreligious; asura-for the demons; dhūma-ketave-unto you who are like fire or an inauspicious comet; trailokya-of the three material worlds; gopāya-the maintainer; viśuddha-transcendental; varcase-whose effulgence; manaḥ-javāya-as speedy as the mind; adbhuta-wonderful; karmaṇe-so active; gṛṇe-I simply utter.





O Sudarśana, you have a very auspicious hub, and therefore you are the upholder of all religion. You are just like an inauspicious comet for the irreligious demons. Indeed, you are the maintainer of the three worlds, you are full of transcendental effulgence, you are as quick as the mind, and you are able to work wonders. I can simply utter the word namaḥ, offering all obeisances unto you.





The disc of the Lord is called Sudarśana because he does not discriminate between high and low criminals or demons. Durvāsā Muni was certainly a powerful brāhmaṇa, but his acts against the pure devotee Mahārāja Ambarīṣa were no better than the activities of asuras. As stated in the śāstras, dharmaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavat-praṇītam: [SB 6.3.19] the word dharma refers to the orders or laws given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] real dharma is surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore real dharma means bhakti, or devotional service to the Lord. The Sudarśana cakra is here addressed as dharma-setave, the protector of dharma. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was a truly religious person, and consequently for his protection the Sudarśana cakra was ready to punish even such a strict brāhmaṇa as Durvāsā Muni because he had acted like a demon. There are demons even in the form of brāhmaṇas. Therefore the Sudarśana cakra does not discriminate between brāhmaṇa demons and śūdra demons. Anyone against the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His devotees is called a demon. In the śāstras we find many brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas who acted as demons and have been described as demons. According to the verdict of the śāstras, one has to be understood according to his symptoms. If one is born of a brāhmaṇa father but his symptoms are demoniac, he is regarded as a demon. The Sudarśana cakra is always concerned with annihilating the demons. Therefore he is described as adharma-śīlāsura-dhūma-ketave. Those who are not devotees are called adharma-śīla. The Sudarśana cakra is just like an inauspicious comet for all such demons.





TEXT 7



tvat-tejasā dharma-mayena saṁhṛtaṁ

tamaḥ prakāśaś ca dṛśo mahātmanām

duratyayas te mahimā girāṁ pate

tvad-rūpam etat sad-asat parāvaram

SYNONYMS



tvat-tejasā-by your effulgence; dharma-mayena-which is full of religious principles; saṁhṛtam-dissipated; tamaḥ-darkness; prakāśaḥ ca-illumination also; dṛśaḥ-of all directions; mahā-ātmanām-of great, learned personalities; duratyayaḥ-insurmountable; te-your; mahimā-glories; girām pate-O master of speech; tvat-rūpam-your manifestation; etat-this; sat-asat-manifested and unmanifested; para-avaram-superior and inferior.





O master of speech, by your effulgence, full of religious principles, the darkness of the world is dissipated, and the knowledge of learned persons or great souls is manifested. Indeed, no one can surpass your effulgence, for all things, manifested and unmanifested, gross and subtle, superior and inferior, are but various forms of you that are manifested by your effulgence.





Without illumination, nothing can be seen, especially in this material world. The illumination in this world emanates from the effulgence of Sudarśana, the original vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The illuminating principles of the sun, the moon and fire emanate from Sudarśana. Similarly, illumination by knowledge also comes from Sudarśana because with the illumination of Sudarśana one can distinguish one thing from another, the superior from the inferior. Generally people accept a powerful yogi like Durvāsā Muni as wonderfully superior, but if such a person is chased by the Sudarśana cakra, we can see his real identity and understand how inferior he is because of his dealings with devotees.





TEXT 8



yadā visṛṣṭas tvam anañjanena vai

balaṁ praviṣṭo 'jita daitya-dānavam

bāhūdarorv-aṅghri-śirodharāṇi

vṛścann ajasraṁ pradhane virājase

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; visṛṣṭaḥ-sent; tvam-your good self; anañjanena-by the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai-indeed; balam-the soldiers; praviṣṭaḥ-entering among; ajita-O indefatigable and unconquerable one; daitya-dānavam-of the Daityas and Dānavas, the demons; bāhu-arms; udara-bellies; ūru-thighs; aṅghri-legs; śiraḥ-dharāṇi-necks; vṛścan-separating; ajasram-incessantly; pradhane-in the battlefield; virājase-you stay.





O indefatigable one, when you are sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to enter among the soldiers of the Daityas and the Dānavas, you stay on the battlefield and unendingly separate their arms, bellies, thighs, legs and heads.





TEXT 9



sa tvaṁ jagat-trāṇa khala-prahāṇaye

nirūpitaḥ sarva-saho gadā-bhṛtā

viprasya cāsmat-kula-daiva-hetave

vidhehi bhadraṁ tad anugraho hi naḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that person; tvam-your good self; jagat-trāṇa-O protector of the whole universe; khala-prahāṇaye-in killing the envious enemies; nirūpitaḥ-are engaged; sarva-sahaḥ-all-powerful; gadā-bhṛtā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viprasya-of this brāhmaṇa; ca-also; asmat-our; kula-daiva-hetave-for the good fortune of the dynasty; vidhehi-kindly do; bhadram-all-good; tat-that; anugrahaḥ-favor; hi-indeed; naḥ-our.





O protector of the universe, you are engaged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as His all-powerful weapon in killing the envious enemies. For the benefit of our entire dynasty, kindly favor this poor brāhmaṇa. This will certainly be a favor for all of us.





TEXT 10



yady asti dattam iṣṭaṁ vā

sva-dharmo vā svanuṣṭhitaḥ

kulaṁ no vipra-daivaṁ ced

dvijo bhavatu vijvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; asti-there is; dattam-charity; iṣṭam-worshiping the Deity; vā-either; sva-dharmaḥ-occupational duty; vā-either; su-anuṣṭhitaḥ-perfectly performed; kulam-dynasty; naḥ-our; vipra-daivam-favored by the brāhmaṇas; cet-if so; dvijaḥ-this brāhmaṇa; bhavatu-may become; vijvaraḥ-without a burning (from the Sudarśana cakra).





If our family has given charity to the proper persons, if we have performed ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices, if we have properly carried out our occupational duties, and if we have been guided by learned brāhmaṇas, I wish, in exchange, that this brāhmaṇa be freed from the burning caused by the Sudarśana cakra.





TEXT 11



yadi no bhagavān prīta

ekaḥ sarva-guṇāśrayaḥ

sarva-bhūtātma-bhāvena

dvijo bhavatu vijvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; naḥ-unto us; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prītaḥ-is satisfied; ekaḥ-without any duplicate; sarva-guṇa-āśrayaḥ-the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; sarva-bhūta-ātma-bhāvena-by a merciful attitude toward all living entities; dvijaḥ-this brāhmaṇa; bhavatu-may become; vijvaraḥ-freed from all burning.





If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second, who is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and who is the life and soul of all living entities, is pleased with us, we wish that this brāhmaṇa, Durvāsā Muni, be freed from the pain of being burned.





TEXT 12



śrī-śuka uvāca

iti saṁstuvato rājño

viṣṇu-cakraṁ sudarśanam

aśāmyat sarvato vipraṁ

pradahad rāja-yācñayā

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; saṁstuvataḥ-being prayed to; rājñaḥ-by the King; viṣṇu-cakram-the disc weapon of Lord Viṣṇu; sudarśanam-of the name Sudarśana cakra; aśāmyat-became no longer disturbing; sarvataḥ-in every respect; vipram-unto the brāhmaṇa; pradahat-causing to burn; rāja-of the King; yācñayā-by the begging.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the King offered prayers to the Sudarśana cakra and Lord Viṣṇu, because of his prayers the Sudarśana cakra became peaceful and stopped burning the brāhmaṇa known as Durvāsā Muni.





TEXT 13



sa mukto 'strāgni-tāpena

durvāsāḥ svastimāṁs tataḥ

praśaśaṁsa tam urvīśaṁ

yuñjānaḥ paramāśiṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Durvāsā Muni; muktaḥ-being freed; astra-agni-tāpena-from the heat of the fire of the Sudarśana cakra; durvāsāḥ-the great mystic Durvāsā; svastimān-fully satisfied, relieved of the burning; tataḥ-then; praśaśaṁsa-offered praise; tam-unto him; urvī-īśam-the King; yuñjānaḥ-performing; parama-āśiṣaḥ-the highest benedictions.





Durvāsā Muni, the greatly powerful mystic, was indeed satisfied when freed from the fire of the Sudarśana cakra. Thus he praised the qualities of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and offered him the highest benedictions.





TEXT 14



durvāsā uvāca

aho ananta-dāsānāṁ

mahattvaṁ dṛṣṭam adya me

kṛtāgaso 'pi yad rājan

maṅgalāni samīhase

SYNONYMS



durvāsāḥ uvāca-Durvāsā Muni said; aho-alas; ananta-dāsānām-of the servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahattvam-greatness; dṛṣṭam-seen; adya-today; me-by me; kṛta-āgasaḥ api-although I was an offender; yat-still; rājan-O King; maṅgalāni-good fortune; samīhase-you are praying for.





Durvāsā Muni said: My dear King, today I have experienced the greatness of devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for although I have committed an offense, you have prayed for my good fortune.





TEXT 15



duṣkaraḥ ko nu sādhūnāṁ

dustyajo vā mahātmanām

yaiḥ saṅgṛhīto bhagavān

sātvatām ṛṣabho hariḥ

SYNONYMS



duṣkaraḥ-difficult to do; kaḥ-what; nu-indeed; sādhūnām-of the devotees; dustyajaḥ-impossible to give up; vā-either; mahā-ātmanām-of the great persons; yaiḥ-by which persons; saṅgṛhītaḥ-achieved (by devotional service); bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sātvatām-of the pure devotees; ṛṣabhaḥ-the leader; hariḥ-the Lord.





For those who have achieved the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of the pure devotees, what is impossible to do, and what is impossible to give up?





TEXT 16



yan-nāma-śruti-mātreṇa

pumān bhavati nirmalaḥ

tasya tīrtha-padaḥ kiṁ vā

dāsānām avaśiṣyate

SYNONYMS



yat-nāma-the holy name of the Lord; śruti-mātreṇa-simply by hearing; pumān-a person; bhavati-becomes; nirmalaḥ-purified; tasya-of Him; tīrtha-padaḥ-the Lord, at whose feet are the holy places; kim vā-what; dāsānām-by the servants; avaśiṣyate-remains to be done.





What is impossible for the servants of the Lord? By the very hearing of His holy name one is purified.





TEXT 17



rājann anugṛhīto 'haṁ

tvayātikaruṇātmanā

mad-aghaṁ pṛṣṭhataḥ kṛtvā

prāṇā yan me 'bhirakṣitāḥ

SYNONYMS



rājan-O King; anugṛhītaḥ-very much favored; aham-I (am); tvayā-by you; ati-karuṇa-ātmanā-because of your being extremely merciful; mat-agham-my offenses; pṛṣṭhataḥ-to the back; kṛtvā-doing so; prāṇāḥ-life; yat-that; me-my; abhirakṣitāḥ-saved.





O King, overlooking my offenses, you have saved my life. Thus I am very much obliged to you because you are so merciful.





TEXT 18



rājā tam akṛtāhāraḥ

pratyāgamana-kāṅkṣayā

caraṇāv upasaṅgṛhya

prasādya samabhojayat

SYNONYMS



rājā-the King; tam-unto him, Durvāsā Muni; akṛta-āhāraḥ-who refrained from taking food; pratyāgamana-returning; kāṅkṣayā-desiring; caraṇau-the feet; upasaṅgṛhya-approaching; prasādya-pleasing in all respects; samabhojayat-fed sumptuously.





Expecting the return of Durvāsā Muni, the King had not taken his food. Therefore, when the sage returned, the King fell at his lotus feet, pleasing him in all respects, and fed him sumptuously.





TEXT 19



so 'śitvādṛtam ānītam

ātithyaṁ sārva-kāmikam

tṛptātmā nṛpatiṁ prāha

bhujyatām iti sādaram

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Durvāsā); aśitvā-after eating sumptuously; ādṛtam-with great respect; ānītam-received; ātithyam-offered different varieties of food; sārva-kāmikam-fulfilling all kinds of tastes; tṛpta-ātmā-thus being fully satisfied; nṛpatim-unto the King; prāha-said; bhujyatām-my dear King, you eat also; iti-in this way; sa-ādaram-with great respect.





Thus the King respectfully received Durvāsā Muni, who after eating varieties of palatable food was so satisfied that with great affection he requested the King to eat also, saying, "Please take your meal."





TEXT 20



prīto 'smy anugṛhīto 'smi

tava bhāgavatasya vai

darśana-sparśanālāpair

ātithyenātma-medhasā

SYNONYMS



prītaḥ-very much satisfied; asmi-I am; anugṛhītaḥ-very much favored; asmi-I am; tava-your; bhāgavatasya-because of your being a pure devotee; vai-indeed; darśana-by seeing you; sparśana-and touching your feet; ālāpaiḥ-by talking with you; ātithyena-by your hospitality; ātma-medhasā-by my own intelligence.





Durvāsā Muni said: I am very pleased with you, my dear King. At first I thought of you as an ordinary human being and accepted your hospitality, but later I could understand, by my own intelligence, that you are the most exalted devotee of the Lord. Therefore, simply by seeing you, touching your feet and talking with you, I have been pleased and have become obliged to you.





It is said, vaiṣṇavera kriyā mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya: even a very intelligent man cannot understand the activities of a pure Vaiṣṇava. Therefore, because Durvāsā Muni was a great mystic yogī, he first mistook Mahārāja Ambarīṣa for an ordinary human being and wanted to punish him. Such is the mistaken observation of a Vaiṣṇava. When Durvāsā Muni was persecuted by the Sudarśana cakra, however, his intelligence developed. Therefore the word ātma-medhasā is used to indicate that by his personal experience he would understand how great a Vaiṣṇava the King was. When Durvāsā Muni was chased by the Sudarśana cakra, he wanted to take shelter of Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, and he was even able to go to the spiritual world, meet the Personality of Godhead and talk with Him face to face, yet he was unable to be rescued from the attack of the Sudarśana cakra. Thus he could understand the influence of a Vaiṣṇava by personal experience. Durvāsā Muni was certainly a great yogī and a very learned brāhmaṇa, but despite his being a real yogī he was unable to understand the influence of a Vaiṣṇava. Therefore it is said, vaiṣṇavera kriyā mudrā vijñeha nā bujhaya: even the most learned person cannot understand the value of a Vaiṣṇava. There is always a possibility for so-called jñānīs and yogīs to be mistaken when studying the character of a Vaiṣṇava. A Vaiṣṇava can be understood by how much he is favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in terms of his inconceivable activities.





TEXT 21



karmāvadātam etat te

gāyanti svaḥ-striyo muhuḥ

kīrtiṁ parama-puṇyāṁ ca

kīrtayiṣyati bhūr iyam

SYNONYMS



karma-activity; avadātam-without any tinge; etat-all this; te-your; gāyanti-will sing; svaḥ-striyaḥ-women from the heavenly planets; muhuḥ-always; kīrtim-glories; parama-puṇyām-highly glorified and pious; ca-also; kīrtayiṣyati-will continuously chant; bhūḥ-the whole world; iyam-this.





All the blessed women in the heavenly planets will continuously chant about your spotless character at every moment, and the people of this world will also chant your glories continuously.





TEXT 22



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ saṅkīrtya rājānaṁ

durvāsāḥ paritoṣitaḥ

yayau vihāyasāmantrya

brahmalokam ahaitukam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; saṅkīrtya-glorifying; rājānam-the King; durvāsāḥ-the great mystic yogī Durvāsā Muni; paritoṣitaḥ-being satisfied in all respects; yayau-left that place; vihāyasā-by the spaceways; āmantrya-taking permission; brahmalokam-to the topmost planet of this universe; ahaitukam-where there is no dry philosophical speculation.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus being satisfied in all respects, the great mystic yogī Durvāsā took permission and left, continuously glorifying the King. Through the skyways, he went to Brahmaloka, which is devoid of agnostics and dry philosophical speculators.





Although Durvāsā Muni went back to Brahmaloka through the spaceways, he did not need an airplane, for great mystic yogīs can transport themselves from any planet to any other without any machine. There is a planet named Siddhaloka whose inhabitants can go to any other planet because they naturally have all the perfection of yoga practice. Thus Durvāsā Muni, the great mystic yogī, could go through the skyways to any planet, even to Brahmaloka. In Brahmaloka, everyone is self-realized, and thus there is no need of philosophical speculation to come to the conclusion of the Absolute Truth. Durvāsā Muni's purpose in going to Brahmaloka was apparently to speak to the residents of Brahmaloka about how powerful a devotee is and how a devotee can surpass every living entity within this material world. The so-called jñānīs and yogīs cannot compare to a devotee.





TEXT 23



saṁvatsaro 'tyagāt tāvad

yāvatā nāgato gataḥ

munis tad-darśanākāṅkṣo

rājāb-bhakṣo babhūva ha

SYNONYMS



saṁvatsaraḥ-one complete year; atyagāt-passed; tāvat-as long as; yāvatā-so long; na-not; āgataḥ-returned; gataḥ-Durvāsā Muni, who had left that place; muniḥ-the great sage; tat-darśana-ākāṅkṣaḥ-desiring to see him again; rājā-the King; ap-bhakṣaḥ-taking only water; babhūva-remained; ha-indeed.





Durvāsā Muni had left the place of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, and as long as he had not returned-for one complete year-the King had fasted, maintaining himself simply by drinking water.





TEXT 24



gate 'tha durvāsasi so 'mbarīṣo

dvijopayogātipavitram āharat

ṛṣer vimokṣaṁ vyasanaṁ ca vīkṣya

mene sva-vīryaṁ ca parānubhāvam

SYNONYMS



gate-on his return; atha-then; durvāsasi-the great mystic yogī Durvāsā; saḥ-he, the King; ambarīṣaḥ-Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; dvija-upayoga-most suitable for a pure brāhmaṇa; ati-pavitram-very pure food; āharat-gave him to eat and he also ate; ṛṣeḥ-of the great sage; vimokṣam-release; vyasanam-from the great danger of being burned by the Sudarśana cakra; ca-and; vīkṣya-seeing; mene-considered; sva-vīryam-about his own power; ca-also; para-anubhāvam-because of his pure devotion to the Supreme Lord.





After one year, when Durvāsā Muni had returned, King Ambarīṣa sumptuously fed him all varieties of pure food, and then he himself also ate. When the King saw that the brāhmaṇa Durvāsā had been released from the great danger of being burned, he could understand that by the grace of the Lord he himself was also powerful, but he did not take any credit, for everything had been done by the Lord.





A devotee like Mahārāja Ambarīṣa is certainly always busy in many activities. Of course, this material world is full of dangers that one has to meet, but a devotee, because of his full dependence on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is never disturbed. The vivid example is Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. He was the emperor of the entire world and had many duties to perform, and in the course of these duties there were many disturbances created by persons like Durvāsā Muni, but the King tolerated everything, patiently depending fully on the mercy of the Lord. The Lord, however, is situated in everyone's heart (sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ), and He manages things as He desires. Thus although Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was faced with many disturbances, the Lord, being merciful to him, managed things so nicely that in the end Durvāsā Muni and Mahārāja Ambarīṣa became great friends and parted cordially on the basis of bhakti-yoga. After all, Durvāsā Muni was convinced of the power of bhakti-yoga, although he himself was a great mystic yogī. Therefore, as stated by Lord Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." Thus it is a fact that a devotee is the topmost yogī, as proved in the dealings of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa with Durvāsā Muni.





TEXT 25



evaṁ vidhāneka-guṇaḥ sa rājā

parātmani brahmaṇi vāsudeve

kriyā-kalāpaiḥ samuvāha bhaktiṁ

yayāviriñcyān nirayāṁś cakāra

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; vidhā-aneka-guṇaḥ-endowed with varieties of good qualities; saḥ-he, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; rājā-the King; para-ātmani-unto the Supersoul; brahmaṇi-unto Brahman; vāsudeve-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva; kriyā-kalāpaiḥ-by practical activities; samuvāha-executed; bhaktim-devotional service; yayā-by such activities; āviriñcyān-beginning from the topmost planet; nirayān-down to the hellish planets; cakāra-he experienced that there is danger everywhere.





In this way, because of devotional service, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, who was endowed with varieties of transcendental qualities, was completely aware of Brahman, Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus he executed devotional service perfectly. Because of his devotion, he thought even the topmost planet of this material world no better than the hellish planets.





An exalted and pure devotee like Mahārāja Ambarīṣa is in full awareness of Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān; in other words, a devotee of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is in full knowledge of the other features of the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth is realized in three features-Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān (brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate). A devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, knows everything (vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti [Bg. 7.19]) because Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, includes both Paramātmā and Brahman. One does not have to realize Paramātmā by the yoga system, for the devotee always thinking of Vāsudeva is the topmost yogī (yoginām api sarveṣām [Bg. 6.47]). And as far as jñāna is concerned, if one is a perfect devotee of Vāsudeva, he is the greatest mahātmā (vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]). A mahātmā is one who has full knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Thus Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, being a devotee of the personality of Godhead, was in full awareness of Paramātmā, Brahman, māyā, the material world, the spiritual world, and how things are going on everywhere. Everything was known to him. Yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. Because the devotee knows Vāsudeva, he knows everything within the creation of Vāsudeva (vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ [Bg. 7.19]). Such a devotee does not give much value to the highest standard of happiness within this material world.



nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve

na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narakeṣv

api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ





(Bhāg. 6.17.28)



Because he is fixed in devotional service, a devotee does not regard any position in the material world as important. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has therefore written (Caitanya-candrāmṛta 5):



kaivalyaṁ narakāyate tri-daśa-pūr ākāśa-puṣpāyate

durdāntendriya-kāla-sarpa-paṭalī protkhāta-daṁṣṭrāyate

viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate vidhi-mahendrādiś ca kīṭāyate

yat-kāruṇya-katākṣa-vaibhavavatāṁ taṁ gauram eva stumaḥ





For one who becomes a pure devotee through devotional service to great personalities like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, kaivalya, or merging into Brahman, appears no better than hell. As far as the heavenly planets are concerned, to a devotee they are like a phantasmagoria or will-o'-the-wisp, and as far as yogic perfection is concerned, a devotee does not care a fig for such perfection, since the purpose of yogic perfection is achieved automatically by the devotee. This is all possible when one becomes a devotee of the Lord through the medium of Caitanya Mahāprabhu's instructions.





TEXT 26



śrī-śuka uvāca

athāmbarīṣas tanayeṣu rājyaṁ

samāna-śīleṣu visṛjya dhīraḥ

vanaṁ viveśātmani vāsudeve

mano dadhad dhvasta-guṇa-pravāhaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha-in this way; ambarīṣaḥ-King Ambarīṣa; tanayeṣu-unto his sons; rājyam-the kingdom; samāna-śīleṣu-who were equally as qualified as their father; visṛjya-dividing; dhīraḥ-the most learned person, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; vanam-into the forest; viveśa-entered; ātmani-unto the Supreme Lord; vāsudeve-Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Vāsudeva; manaḥ-mind; dadhat-concentrating; dhvasta-vanquished; guṇa-pravāhaḥ-the waves of the material modes of nature.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thereafter, because of his advanced position in devotional life, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, who no longer desired to live with material things, retired from active family life. He divided his property among his sons, who were equally as qualified, and he himself took the order of vānaprastha and went to the forest to concentrate his mind fully upon Lord Vāsudeva.





As a pure devotee, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was liberated in any condition of life because, as enunciated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, a devotee is always liberated.



īhā yasya harer dāsye

karmaṇā manasā girā

nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu

jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate





In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī thus instructs that if one's only desire is service to the Lord, he is liberated in any condition of life. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was undoubtedly liberated in any condition, but as an ideal king he accepted the vānaprastha order of retirement from family life. It is essential for one to renounce family responsibilities and fully concentrate on the lotus feet of Vāsudeva. Therefore Mahārāja Ambarīṣa divided the kingdom among his sons and retired from family life.





TEXT 27



ity etat puṇyam ākhyānam

ambarīṣasya bhūpate

saṅkīrtayann anudhyāyan

bhakto bhagavato bhavet

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; etat-this; puṇyam ākhyānam-most pious activity in history; ambarīṣasya-of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; bhūpate-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); saṅkīrtayan-by chanting, repeating; anudhyāyan-or by meditating upon; bhaktaḥ-a devotee; bhagavataḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavet-one can become.





Anyone who chants this narration or even thinks of this narration about the activities of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa certainly becomes a pure devotee of the Lord.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura herein gives a very good example. When one is very eager for more and more money, he is not satisfied even when he is a millionaire or a multimillionaire, but wants to earn more and more money by any means. The same mentality is present in a devotee. The devotee is never satisfied, thinking, "This is the limit of my devotional service." The more he engages in the service of the Lord, the more service he wants to give. This is the position of a devotee. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, in his family life, was certainly a pure devotee, complete in every respect, because his mind and all his senses were engaged in devotional service (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane). Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was self-satisfied because all of his senses were engaged in devotional service (sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam/ hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). Nonetheless, although Mahārāja Ambarīṣa had engaged all his senses in devotional service, he left his home and went to the forest to concentrate his mind fully at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, exactly as a mercantile man, even though complete in wealth, tries to earn more and more. This mentality of getting more and more engaged in devotional service puts one in the most exalted position. Whereas on the karma platform the mercantile man who wants more and more money becomes increasingly bound and entangled, the devotee becomes increasingly liberated.





TEXT 28



ambarīṣasya caritaṁ

ye śṛṇvanti mahātmanaḥ

muktiṁ prayānti te sarve

bhaktyā viṣṇoḥ prasādataḥ

SYNONYMS



ambarīṣasya-of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; caritam-character; ye-persons who; śṛṇvanti-hear; mahā-ātmanaḥ-of the great personality, the great devotee; muktim-liberation; prayānti-certainly they attain; te-such persons; sarve-all of them; bhaktyā-simply by devotional service; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; prasādataḥ-by the mercy.





By the grace of the Lord, those who hear about the activities of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the great devotee, certainly become liberated or become devotees without delay.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Durvāsā Muni's Life Spared."



Chapter Six



The Downfall of Saubhari Muni





After describing the descendants of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, Śukadeva Gosvāmī described all the kings from Śaśāda to Māndhātā, and in this connection he also described how the great sage Saubhari married the daughters of Māndhātā.





Mahārāja Ambarīṣa had three sons, named Virūpa, Ketumān and Śambhu. The son of Virūpa was Pṛṣadaśva, and his son was Rathītara. Rathītara had no sons, but when he requested the favor of the great sage Aṅgirā, the sage begot several sons in the womb of Rathītara's wife. When the sons were born, they became the dynasty of Aṅgirā Ṛṣi and of Rathītara.





The son of Manu was Ikṣvāku, who had one hundred sons, of whom Vikukṣi, Nimi and Daṇḍakā were the eldest. The sons of Mahārāja Ikṣvāku became kings of different parts of the world. Because of violating sacrificial rules and regulations, one of these sons, Vikukṣi, was banished from the kingdom. By the mercy of Vasiṣṭha and the power of mystic yoga, Mahārāja Ikṣvāku attained liberation after giving up his material body. When Mahārāja Ikṣvāku expired, his son Vikukṣi returned and took charge of the kingdom. He performed various types of sacrifices, and thus he pleased the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This Vikukṣi later became celebrated as Saśāda.





Vikukṣi's son fought with the demons for the sake of the demigods, and because of his valuable service he became famous as Purañjaya, Indravāha and Kakutstha. The son of Purañjaya was Anenā, the son of Anenā was Pṛthu, and the son of Pṛthu was Viśvagandhi. The son of Viśvagandhi was Candra, the son of Candra was Yuvanāśva, and his son was Śrāvasta, who constructed Śrāvastī Purī. The son of Śrāvasta was Bṛhadaśva. Bṛhadaśva's son Kuvalayāśva killed a demon named Dhundhu, and thus he became celebrated as Dhundhumāra, "the killer of Dhundhu." The sons of the killer of Dhundhu were Dṛḍhāśva, Kapilāśva and Bhadrāśva. He also had thousands of other sons, but they burned to ashes in the fire emanating from Dhundhu. The son of Dṛḍhāśva was Haryaśva, the son of Haryaśva was Nikumbha, the son of Nikumbha was Bahulāśva, and the son of Bahulāśva was Kṛśāśva. The son of Kṛśāśva was Senajit, and his son was Yuvanāśva.





Yuvanāśva married one hundred wives, but he had no sons, and therefore he entered the forest. In the forest, the sages performed a sacrifice known as Indra-yajña on his behalf. Once, however, the King became so thirsty in the forest that he drank the water kept for performing yajña. Consequently, after some time, a son came forth from the right side of his abdomen. The son, who was very beautiful, was crying to drink breast milk, and Indra gave the child his index finger to suck. Thus the son became known as Māndhātā. In due course of time, Yuvanāśva achieved perfection by performing austerities.





Thereafter, Māndhātā became the emperor and ruled the earth, which consists of seven islands. Thieves and rogues were very much afraid of this powerful king, and therefore the king was known as Trasaddasyu, meaning "one who is very fearful to rogues and thieves." Māndhātā begot sons in the womb of his wife, Bindumatī. These sons were Purukutsa, Ambarīṣa and Mucukunda. These three sons had fifty sisters, all of whom became wives of the great sage known as Saubhari.





In this connection, Śukadeva Gosvāmī described the history of Saubhari Muni, who, because of sensual agitation caused by fish, fell from his yoga and wanted to marry all the daughters of Māndhātā for sexual pleasure. Later, Saubhari Muni became very regretful. Thus he accepted the order of vānaprastha, performed very severe austerities, and thus attained perfection. In this regard, Śukadeva Gosvāmī described how Saubhari Muni's wives also became perfect.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

virūpaḥ ketumāñ chambhur

ambarīṣa-sutās trayaḥ

virūpāt pṛṣadaśvo 'bhūt

tat-putras tu rathītaraḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; virūpaḥ-by the name Virūpa; ketumān-by the name Ketumān; śambhuḥ-by the name Śambhu; ambarīṣa-of Ambarīṣa Mahārāja; sutāḥ trayaḥ-the three sons; virūpāt-from Virūpa; pṛṣadaśvaḥ-of the name Pṛṣadaśva; abhūt-there was; tat-putraḥ-his son; tu-and; rathītaraḥ-of the name Rathītara.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Ambarīṣa had three sons, named Virūpa, Ketumān and Śambhu. From Virūpa came a son named Pṛṣadaśva, and from Pṛṣadaśva came a son named Rathītara.





TEXT 2



rathītarasyāprajasya

bhāryāyāṁ tantave 'rthitaḥ

aṅgirā janayām āsa

brahma-varcasvinaḥ sutān

SYNONYMS



rathītarasya-of Rathītara; aprajasya-who had no sons; bhāryāyām-unto his wife; tantave-for increasing offspring; arthitaḥ-being requested; aṅgirāḥ-the great sage Aṅgirā; janayām āsa-caused to take birth; brahma-varcasvinaḥ-who had brahminical qualities; sutān-sons.





Rathītara had no sons, and therefore he requested the great sage Aṅgirā to beget sons for him. Because of this request, Aṅgirā begot sons in the womb of Rathītara's wife. All these sons were born with brahminical prowess.





In the Vedic age a man was sometimes called upon to beget sons in the womb of a lesser man's wife for the sake of better progeny. In such an instance, the woman is compared to an agricultural field. A person possessing an agricultural field may employ another person to produce food grains from it, but because the grains are produced from the land, they are considered the property of the owner of the land. Similarly, a woman was sometimes allowed to be impregnated by someone other than her husband, but the sons born of her would then become her husband's sons. Such sons were called kṣetra jāta. Because Rathītara had no sons, he took advantage of this method.





TEXT 3



ete kṣetra-prasūtā vai

punas tv āṅgirasāḥ smṛtāḥ

rathītarāṇāṁ pravarāḥ

kṣetropetā dvi-jātayaḥ

SYNONYMS



ete-the sons begotten by Aṅgirā; kṣetra-prasūtāḥ-became the children of Rathītara and belonged to his family (because they were born from the womb of his wife); vai-indeed; punaḥ-again; tu-but; āṅgirasāḥ-of the dynasty of Aṅgirā; smṛtāḥ-they were called; rathītarāṇām-of all the sons of Rathītara; pravarāḥ-the chief; kṣetra-upetāḥ-because of being born of the kṣetra (field); dvi-jātayaḥ-called brāhmaṇa (being a mixture of brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya).





Having been born from the womb of Rathītara's wife, all these sons were known as the dynasty of Rathītara, but because they were born from the semen of Aṅgirā, they were also known as the dynasty of Aṅgirā. Among all the progeny of Rathītara, these sons were the most prominent because, owing to their birth, they were considered brāhmaṇas.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives the meaning of dvi jātayaḥ as "mixed caste," indicating a mixture of brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya.





TEXT 4



kṣuvatas tu manor jajñe

ikṣvākur ghrāṇataḥ sutaḥ

tasya putra-śata-jyeṣṭhā

vikukṣi-nimi-daṇḍakāḥ

SYNONYMS



kṣuvataḥ-while sneezing; tu-but; manoḥ-of Manu; jajñe-was born; ikṣvākuḥ-by the name Ikṣvāku; ghrāṇataḥ-from the nostrils; sutaḥ-the son; tasya-of Ikṣvāku; putra-śata-one hundred sons; jyeṣṭhāḥ-prominent; vikukṣi-of the name Vikukṣi; nimi-by the name Nimi; daṇḍakāḥ-by the name Daṇḍakā.





The son of Manu was Ikṣvāku. When Manu was sneezing, Ikṣvāku was born from Manu's nostrils. King Ikṣvāku had one hundred sons, of whom Vikukṣi, Nimi and Daṇḍakā were the most prominent.





According to Śrīdhara Svāmī, although the Bhāgavatam (9.1.11–12) has previously included Ikṣvāku among the ten sons begotten by Manu in his wife Śraddhā, this was a generalization. It is here specifically explained that Ikṣvāku was born simply from the sneezing of Manu.





TEXT 5



teṣāṁ purastād abhavann

āryāvarte nṛpā nṛpa

pañca-viṁśatiḥ paścāc ca

trayo madhye 'pare 'nyataḥ

SYNONYMS



teṣām-among all of those sons; purastāt-on the eastern side; abhavan-they became; āryāvarte-in the place within the Himalaya and Vindhya mountains known as Āryāvarta; nṛpāḥ-kings; nṛpa-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); pañca-viṁśatiḥ-twenty-five; paścāt-on the western side; ca-also; trayaḥ-three of them; madhye-in the middle (between east and west); apare-others; anyataḥ-in other places.





Of the one hundred sons, twenty-five became kings in the western side of Āryāvarta, a place between the Himalaya and Vindhya mountains. Another twenty-five sons became kings in the east of Āryāvarta, and the three principal sons became kings in the middle. The other sons became kings in various other places.





TEXT 6



sa ekadāṣṭakā-śrāddhe

ikṣvākuḥ sutam ādiśat

māṁsam ānīyatāṁ medhyaṁ

vikukṣe gaccha mā ciram

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that king (Mahārāja Ikṣvāku); ekadā-once upon a time; aṣṭakā-śrāddhe-during January, February and March, when offerings are made to the forefathers; ikṣvākuḥ-King Ikṣvāku; sutam-to his son; ādiśat-ordered; māṁsam-flesh; ānīyatām-bring here; medhyam-pure (obtained by hunting); vikukṣe-O Vikukṣi; gaccha-immediately go; mā ciram-without delay.





During the months of January, February and March, oblations offered to the forefathers are called aṣṭakā-śrāddha. The śrāddha ceremony is held during the dark fortnight of the month. When Mahārāja Ikṣvāku was performing his oblations in this ceremony, he ordered his son Vikukṣi to go immediately to the forest to bring some pure flesh.





TEXT 7



tatheti sa vanaṁ gatvā

mṛgān hatvā kriyārhaṇān

śrānto bubhukṣito vīraḥ

śaśaṁ cādad apasmṛtiḥ

SYNONYMS



tathā-according to the direction; iti-thus; saḥ-Vikukṣi; vanam-to the forest; gatvā-going; mṛgān-animals; hatvā-killing; kriyā-arhaṇān-suitable for offering to the yajña in the śrāddha ceremony; śrāntaḥ-when he was fatigued; bubhukṣitaḥ-and hungry; vīraḥ-the hero; śaśam-a rabbit; ca-also; ādat-he ate; apasmṛtiḥ-forgetting (that the flesh was meant for offering in the śrāddha).





Thereafter, Ikṣvāku's son Vikukṣi went to the forest and killed many animals suitable for being offered as oblations. But when fatigued and hungry he became forgetful and ate a rabbit he had killed.





It is evident that kṣatriyas killed animals in the forest because the flesh of the animals was suitable to be offered at a particular type of yajña. Offering oblations to the forefathers in the ceremony known as śrāddha is also a kind of yajña. In this yajña, flesh obtained from the forest by hunting could be offered. However, in the present age, Kali-yuga, this kind of offering is forbidden. Quoting from the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:



aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ

sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ

kalau pañca vivarjayet

[Cc. Ādi 17.164]





"In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyāsa, the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a man's begetting children in his brother's wife." The word pala-paitṛkam refers to an offering of flesh in oblations to forefathers. Formerly, such an offering was allowed, but in this age it is forbidden. In this age, Kali-yuga, everyone is expert in hunting animals, but most of the people are śūdras, not kṣatriyas. According to Vedic injunctions, however, only kṣatriyas are allowed to hunt, whereas śūdras are allowed to eat flesh after offering goats or other insignificant animals before the deity of goddess Kālī or similar demigods. On the whole, meat-eating is not completely forbidden; a particular class of men is allowed to eat meat according to various circumstances and injunctions. As far as eating beef is concerned, however, it is strictly prohibited to everyone. Thus in Bhagavad-gītā Kṛṣṇa personally speaks of go-rakṣyam, cow protection. Meat-eaters, according to their different positions and the directions of the śāstra, are allowed to eat flesh, but never the flesh of cows. Cows must be given all protection.





TEXT 8



śeṣaṁ nivedayām āsa

pitre tena ca tad-guruḥ

coditaḥ prokṣaṇāyāha

duṣṭam etad akarmakam

SYNONYMS



śeṣam-the remnants; nivedayām āsa-he offered; pitre-to his father; tena-by him; ca-also; tat-guruḥ-their priest or spiritual master; coditaḥ-being requested; prokṣaṇāya-for purifying; āha-said; duṣṭam-polluted; etat-all this flesh; akarmakam-not fit to be used for offering in śrāddha.





Vikukṣi offered the remnants of the flesh to King Ikṣvāku, who gave it to Vasiṣṭha for purification. But Vasiṣṭha could immediately understand that part of the flesh had already been taken by Vikukṣi, and therefore he said that it was unfit to be used in the śrāddha ceremony.





That which is meant to be offered in yajña cannot be tasted by anyone before being offered to the Deity. In our temples, this regulation is in effect. One cannot eat food from the kitchen unless it is offered to the Deity. If something is taken before being offered to the Deity, the entire preparation is polluted and can no longer be offered. Those engaged in Deity worship must know this very well so that they may be saved from committing offenses in Deity worship.





TEXT 9



jñātvā putrasya tat karma

guruṇābhihitaṁ nṛpaḥ

deśān niḥsārayām āsa

sutaṁ tyakta-vidhiṁ ruṣā

SYNONYMS



jñātvā-knowing; putrasya-of his son; tat-that; karma-action; guruṇā-by the spiritual master (Vasiṣṭha); abhihitam-informed; nṛpaḥ-the King (Ikṣvāku); deśāt-from the country; niḥsārayām āsa-drove away; sutam-his son; tyakta-vidhim-because he violated the regulative principles; ruṣā-out of anger.





When King Ikṣvāku, thus informed by Vasiṣṭha, understood what his son Vikukṣi had done, he was extremely angry. Thus he ordered Vikukṣi to leave the country because Vikukṣi had violated the regulative principles.





TEXT 10



sa tu vipreṇa saṁvādaṁ

jñāpakena samācaran

tyaktvā kalevaraṁ yogī

sa tenāvāpa yat param

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Mahārāja Ikṣvāku; tu-indeed; vipreṇa-with the brāhmaṇa (Vasiṣṭha); saṁvādam-discussion; jñāpakena-with the informer; samācaran-doing accordingly; tyaktvā-giving up; kalevaram-this body; yogī-being a bhakti-yogī in the order of renunciation; saḥ-the King; tena-by such instruction; avāpa-achieved; yat-that position which; param-supreme.





Having been instructed by the great and learned brāhmaṇa Vasiṣṭha, who discoursed about the Absolute Truth, Mahārāja Ikṣvāku became renounced. By following the principles for a yogī, he certainly achieved the supreme perfection after giving up his material body.





TEXT 11



pitary uparate 'bhyetya

vikukṣiḥ pṛthivīm imām

śāsad īje hariṁ yajñaiḥ

śaśāda iti viśrutaḥ

SYNONYMS



pitari-when his father; uparate-upon being relieved of the kingdom; abhyetya-having come back; vikukṣiḥ-the son named Vikukṣi; pṛthivīm-the planet earth; imām-this; śāsat-ruling; īje-worshiped; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajñaiḥ-by performing various sacrifices; śaśa-adaḥ-Saśāda ("the eater of a rabbit"); iti-thus; viśrutaḥ-celebrated.





After his father's disappearance, Vikukṣi returned to the country and thus became the king, ruling the planet earth and performing various sacrifices to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vikukṣi later became celebrated as Saśāda.





TEXT 12



purañjayas tasya suta

indravāha itīritaḥ

kakutstha iti cāpy uktaḥ

śṛṇu nāmāni karmabhiḥ

SYNONYMS



puram-jayaḥ-Purañjaya ("the conqueror of the residence"); tasya-his (Vikukṣi's); sutaḥ-son; indra-vāhaḥ-Indravāha ("he whose carrier is Indra"); iti-thus; īritaḥ-known as such; kakutsthaḥ-Kakutstha ("situated on the hump of a bull"); iti-thus; ca-also; api-indeed; uktaḥ-known as such; śṛṇu-just hear; nāmāni-all the names; karmabhiḥ-according to one's work.





The son of Saśāda was Purañjaya, who is also known as Indravāha and sometimes as Kakutstha. Please hear from me how he received different names for different activities.





TEXT 13



kṛtānta āsīt samaro

devānāṁ saha dānavaiḥ

pārṣṇigrāho vṛto vīro

devair daitya-parājitaiḥ

SYNONYMS



kṛta-antaḥ-a devastating war; āsīt-there was; samaraḥ-a fight; devānām-of the demigods; saha-with; dānavaiḥ-the demons; pārṣṇigrāhaḥ-a very good assistant; vṛtaḥ-accepted; vīraḥ-a hero; devaiḥ-by the demigods; daitya-by the demons; parājitaiḥ-who had been conquered.





Formerly, there was a devastating war between the demigods and the demons. The demigods, having been defeated, accepted Purañjaya as their assistant and then conquered the demons. Therefore this hero is known as Purañjaya, "he who conquered the residence of the demons."





TEXT 14



vacanād deva-devasya

viṣṇor viśvātmanaḥ prabhoḥ

vāhanatve vṛtas tasya

babhūvendro mahā-vṛṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



vacanāt-by the order or the words; deva-devasya-of the Supreme Lord of all demigods; viṣṇoḥ-Lord Viṣṇu; viśva-ātmanaḥ-the Supersoul of the entire creation; prabhoḥ-the Lord, the controller; vāhanatve-because of becoming the carrier; vṛtaḥ-engaged; tasya-in the service of Purañjaya; babhūva-he became; indraḥ-the King of heaven; mahā-vṛṣaḥ-a great bull.





Purañjaya agreed to kill all the demons, on the condition that Indra would be his carrier. Because of pride, Indra could not accept this proposal, but later, by the order of the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, Indra did accept it and became a great bull carrier for Purañjaya.





TEXTS 15–16



sa sannaddho dhanur divyam

ādāya viśikhāñ chitān

stūyamānas tam āruhya

yuyutsuḥ kakudi sthitaḥ

tejasāpyāyito viṣṇoḥ



puruṣasya mahātmanaḥ

pratīcyāṁ diśi daityānāṁ

nyaruṇat tridaśaiḥ puram

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Purañjaya; sannaddhaḥ-being well equipped; dhanuḥ divyam-a first-class or transcendental bow; ādāya-taking; viśikhān-arrows; śitān-very sharp; stūyamānaḥ-being praised very much; tam-him (the bull); āruhya-getting on; yuyutsuḥ-prepared to fight; kakudi-on the hump of the bull; sthitaḥ-being situated; tejasā-by the power; āpyāyitaḥ-being favored; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; puruṣasya-the Supreme Person; mahā-ātmanaḥ-the Supersoul; pratīcyām-on the western; diśi-direction; daityānām-of the demons; nyaruṇat-captured; tridaśaiḥ-surrounded by the demigods; puram-the residence.





Well protected by armor and desiring to fight, Purañjaya took up a transcendental bow and very sharp arrows, and, while being highly praised by the demigods, he got up on the back of the bull [Indra] and sat on its hump. Thus he is known as Kakutstha. Being empowered by Lord Viṣṇu, who is the Supersoul and the Supreme Person, Purañjaya sat on the great bull and is therefore known as Indravāha. Surrounded by the demigods, he attacked the residence of the demons in the west.





TEXT 17



tais tasya cābhūt pradhanaṁ

tumulaṁ loma-harṣaṇam

yamāya bhallair anayad

daityān abhiyayur mṛdhe

SYNONYMS



taiḥ-with the demons; tasya-of him, Purañjaya; ca-also; abhūt-there was; pradhanam-a fight; tumulam-very fierce; loma-harṣaṇam-the hearing of which makes one's hairs stand on end; yamāya-to the residence of Yamarāja; bhallaiḥ-by arrows; anayat-sent; daityān-the demons; abhiyayuḥ-who came toward him; mṛdhe-in that fight.





There was a fierce battle between the demons and Purañjaya. Indeed, it was so fierce that when one hears about it one's hairs stand on end. All the demons bold enough to come before Purañjaya were immediately sent to the residence of Yamarāja by his arrows.





TEXT 18



tasyeṣu-pātābhimukhaṁ

yugāntāgnim ivolbaṇam

visṛjya dudruvur daityā

hanyamānāḥ svam ālayam

SYNONYMS



tasya-his (Purañjaya's); iṣu-pāta-the throwing of the arrows; abhimukham-in front of; yuga-anta-at the end of the millennium; agnim-the flames; iva-exactly like; ulbaṇam-fierce; visṛjya-giving up the attack; dudruvuḥ-ran away; daityāḥ-all the demons; hanyamānāḥ-being killed (by Purañjaya); svam-own; ālayam-to the residence.





To save themselves from the blazing arrows of Indravāha, which resembled the flames of devastation at the end of the millennium, the demons who remained when the rest of their army was killed fled very quickly to their respective homes.





TEXT 19



jitvā paraṁ dhanaṁ sarvaṁ

sastrīkaṁ vajra-pāṇaye

pratyayacchat sa rājarṣir

iti nāmabhir āhṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



jitvā-conquering; param-enemies; dhanam-wealth; sarvam-everything; sa-strīkam-with their wives; vajra-pāṇaye-unto Indra, who carries the thunderbolt; pratyayacchat-returned and delivered; saḥ-that; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-saintly king (Purañjaya); iti-thus; nāmabhiḥ-by names; āhṛtaḥ-was called.





After conquering the enemy, the saintly king Purañjaya gave everything, including the enemy's riches and wives, to Indra, who carries a thunderbolt. For this he is celebrated as Purañjaya. Thus Purañjaya is known by different names because of his different activities.





TEXT 20



purañjayasya putro 'bhūd

anenās tat-sutaḥ pṛthuḥ

viśvagandhis tataś candro

yuvanāśvas tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



purañjayasya-of Purañjaya; putraḥ-son; abhūt-was born; anenāḥ-by the name Anenā; tat-sutaḥ-his son; pṛthuḥ-of the name Pṛthu; viśvagandhiḥ-of the name Viśvagandhi; tataḥ-his son; candraḥ-by the name Candra; yuvanāśvaḥ-of the name Yuvanāśva; tu-indeed; tat-sutaḥ-his son.





The son of Purañjaya was known as Anenā, Anenā's son was Pṛthu, and Pṛthu's son was Viśvagandhi. Viśvagandhi's son was Candra, and Candra's son was Yuvanāśva.





TEXT 21



śrāvastas tat-suto yena

śrāvastī nirmame purī

bṛhadaśvas tu śrāvastis

tataḥ kuvalayāśvakaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrāvastaḥ-by the name Śrāvasta; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Yuvanāśva; yena-by whom; śrāvastī-of the name Śrāvastī; nirmame-was constructed; purī-the great township; bṛhadaśvaḥ-Bṛhadaśva; tu-however; śrāvastiḥ-begotten by Śrāvasta; tataḥ-from him; kuvalayāśvakaḥ-of the name Kuvalayāśva.





The son of Yuvanāśva was Śrāvasta, who constructed a township known as Śrāvastī Purī. The son of Śrāvasta was Bṛhadaśva, and his son was Kuvalayāśva. In this way the dynasty increased.





TEXT 22



yaḥ priyārtham utaṅkasya

dhundhu-nāmāsuraṁ balī

sutānām eka-viṁśatyā

sahasrair ahanad vṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-he who; priya-artham-for the satisfaction; utaṅkasya-of the great sage Utaṅka; dhundhu-nāma-of the name Dhundhu; asuram-a demon; balī-very powerful (Kuvalayāśva); sutānām-of sons; eka-viṁśatyā-by twenty-one; sahasraiḥ-thousands; ahanat-killed; vṛtaḥ-surrounded.





To satisfy the sage Utaṅka, the greatly powerful Kuvalayāśva killed a demon named Dhundhu. He did this with the assistance of his twenty-one thousand sons.





TEXTS 23–24



dhundhumāra iti khyātas

tat-sutās te ca jajvaluḥ

dhundhor mukhāgninā sarve

traya evāvaśeṣitāḥ

dṛḍhāśvaḥ kapilāśvaś ca



bhadrāśva iti bhārata

dṛḍhāśva-putro haryaśvo

nikumbhas tat-sutaḥ smṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



dhundhu-māraḥ-the killer of Dhundhu; iti-thus; khyātaḥ-celebrated; tat-sutāḥ-his sons; te-all of them; ca-also; jajvaluḥ-burned; dhundhoḥ-of Dhundhu; mukha-agninā-by the fire emanating from the mouth; sarve-all of them; trayaḥ-three; eva-only; avaśeṣitāḥ-remained alive; dṛḍhāśvaḥ-Dṛḍhāśva; kapilāśvaḥ-Kapilāśva; ca-and; bhadrāśvaḥ-Bhadrāśva; iti-thus; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; dṛḍhāśva-putraḥ-the son of Dṛḍhāśva; haryaśvaḥ-named Haryaśva; nikumbhaḥ-Nikumbha; tat-sutaḥ-his son; smṛtaḥ-well known.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, for this reason Kuvalayāśva is celebrated as Dhundhumāra ["the killer of Dhundhu"]. All but three of his sons, however, were burned to ashes by the fire emanating from Dhundhu's mouth. The remaining sons were Dṛḍhāśva, Kapilāśva and Bhadrāśva. From Dṛḍhāśva came a son named Haryaśva, whose son is celebrated as Nikumbha.





TEXT 25



bahulāśvo nikumbhasya

kṛśāśvo 'thāsya senajit

yuvanāśvo 'bhavat tasya

so 'napatyo vanaṁ gataḥ

SYNONYMS



bahulāśvaḥ-of the name Bahulāśva; nikumbhasya-of Nikumbha; kṛśāśvaḥ-of the name Kṛśāśva; atha-thereafter; asya-of Kṛśāśva; senajit-Senajit; yuvanāśvaḥ-of the name Yuvanāśva; abhavat-was born; tasya-of Senajit; saḥ-he; anapatyaḥ-without any sons; vanam gataḥ-retired to the forest as a vānaprastha.





The son of Nikumbha was Bahulāśva, the son of Bahulāśva was Kṛśāśva, the son of Kṛśāśva was Senajit, and the son of Senajit was Yuvanāśva. Yuvanāśva had no sons, and thus he retired from family life and went to the forest.





TEXT 26



bhāryā-śatena nirviṇṇa

ṛṣayo 'sya kṛpālavaḥ

iṣṭiṁ sma vartayāṁ cakrur

aindrīṁ te susamāhitāḥ

SYNONYMS



bhāryā-śatena-with one hundred wives; nirviṇṇaḥ-very morose; ṛṣayaḥ-the sages (in the forest); asya-upon him; kṛpālavaḥ-very merciful; iṣṭim-a ritualistic ceremony; sma-in the past; vartayām cakruḥ-began to execute; aindrīm-known as an Indra-yajña; te-all of them; su-samāhitāḥ-being very careful and attentive.





Although Yuvanāśva went into the forest with his one hundred wives, all of them were very morose. The sages in the forest, however, being very kind to the King, began very carefully and attentively performing an Indra-yajña so that the King might have a son.





One may enter the vānaprastha order of life with his wife, but the vānaprastha order means complete retirement from household life. Although King Yuvanāśva retired from family life, he and his wives were always morose because he had no son.





TEXT 27



rājā tad-yajña-sadanaṁ

praviṣṭo niśi tarṣitaḥ

dṛṣṭvā śayānān viprāṁs tān

papau mantra-jalaṁ svayam

SYNONYMS



rājā-the King (Yuvanāśva); tat-yajña-sadanam-the arena of sacrifice; praviṣṭaḥ-entered; niśi-at night; tarṣitaḥ-being thirsty; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; śayānān-lying down; viprān-all the brāhmaṇas; tān-all of them; papau-drank; mantra-jalam-water sanctified by mantras; svayam-personally.





Being thirsty one night, the King entered the arena of sacrifice, and when he saw all the brāhmaṇas lying down, he personally drank the sanctified water meant to be drunk by his wife.





Yajñas performed by brāhmaṇas according to Vedic ritualistic ceremonies are so potent that the sanctifying of water by Vedic mantras can bring about the desired result. In this instance, the brāhmaṇas sanctified the water so that the King's wife might drink it in the yajña, but by providence the King himself went there at night and, being thirsty, drank the water.





TEXT 28



utthitās te niśamyātha

vyudakaṁ kalaśaṁ prabho

papracchuḥ kasya karmedaṁ

pītaṁ puṁsavanaṁ jalam

SYNONYMS



utthitāḥ-after awakening; te-all of them; niśamya-seeing; atha-thereafter; vyudakam-empty; kalaśam-the waterpot; prabho-O King Parīkṣit; papracchuḥ-inquired; kasya-whose; karma-act; idam-this; pītam-drunk; puṁsavanam-which was to cause the birth of a child; jalam-water.





When the brāhmaṇas got up from bed and saw the waterpot empty, they inquired who had done this work of drinking the water meant for begetting a child.





TEXT 29



rājñā pītaṁ viditvā vai

īśvara-prahitena te

īśvarāya namaś cakrur

aho daiva-balaṁ balam

SYNONYMS



rājñā-by the King; pītam-drunk; viditvā-understanding this; vai-indeed; īśvara-prahitena-inspired by providence; te-all of them; īśvarāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller; namaḥ cakruḥ-offered respectful obeisances; aho-alas; daiva-balam-providential power; balam-is actual power.





When the brāhmaṇas came to understand that the King, inspired by the supreme controller, had drunk the water, they all exclaimed "Alas! The power of providence is real power. No one can counteract the power of the Supreme." In this way they offered their respectful obeisances unto the Lord.





TEXT 30



tataḥ kāla upāvṛtte

kukṣiṁ nirbhidya dakṣiṇam

yuvanāśvasya tanayaś

cakravartī jajāna ha

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; kāle-time; upāvṛtte-being mature; kukṣim-the lower part of the abdomen; nirbhidya-piercing; dakṣiṇam-the right side; yuvanāśvasya-of King Yuvanāśva; tanayaḥ-a son; cakravartī-with all the good symptoms of a king; jajāna-generated; ha-in the past.





Thereafter, in due course of time, a son with all the good symptoms of a powerful king came forth from the lower right side of King Yuvanāśva's abdomen.





TEXT 31



kaṁ dhāsyati kumāro 'yaṁ

stanye rorūyate bhṛśam

māṁ dhātā vatsa mā rodīr

itīndro deśinīm adāt

SYNONYMS



kam-by whom; dhāsyati-will he be cared for by being supplied breast milk; kumāraḥ-child; ayam-this; stanye-for drinking breast milk; rorūyate-is crying; bhṛśam-so much; mām dhātā-just drink me; vatsa-my dear child; mā rodīḥ-do not cry; iti-thus; indraḥ-King Indra; deśinīm-the index finger; adāt-gave him to suck.





The baby cried so much for breast milk that all the brāhmaṇas were very unhappy. "Who will take care of this baby?" they said. Then Indra, who was worshiped in that yajña, came and solaced the baby. "Do not cry," Indra said. Then Indra put his index finger in the baby's mouth and said, "You may drink me."





TEXT 32



na mamāra pitā tasya

vipra-deva-prasādataḥ

yuvanāśvo 'tha tatraiva

tapasā siddhim anvagāt

SYNONYMS



na-not; mamāra-died; pitā-the father; tasya-of the baby; vipra-deva-prasādataḥ-because of the mercy and blessings of the brāhmaṇas; yuvanāśvaḥ-King Yuvanāśva; atha-thereafter; tatra eva-in that very place; tapasā-by executing austerity; siddhim-perfection; anvagāt-achieved.





Because Yuvanāśva, the father of the baby, was blessed by the brāhmaṇas, he did not fall a victim to death. After this incident, he performed severe austerities and achieved perfection in that very spot.





TEXTS 33–34



trasaddasyur itīndro 'ṅga

vidadhe nāma yasya vai

yasmāt trasanti hy udvignā

dasyavo rāvaṇādayaḥ

yauvanāśvo 'tha māndhātā



cakravarty avanīṁ prabhuḥ

sapta-dvīpavatīm ekaḥ

śaśāsācyuta-tejasā

SYNONYMS



trasat-dasyuḥ-of the name Trasaddasyu ("one who threatens thieves and rogues"); iti-thus; indraḥ-the King of heaven; aṅga-my dear King; vidadhe-gave; nāma-the name; yasya-whom; vai-indeed; yasmāt-from whom; trasanti-are afraid; hi-indeed; udvignāḥ-the cause of anxiety; dasyavaḥ-thieves and rogues; rāvaṇa-ādayaḥ-headed by great Rākṣasas like Rāvaṇa; yauvanāśvaḥ-the son of Yuvanāśva; atha-thus; māndhātā-known as Māndhātā; cakravartī-the emperor of the world; avanīm-this surface of the world; prabhuḥ-the master; sapta-dvīpa-vatīm-consisting of seven islands; ekaḥ-one alone; śaśāsa-ruled; acyuta-tejasā-being powerful by the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Māndhātā, the son of Yuvanāśva, was the cause of fear for Rāvaṇa and other thieves and rogues who caused anxiety. O King Parīkṣit, because they feared him, the son of Yuvanāśva was known as Trasaddasyu. This name was given by King Indra. By the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the son of Yuvanāśva was so powerful that when he became emperor he ruled the entire world, consisting of seven islands, without any second ruler.





TEXTS 35–36



īje ca yajñaṁ kratubhir

ātma-vid bhūri-dakṣiṇaiḥ

sarva-devamayaṁ devaṁ

sarvātmakam atīndriyam

dravyaṁ mantro vidhir yajño



yajamānas tathartvijaḥ

dharmo deśaś ca kālaś ca

sarvam etad yad ātmakam

SYNONYMS



īje-he worshiped; ca-also; yajñam-the Lord of sacrifices; kratubhiḥ-by great ritualistic performances; ātma-vit-fully conscious by self-realization; bhūri-dakṣiṇaiḥ-by giving large contributions to the brāhmaṇas; sarva-deva-mayam-consisting of all the demigods; devam-the Lord; sarva-ātmakam-the Supersoul of everyone; ati-indriyam-transcendentally situated; dravyam-ingredients; mantraḥ-chanting of the Vedic hymns; vidhiḥ-regulative principles; yajñaḥ-worshiping; yajamānaḥ-the performer; tathā-with; ṛtvijaḥ-the priests; dharmaḥ-religious principles; deśaḥ-the country; ca-and; kālaḥ-the time; ca-also; sarvam-everything; etat-all these; yat-that which is; ātmakam-favorable for self-realization.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not different from the auspicious aspects of great sacrifices, such as the ingredients of the sacrifice, the chanting of Vedic hymns, the regulative principles, the performer, the priests, the result of the sacrifice, the arena of sacrifice, and the time of sacrifice. Knowing the principles of self-realization, Māndhātā worshiped that transcendentally situated Supreme Soul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, who comprises all the demigods. He also gave immense charity to the brāhmaṇas, and thus he performed yajña to worship the Lord.





TEXT 37



yāvat sūrya udeti sma

yāvac ca pratitiṣṭhati

tat sarvaṁ yauvanāśvasya

māndhātuḥ kṣetram ucyate

SYNONYMS



yāvat-as long as; sūryaḥ-the sun; udeti-has risen on the horizon; sma-in the past; yāvat-as long as; ca-also; pratitiṣṭhati-continues to stay; tat-all those things mentioned above; sarvam-everything; yauvanāśvasya-of the son of Yuvanāśva; māndhātuḥ-called Māndhātā; kṣetram-location; ucyate-is said to be.





All places, from where the sun rises on the horizon, shining brilliantly, to where the sun sets, are known as the possession of the celebrated Māndhātā, the son of Yuvanāśva.





TEXT 38



śaśabindor duhitari

bindumatyām adhān nṛpaḥ

purukutsam ambarīṣaṁ

mucukundaṁ ca yoginam

teṣāṁ svasāraḥ pañcāśat

saubhariṁ vavrire patim

SYNONYMS



śaśabindoḥ-of a king known as Śaśabindu; duhitari-unto the daughter; bindumatyām-whose name was Bindumatī; adhāt-begot; nṛpaḥ-the King (Māndhātā); purukutsam-Purukutsa; ambarīṣam-Ambarīṣa; mucukundam-Mucukunda; ca-and; yoginam-a highly elevated mystic; teṣām-of them; svasāraḥ-the sisters; pañcāśat-fifty; saubharim-unto the great sage Saubhari; vavrire-accepted; patim-as husband.





Māndhātā begot three sons in the womb of Bindumatī, the daughter of Śaśabindu. These sons were Purukutsa, Ambarīṣa, and Mucukunda, a great mystic yogī. These three brothers had fifty sisters, who all accepted the great sage Saubhari as their husband.





TEXTS 39–40



yamunāntar-jale magnas

tapyamānaḥ paraṁ tapaḥ

nirvṛtiṁ mīna-rājasya

dṛṣṭvā maithuna-dharmiṇaḥ

jāta-spṛho nṛpaṁ vipraḥ



kanyām ekām ayācata

so 'py āha gṛhyatāṁ brahman

kāmaṁ kanyā svayaṁvare

SYNONYMS



yamunā-antaḥ-jale-in the deep water of the River Yamunā; magnaḥ-merged completely; tapyamānaḥ-executing austerities; param-uncommon; tapaḥ-austerity; nirvṛtim-pleasure; mīna-rājasya-of a big fish; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; maithuna-dharmiṇaḥ-engaged in sexual affairs; jāta-spṛhaḥ-became sexually inclined; nṛpam-unto the King (Māndhātā); vipraḥ-the brāhmaṇa (Saubhari Ṛṣi); kanyām ekām-one daughter; ayācata-begged for; saḥ-he, the King; api-also; āha-said; gṛhyatām-you can take; brahman-O brāhmaṇa; kāmam-as she desires; kanyā-daughter; svayaṁvare-a personal selection.





Saubhari Ṛṣi was engaged in austerity, deep in the water of the River Yamunā, when he saw a pair of fish engaged in sexual affairs. Thus he perceived the pleasure of sex life, and induced by this desire he went to King Māndhātā and begged for one of the King's daughters. In response to this request, the King said, "O brāhmaṇa, any of my daughters may accept any husband according to her personal selection."





This is the beginning of the story of Saubhari Ṛṣi. According to Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Māndhātā was the king of Mathurā, and Saubhari Ṛṣi was engaged in austerity while submerged deep within the River Yamunā. When the ṛṣi felt sexual desire, he emerged from the water and went to King Māndhātā to ask that one of the King's daughters become his wife.





TEXTS 41–42



sa vicintyāpriyaṁ strīṇāṁ

jaraṭho 'ham asan-mataḥ

valī-palita ejat-ka

ity ahaṁ pratyudāhṛtaḥ

sādhayiṣye tathātmānaṁ



sura-strīṇām abhīpsitam

kiṁ punar manujendrāṇām

iti vyavasitaḥ prabhuḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Saubhari Muni; vicintya-thinking to himself; apriyam-not liked; strīṇām-by the women; jaraṭhaḥ-being infirm because of old age; aham-I; asat-mataḥ-not desired by them; valī-wrinkled; palitaḥ-grey-haired; ejat-kaḥ-with the head always trembling; iti-in this way; aham-I; pratyudāhṛtaḥ-rejected (by them); sādhayiṣye-I shall act in such a way; tathā-as; ātmānam-my body; sura-strīṇām-to the celestial women of the heavenly planets; abhīpsitam-desirable; kim-what to speak of; punaḥ-yet; manuja-indrāṇām-of the daughters of worldly kings; iti-in this way; vyavasitaḥ-determined; prabhuḥ-Saubhari, the greatly powerful mystic.





Saubhari Muni thought: I am now feeble because of old age. My hair has become grey, my skin is slack, and my head always trembles. Besides, I am a yogī. Therefore women do not like me. Since the King has thus rejected me, I shall reform my body in such a way as to be desirable even to celestial women, what to speak of the daughters of worldly kings.





TEXT 43



muniḥ praveśitaḥ kṣatrā

kanyāntaḥpuram ṛddhimat

vṛtaḥ sa rāja-kanyābhir

ekaṁ pañcāśatā varaḥ

SYNONYMS



muniḥ-Saubhari Muni; praveśitaḥ-admitted; kṣatrā-by the palace messenger; kanyā-antaḥpuram-into the residential quarters of the princesses; ṛddhi-mat-extremely opulent in all respects; vṛtaḥ-accepted; saḥ-he; rāja-kanyābhiḥ-by all the princesses; ekam-he alone; pañcāśatā-by all fifty; varaḥ-the husband.





Thereafter, when Saubhari Muni became quite a young and beautiful person, the messenger of the palace took him inside the residential quarters of the princesses, which were extremely opulent. All fifty princesses then accepted him as their husband, although he was only one man.





TEXT 44



tāsāṁ kalir abhūd bhūyāṁs

tad-arthe 'pohya sauhṛdam

mamānurūpo nāyaṁ va

iti tad-gata-cetasām

SYNONYMS



tāsām-of all the princesses; kaliḥ-disagreement and quarrel; abhūt-there was; bhūyān-very much; tat-arthe-for the sake of Saubhari Muni; apohya-giving up; sauhṛdam-a good relationship; mama-mine; anurūpaḥ-the fit person; na-not; ayam-this; vaḥ-yours; iti-in this way; tat-gata-cetasām-being attracted by him.





Thereafter, the princesses, being attracted by Saubhari Muni, gave up their sisterly relationship and quarreled among themselves, each one of them contending, "This man is just suitable for me, and not for you." In this way there ensued a great disagreement.





TEXTS 45–46



sa bahv-ṛcas tābhir apāraṇīya-

tapaḥ-śriyānarghya-paricchadeṣu

gṛheṣu nānopavanāmalāmbhaḥ-

saraḥsu saugandhika-kānaneṣu

mahārha-śayyāsana-vastra-bhūṣaṇa-



snānānulepābhyavahāra-mālyakaiḥ

svalaṅkṛta-strī-puruṣeṣu nityadā

reme 'nugāyad-dvija-bhṛṅga-vandiṣu

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Saubhari Ṛṣi; bahu-ṛcaḥ-quite expert in utilizing Vedic mantras; tābhiḥ-with his wives; apāraṇīya-unlimited; tapaḥ-the result of austerity; śriyā-by opulences; anarghya-paraphernalia for enjoyment; paricchadeṣu-equipped with different garments and dresses; gṛheṣu-in the house and rooms; nānā-varieties of; upavana-parks; amala-clean; ambhaḥ-water; saraḥsu-in lakes; saugandhika-very fragrant; kānaneṣu-in gardens; mahā-arha-very costly; śayyā-bedding; āsana-sitting places; vastra-clothing; bhūṣaṇa-ornaments; snāna-bathing places; anulepa-sandalwood; abhyavahāra-palatable dishes; mālyakaiḥ-and with garlands; su-alaṅkṛta-properly dressed and decorated; strī-women; puruṣeṣu-with men also; nityadā-constantly; reme-enjoyed; anugāyat-followed by the singing of; dvija-birds; bhṛṅga-bumblebees; vandiṣu-and professional singers.





Because Saubhari Muni was expert in chanting mantras perfectly, his severe austerities resulted in an opulent home, with garments, ornaments, properly dressed and decorated maidservants and manservants, and varieties of parks with clear-water lakes and gardens. In the gardens, fragrant with varieties of flowers, birds chirped and bees hummed, surrounded by professional singers. Saubhari Muni's home was amply provided with valuable beds, seats, ornaments, and arrangements for bathing, and there were varieties of sandalwood creams, flower garlands, and palatable dishes. Thus surrounded by opulent paraphernalia, the muni engaged in family affairs with his numerous wives.





Saubhari Ṛṣi was a great yogī. Yogic perfection makes available eight material opulences-aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, prāpti, prākāmya, īśitva, vaśitva and kāmāvasāyitā. Saubhari Muni exhibited super-excellence in material enjoyment by dint of his yogic perfection. The word bahv-ṛca means "expert in chanting mantras." As material opulence can be achieved by ordinary material means, it can also be achieved by subtle means through mantras. By chanting mantras, Saubhari Muni arranged for material opulence, but this was not perfection in life. As will be seen, Saubhari Muni became very dissatisfied with material opulence and thus left everything and reentered the forest in the vānaprastha order and achieved final success. Those who are not ātma-tattva-vit, who do not know the spiritual value of life, can be satisfied with external material opulences, but those who are ātma-tattva-vit are not inspired by material opulence. This is the instruction we can derive from the life and activities of Saubhari Muni.





TEXT 47



yad-gārhasthyaṁ tu saṁvīkṣya

sapta-dvīpavatī-patiḥ

vismitaḥ stambham ajahāt

sārvabhauma-śriyānvitam

SYNONYMS



yat-he whose; gārhasthyam-family life, householder life; tu-but; saṁvīkṣya-observing; sapta-dvīpa-vatī-patiḥ-Māndhātā, who was the King of the entire world, consisting of seven islands; vismitaḥ-was struck with wonder; stambham-pride due to a prestigious position; ajahāt-he gave up; sārva-bhauma-the emperor of the entire world; śriyā-anvitam-blessed with all kinds of opulence.





Māndhātā, the King of the entire world, consisting of seven islands, was struck with wonder when he saw the household opulence of Saubhari Muni. Thus he gave up his false prestige in his position as emperor of the world.





Everyone is proud of his own position, but here was an astounding experience, in which the emperor of the entire world felt himself defeated in all details of material happiness by the opulence of Saubhari Muni.





TEXT 48



evaṁ gṛheṣv abhirato

viṣayān vividhaiḥ sukhaiḥ

sevamāno na cātuṣyad

ājya-stokair ivānalaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; gṛheṣu-in household affairs; abhirataḥ-being always engaged; viṣayān-material paraphernalia; vividhaiḥ-with varieties of; sukhaiḥ-happiness; sevamānaḥ-enjoying; na-not; ca-also; atuṣyat-satisfied him; ājya-stokaiḥ-by drops of fat; iva-like; analaḥ-a fire.





In this way, Saubhari Muni enjoyed sense gratification in the material world, but he was not at all satisfied, just as a fire never ceases blazing if constantly supplied with drops of fat.





Material desire is just like a blazing fire. If a fire is continually supplied with drops of fat, the fire will increase more and more and never be extinguished. Therefore the policy of trying to satisfy material desires by catering to one's material demands will never be successful. In modern civilization, everyone is engaged in economic development, which is another way of constantly dropping fat into the material fire. The Western countries have reached the summit of material civilization, but people are still dissatisfied. Real satisfaction is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (5.29), where Kṛṣṇa says:



bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ

sarva-loka-maheśvaram

suhṛdaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

jñātvā māṁ śāntim ṛcchati





"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of material miseries." One must therefore take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness by properly following the regulative principles. Then one can attain an eternal, blissful life in peace and knowledge.





TEXT 49



sa kadācid upāsīna

ātmāpahnavam ātmanaḥ

dadarśa bahv-ṛcācāryo

mīna-saṅga-samutthitam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Saubhari Muni; kadācit-one day; upāsīnaḥ-sitting down; ātma-apahnavam-degrading oneself from the platform of tapasya; ātmanaḥ-self-caused; dadarśa-observed; bahu-ṛca-ācāryaḥ-Saubhari Muni, who was expert in chanting mantras; mīna-saṅga-the sexual affairs of fish; samutthitam-caused by this incident.





Thereafter, one day while Saubhari Muni, who was expert in chanting mantras, was sitting in a secluded place, he thought to himself about the cause of his falldown, which was simply that he had associated himself with the sexual affairs of the fish.





Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that Saubhari Muni had fallen from his austerity because of a vaiṣṇava-aparādha. The history is that when Garuḍa wanted to eat fish, Saubhari Muni unnecessarily gave the fish shelter under his care. Because Garuḍa's plans for eating were disappointed, Saubhari Muni certainly committed a great offense to a Vaiṣṇava. Because of this vaiṣṇava-aparādha, an offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava, Saubhari Muni fell from his exalted position of mystic tapasya. One should not, therefore, impede the activities of a Vaiṣṇava. This is the lesson we must learn from this incident concerning Saubhari Muni.





TEXT 50



aho imaṁ paśyata me vināśaṁ

tapasvinaḥ sac-carita-vratasya

antarjale vāri-cara-prasaṅgāt

pracyāvitaṁ brahma ciraṁ dhṛtaṁ yat

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; imam-this; paśyata-just see; me-of me; vināśam-falldown; tapasvinaḥ-who was such a great mystic performing austerity; sat-carita-of very good character, observing all necessary rules and regulations; vratasya-of one who has taken a vow strictly; antaḥ-jale-in the depths of the water; vāri-cara-prasaṅgāt-because of the affairs of the aquatics; pracyāvitam-fallen; brahma-from the activities of Brahman realization or austerity; ciram-for a long time; dhṛtam-executed; yat-which.





Alas! While practicing austerity, even within the depths of the water, and while observing all the rules and regulations practiced by saintly persons, I lost the results of my long austerities simply by association with the sexual affairs of fish. Everyone should observe this falldown and learn from it.





TEXT 51



saṅgaṁ tyajeta mithuna-vratīnāṁ mumukṣuḥ

sarvātmanā na visṛjed bahir-indriyāṇi

ekaś caran rahasi cittam ananta īśe

yuñjīta tad-vratiṣu sādhuṣu cet prasaṅgaḥ

SYNONYMS



saṅgam-association; tyajeta-must give up; mithuna-vratīnām-of a person engaged in sexual affairs, legal or illegal; mumukṣuḥ-persons who desire liberation; sarva-ātmanā-in all respects; na-do not; visṛjet-employ; bahiḥ-indriyāṇi-external senses; ekaḥ-alone; caran-moving; rahasi-in a secluded place; cittam-the heart; anante īśe-fixed at the lotus feet of the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead; yuñjīta-one can engage himself; tat-vratiṣu-with persons of the same category (desiring liberation from material bondage); sādhuṣu-such saintly persons; cet-if; prasaṅgaḥ-one wants association.





A person desiring liberation from material bondage must give up the association of persons interested in sex life and should not employ his senses externally [in seeing, hearing, talking, walking and so on]. One should always stay in a secluded place, completely fixing his mind at the lotus feet of the unlimited Personality of Godhead, and if one wants any association at all, he should associate with persons similarly engaged.





Saubhari Muni, giving conclusions derived from his practical experience, instructs us that persons interested in crossing to the other side of the material ocean must give up the association of persons interested in sex life and accumulating money. This is also advised by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukasya

pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya

sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca

hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato 'py asādhu





(Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 8.27)



"Alas, for a person seriously desiring to cross the material ocean and engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without material motives, seeing a materialist engaged in sense gratification and seeing a woman who is similarly interested is more abominable than drinking poison willingly."



One who desires complete freedom from material bondage can engage himself in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. He must not associate with viṣayī-materialistic persons or those interested in sex life. Every materialist is interested in sex. Thus in plain language it is advised that an exalted saintly person avoid the association of those who are materially inclined. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura also recommends that one engage in the service of the ācāryas, and if one wants to live in association, he must live in the association of devotees (tāṅdera caraṇa sevi bhakta-sane vāsa). The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is creating many centers just to create devotees so that by associating with the members of such a center people will automatically become uninterested in material affairs. Although this is an ambitious proposal, this association is proving effective by the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. By gradually associating with the members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, simply by taking prasāda and taking part in chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, ordinary persons are being considerably elevated. Saubhari Muni regrets that he had bad association even in the deepest part of the water. Because of the bad association of the sexually engaged fish, he fell down. A secluded place is also not secure unless there is good association.





TEXT 52



ekas tapasvy aham athāmbhasi matsya-saṅgāt

pañcāśad āsam uta pañca-sahasra-sargaḥ

nāntaṁ vrajāmy ubhaya-kṛtya-manorathānāṁ

māyā-guṇair hṛta-matir viṣaye 'rtha-bhāvaḥ

SYNONYMS



ekaḥ-one only; tapasvī-great sage; aham-I; atha-thus; ambhasi-in the deep water; matsya-saṅgāt-by associating with the fish; pañcāśat-fifty; āsam-got wives; uta-and what to speak of begetting one hundred sons in each of them; pañca-sahasra-sargaḥ-procreation of five thousand; na antam-no end; vrajāmi-I can find; ubhaya-kṛtya-duties of this life and the next; manorathānām-mental concoctions; māyā-guṇaiḥ-influenced by the modes of material nature; hṛta-lost; matiḥ viṣaye-great attraction for material things; artha-bhāvaḥ-matters of self-interest.





In the beginning I was alone and engaged in performing the austerities of mystic yoga, but later, because of the association of fish engaged in sex, I desired to marry. Then I became the husband of fifty wives, and in each of them I begot one hundred sons, and thus my family increased to five thousand members. By the influence of the modes of material nature, I became fallen and thought that I would be happy in material life. Thus there is no end to my material desires for enjoyment, in this life and the next.





TEXT 53



evaṁ vasan gṛhe kālaṁ

virakto nyāsam āsthitaḥ

vanaṁ jagāmānuyayus

tat-patnyaḥ pati-devatāḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; vasan-living; gṛhe-at home; kālam-passing away time; viraktaḥ-became detached; nyāsam-in the renounced order of life; āsthitaḥ-became situated; vanam-in the forest; jagāma-he went; anuyayuḥ-was followed by; tat-patnyaḥ-all his wives; pati-devatāḥ-because their only worshipable object was their husband.





In this way he passed his life in household affairs for some time, but then he became detached from material enjoyment. To renounce material association, he accepted the vānaprastha order and went to the forest. His devoted wives followed him, for they had no shelter other than their husband.





TEXT 54



tatra taptvā tapas tīkṣṇam

ātma-darśanam ātmavān

sahaivāgnibhir ātmānaṁ

yuyoja paramātmani

SYNONYMS



tatra-in the forest; taptvā-executing austerity; tapaḥ-the regulative principles of austerity; tīkṣṇam-very severely; ātma-darśanam-which helps self-realization; ātmavān-conversant with the self; saha-with; eva-certainly; agnibhiḥ-fires; ātmānam-the personal self; yuyoja-he engaged; parama-ātmani-dealing with the Supreme Soul.





When Saubhari Muni, who was quite conversant with the self, went to the forest, he performed severe penances. In this way, in the fire at the time of death, he ultimately engaged himself in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





At the time of death, fire burns the gross body, and if there is no more desire for material enjoyment the subtle body is also ended, and in this way a pure soul remains. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]). If one is free from the bondage of both the gross and subtle material bodies and remains a pure soul, he returns home, back to Godhead, to be engaged in the service of the Lord. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti: [Bg. 4.9] he goes back home, back to Godhead. Thus it appears that Saubhari Muni attained that perfect stage.





TEXT 55



tāḥ sva-patyur mahārāja

nirīkṣyādhyātmikīṁ gatim

anvīyus tat-prabhāveṇa

agniṁ śāntam ivārciṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



tāḥ-all the wives of Saubhari; sva-patyuḥ-with their own husband; mahārāja-O King Parīkṣit; nirīkṣya-observing; adhyātmikīm-spiritual; gatim-progress; anvīyuḥ-followed; tat-prabhāveṇa-by the influence of their husband (although they were unfit, by the influence of their husband they also could go to the spiritual world); agnim-the fire; śāntam-completely merged; iva-like; arciṣaḥ-the flames.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, by observing their husband progressing in spiritual existence, Saubhari Muni's wives were also able to enter the spiritual world by his spiritual power, just as the flames of a fire cease when the fire is extinguished.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (9.32), striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te 'pi yānti parāṁ gatim. Women are not considered very powerful in following spiritual principles, but if a woman is fortunate enough to get a suitable husband who is spiritually advanced and if she always engages in his service, she also gets the same benefit as her husband. Here it is clearly said that the wives of Saubhari Muni also entered the spiritual world by the influence of their husband. They were unfit, but because they were faithful followers of their husband, they also entered the spiritual world with him. Thus a woman should be a faithful servant of her husband, and if the husband is spiritually advanced, the woman will automatically get the opportunity to enter the spiritual world.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Downfall of Saubhari Muni."



Chapter Seven



The Descendants of King Māndhātā





In this chapter the descendants of King Māndhātā are described, and in this connection the histories of Purukutsa and Hariścandra are also given.





The most prominent son of Māndhātā was Ambarīṣa, his son was Yauvanāśva, and Yauvanāśva's son was Hārīta. These three personalities were the best in the dynasty of Māndhātā. Purukutsa, another son of Māndhātā, married the sister of the snakes (sarpa-gaṇa) named Narmadā. The son of Purukutsa was Trasaddasyu, whose son was Anaraṇya. Anaraṇya's son was Haryaśva, Haryaśva's son was Prāruṇa, Prāruṇa's son was Tribandhana, and Tribandhana's son was Satyavrata, also known as Triśaṅku. When Triśaṅku kidnapped the daughter of a brāhmaṇa, his father cursed him for this sinful act, and Triśaṅku became a caṇḍāla, worse than a śūdra. Later, by the influence of Viśvāmitra, he was brought to the heavenly planets, but by the influence of the demigods he fell back downward. He was stopped in his fall, however, by the influence of Viśvāmitra. The son of Triśaṅku was Hariścandra. Hariścandra once performed a Rājasūya-yajña, but Viśvāmitra cunningly took all of Hariścandra's possessions as a dakṣiṇa contribution and chastised Hariścandra in various ways. Because of this, a quarrel arose between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha. Hariścandra had no sons, but on the advice of Nārada he worshiped Varuṇa and in this way got a son named Rohita. Hariścandra promised that Rohita would be used to perform a Varuṇa-yajña. Varuṇa reminded Hariścandra repeatedly about this yajña, but the King, because of affection for his son, gave various arguments to avoid sacrificing him. Thus time passed, and gradually the son grew up. To safeguard his life, the boy then took bow and arrows in hand and went to the forest. Meanwhile, at home, Hariścandra suffered from dropsy because of an attack from Varuṇa. When Rohita received the news that his father was suffering, he wanted to return to the capital, but King Indra prevented him from doing so. Following the instructions of Indra, Rohita lived in the forest for six years and then returned home. Rohita purchased Śunaḥśepha, the second son of Ajīgarta, and gave him to his father, Hariścandra, as the sacrificial animal. In this way, the sacrifice was performed, Varuṇa and the other demigods were pacified, and Hariścandra was freed from disease. In this sacrifice, Viśvāmitra was the hotā priest, Jamadagni was the adhvaryu, Vasiṣṭha was the brahmā, and Ayāsya was the udgātā. King Indra, being very satisfied by the sacrifice, gave Hariścandra a golden chariot, and Viśvāmitra gave him transcendental knowledge. Thus Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes how Hariścandra achieved perfection.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

māndhātuḥ putra-pravaro

yo 'mbarīṣaḥ prakīrtitaḥ

pitāmahena pravṛto

yauvanāśvas tu tat-sutaḥ

hārītas tasya putro 'bhūn

māndhātṛ-pravarā ime

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; māndhātuḥ-of Māndhātā; putra-pravaraḥ-the prominent son; yaḥ-the one who; ambarīṣaḥ-by the name Ambarīṣa; prakīrtitaḥ-celebrated; pitāmahena-by his grandfather Yuvanāśva; pravṛtaḥ-accepted; yauvanāśvaḥ-named Yauvanāśva; tu-and; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Ambarīṣa; hārītaḥ-by the name Hārīta; tasya-of Yauvanāśva; putraḥ-the son; abhūt-became; māndhātṛ-in the dynasty of Māndhātā; pravarāḥ-most prominent; ime-all of them.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The most prominent among the sons of Māndhātā was he who is celebrated as Ambarīṣa. Ambarīṣa was accepted as son by his grandfather Yuvanāśva. Ambarīṣa's son was Yauvanāśva, and Yauvanāśva's son was Hārīta. In Māndhātā's dynasty, Ambarīṣa, Hārīta and Yauvanāśva were very prominent.





TEXT 2



narmadā bhrātṛbhir dattā

purukutsāya yoragaiḥ

tayā rasātalaṁ nīto

bhujagendra-prayuktayā

SYNONYMS



narmadā-by the name Narmadā; bhrātṛbhiḥ-by her brothers; dattā-was given in charity; purukutsāya-unto Purukutsa; yā-she who; uragaiḥ-by the serpents (sarpa-gaṇa); tayā-by her; rasātalam-to the lower region of the universe; nītaḥ-was brought; bhujaga-indra-prayuktayā-engaged by Vāsuki, the King of the serpents.





The serpent brothers of Narmadā gave Narmadā to Purukutsa. Being sent by Vāsuki, she took Purukutsa to the lower region of the universe.





Before describing the descendants of Purukutsa, the son of Māndhātā, Śukadeva Gosvāmī first describes how Purukutsa was married to Narmadā, who was induced to take him to the lower region of the universe.





TEXT 3



gandharvān avadhīt tatra

vadhyān vai viṣṇu-śakti-dhṛk

nāgāl labdha-varaḥ sarpād

abhayaṁ smaratām idam

SYNONYMS



gandharvān-the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; avadhīt-he killed; tatra-there (in the lower region of the universe); vadhyān-who deserved to be killed; vai-indeed; viṣṇu-śakti-dhṛk-being empowered by Lord Viṣṇu; nāgāt-from the Nāgas; labdha-varaḥ-having received a benediction; sarpāt-from the snakes; abhayam-assurances; smaratām-of those who remember; idam-this incident.





There in Rasātala, the lower region of the universe, Purukutsa, being empowered by Lord Viṣṇu, was able to kill all the Gandharvas who deserved to be killed. Purukutsa received the benediction from the serpents that anyone who remembers this history of his being brought by Narmadā to the lower region of the universe will be assured of safety from the attack of snakes.





TEXT 4



trasaddasyuḥ paurukutso

yo 'naraṇyasya deha-kṛt

haryaśvas tat-sutas tasmāt

prāruṇo 'tha tribandhanaḥ

SYNONYMS



trasaddasyuḥ-by the name Trasaddasyu; paurukutsaḥ-the son of Purukutsa; yaḥ-who; anaraṇyasya-of Anaraṇya; deha-kṛt-the father; haryaśvaḥ-by the name Haryaśva; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Anaraṇya; tasmāt-from him (Haryaśva); prāruṇaḥ-by the name Prāruṇa; atha-then, from Prāruṇa; tribandhanaḥ-his son, Tribandhana.





The son of Purukutsa was Trasaddasyu, who was the father of Anaraṇya. Anaraṇya's son was Haryaśva, the father of Prāruṇa. Prāruṇa was the father of Tribandhana.





TEXTS 5–6



tasya satyavrataḥ putras

triśaṅkur iti viśrutaḥ

prāptaś cāṇḍālatāṁ śāpād

guroḥ kauśika-tejasā

saśarīro gataḥ svargam



adyāpi divi dṛśyate

pātito 'vāk-śirā devais

tenaiva stambhito balāt

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Tribandhana; satyavrataḥ-by the name Satyavrata; putraḥ-the son; triśaṅkuḥ-by the name Triśaṅku; iti-thus; viśrutaḥ-celebrated; prāptaḥ-had obtained; cāṇḍālatām-the quality of a caṇḍāla, lower than a śūdra; śāpāt-from the curse; guroḥ-of his father; kauśika-tejasā-by the prowess of Kauśika (Viśvāmitra); saśarīraḥ-while in this body; gataḥ-went; svargam-to the heavenly planet; adya api-until today; divi-in the sky; dṛśyate-can be seen; pātitaḥ-having fallen down; avāk-śirāḥ-with his head hanging downward; devaiḥ-by the prowess of the demigods; tena-by Viśvāmitra; eva-indeed; stambhitaḥ-fixed; balāt-by superior power.





The son of Tribandhana was Satyavrata, who is celebrated by the name Triśaṅku. Because he kidnapped the daughter of a brāhmaṇa when she was being married, his father cursed him to become a caṇḍāla, lower than a śūdra. Thereafter, by the influence of Viśvāmitra, he went to the higher planetary system, the heavenly planets, in his material body, but because of the prowess of the demigods he fell back downward. Nonetheless, by the power of Viśvāmitra, he did not fall all the way down; even today he can still be seen hanging in the sky, head downward.





TEXT 7



traiśaṅkavo hariścandro

viśvāmitra-vasiṣṭhayoḥ

yan-nimittam abhūd yuddhaṁ

pakṣiṇor bahu-vārṣikam

SYNONYMS



traiśaṅkavaḥ-the son of Triśaṅku; hariścandraḥ-by the name Hariścandra; viśvāmitra-vasiṣṭhayoḥ-between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha; yat-nimittam-because of Hariścandra; abhūt-there was; yuddham-a great fight; pakṣiṇoḥ-both of whom had been converted into birds; bahu-vārṣikam-for many years.





The son of Triśaṅku was Hariścandra. Because of Hariścandra there was a quarrel between Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha, who for many years fought one another, having been transformed into birds.





Viśvāmitra and Vasiṣṭha were always inimical. Formerly, Viśvāmitra was a kṣatriya, and by undergoing severe austerities he wanted to become a brāhmaṇa, but Vasiṣṭha would not agree to accept him. In this way there was always disagreement between the two. Later, however, Vasiṣṭha accepted him because of Viśvāmitra's quality of forgiveness. Once Hariścandra performed a yajña for which Viśvāmitra was the priest, but Viśvāmitra, being angry at Hariścandra, took away all his possessions, claiming them as a contribution of dakṣiṇā. Vasiṣṭha, however, did not like this, and therefore a fight arose between Vasiṣṭha and Viśvāmitra. The fighting became so severe that each of them cursed the other. One of them said, "May you become a bird," and the other said, "May you become a duck." Thus both of them became birds and continued fighting for many years because of Hariścandra. We can see that such a great mystic yogī as Saubhari became a victim of sense gratification, and such great sages as Vasiṣṭha and Viśvāmitra became birds. This is the material world. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Within this material world, or within this universe, however elevated one may be in material qualities, one must suffer the conditions of birth, death, old age and disease (janma-mṛtyu jarā-vyādhi). Therefore Kṛṣṇa says that this material world is simply miserable (duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam [Bg. 8.15]). The Bhāgavatam says, padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadām: at every step here there is danger. Therefore, because the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement provides the opportunity for the human being to get out of this material world simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, this movement is the greatest benediction in human society.





TEXT 8



so 'napatyo viṣaṇṇātmā

nāradasyopadeśataḥ

varuṇaṁ śaraṇaṁ yātaḥ

putro me jāyatāṁ prabho

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that Hariścandra; anapatyaḥ-being without a son; viṣaṇṇa-ātmā-therefore very morose; nāradasya-of Nārada; upadeśataḥ-by the advice; varuṇam-unto Varuṇa; śaraṇam yātaḥ-took shelter; putraḥ-a son; me-of me; jāyatām-let there be born; prabho-O my lord.





Hariścandra had no son and was therefore extremely morose. Once, therefore, following the advice of Nārada, he took shelter of Varuṇa and said to him "My lord I have no son. Would you kindly give me one?"





TEXT 9



yadi vīro mahārāja

tenaiva tvāṁ yaje iti

tatheti varuṇenāsya

putro jātas tu rohitaḥ

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; vīraḥ-there is a son; mahārāja-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; tena eva-even by that son; tvām-unto you; yaje-I shall offer sacrifice; iti-thus; tathā-as you desire; iti-thus accepted; varuṇena-by Varuṇa; asya-of Mahārāja Hariścandra; putraḥ-a son; jātaḥ-was born; tu-indeed; rohitaḥ-by the name Rohita.





O King Parīkṣit, Hariścandra begged Varuṇa, "My lord, if a son is born to me, with that son I shall perform a sacrifice for your satisfaction." When Hariścandra said this, Varuṇa replied, "Let it be so." Because of Varuṇa's benediction, Hariścandra begot a son named Rohita.





TEXT 10



jātaḥ suto hy anenāṅga

māṁ yajasveti so 'bravīt

yadā paśur nirdaśaḥ syād

atha medhyo bhaved iti

SYNONYMS



jātaḥ-has been born; sutaḥ-a son; hi-indeed; anena-by this son; aṅga-O Hariścandra; mām-unto me; yajasva-offer sacrifice; iti-thus; saḥ-he, Varuṇa; abravīt-said; yadā-when; paśuḥ-an animal; nirdaśaḥ-has passed ten days; syāt-should become; atha-then; medhyaḥ-suitable for offering in sacrifice; bhavet-becomes; iti-thus (Hariścandra said).





Thereafter, when the child was born, Varuṇa approached Hariścandra and said, "Now you have a son. With this son you can offer me a sacrifice." In answer to this, Hariścandra said, "After ten days have passed since an animal's birth, the animal becomes fit to be sacrificed."





TEXT 11



nirdaśe ca sa āgatya

yajasvety āha so 'bravīt

dantāḥ paśor yaj jāyerann

atha medhyo bhaved iti

SYNONYMS



nirdaśe-after ten days; ca-also; saḥ-he, Varuṇa; āgatya-coming there; yajasva-now sacrifice; iti-thus; āha-said; saḥ-he, Hariścandra; abravīt-replied; dantāḥ-the teeth; paśoḥ-of the animal; yat-when; jāyeran-have appeared; atha-then; medhyaḥ-fit for being sacrificed; bhavet-will become; iti-thus.





After ten days, Varuṇa came again and said to Hariścandra, "Now you can perform the sacrifice." Hariścandra replied, "When an animal grows teeth, then it becomes pure enough to be sacrificed."





TEXT 12



dantā jātā yajasveti

sa pratyāhātha so 'bravīt

yadā patanty asya dantā

atha medhyo bhaved iti

SYNONYMS



dantāḥ-the teeth; jātāḥ-have grown; yajasva-now sacrifice; iti-thus; saḥ-he, Varuṇa; pratyāha-said; atha-thereupon; saḥ-he, Hariścandra; abravīt-replied; yadā-when; patanti-fall out; asya-his; dantāḥ-teeth; atha-then; medhyaḥ-fit for sacrifice; bhavet-will become; iti-thus.





When the teeth grew, Varuṇa came and said to Hariścandra, "Now the animal has grown teeth, and you can perform the sacrifice." Hariścandra replied, "When all its teeth have fallen out, then it will be fit for sacrifice."





TEXT 13



paśor nipatitā dantā

yajasvety āha so 'bravīt

yadā paśoḥ punar dantā

jāyante 'tha paśuḥ śuciḥ

SYNONYMS



paśoḥ-of the animal; nipatitāḥ-have fallen out; dantāḥ-the teeth; yajasva-now sacrifice him; iti-thus; āha-said (Varuṇa); saḥ-he, Hariścandra; abravīt-replied; yadā-when; paśoḥ-of the animal; punaḥ-again; dantāḥ-the teeth; jāyante-grow; atha-then; paśuḥ-the animal; śuciḥ-is purified for being sacrificed.





When the teeth had fallen out, Varuṇa returned and said to Hariścandra, "Now the animal's teeth have fallen out, and you can perform the sacrifice." But Hariścandra replied, "When the animal's teeth grow in again, then he will be pure enough to be sacrificed."





TEXT 14



punar jātā yajasveti

sa pratyāhātha so 'bravīt

sānnāhiko yadā rājan

rājanyo 'tha paśuḥ śuciḥ

SYNONYMS



punaḥ-again; jātāḥ-have grown; yajasva-now you offer the sacrifice; iti-thus; saḥ-he, Varuṇa; pratyāha-replied; atha-thereafter; saḥ-he, Hariścandra; abravīt-said; sānnāhikaḥ-able to equip himself with a shield; yadā-when; rājan-O King Varuṇa; rājanyaḥ-the kṣatriya; atha-then; paśuḥ-the sacrificial animal; śuciḥ-becomes purified.





When the teeth grew in again, Varuṇa came and said to Hariścandra, "Now you can perform the sacrifice." But Hariścandra then said, "O King, when the sacrificial animal becomes a kṣatriya and is able to shield himself to fight with the enemy, then he will be purified."





TEXT 15



iti putrānurāgeṇa

sneha-yantrita-cetasā

kālaṁ vañcayatā taṁ tam

ukto devas tam aikṣata

SYNONYMS



iti-in this way; putra-anurāgeṇa-because of affection for the son; sneha-yantrita-cetasā-his mind being controlled by such affection; kālam-time; vañcayatā-cheating; tam-unto him; tam-that; uktaḥ-said; devaḥ-the demigod Varuṇa; tam-unto him, Hariścandra; aikṣata-waited for the fulfillment of his promise.





Hariścandra was certainly very much attached to his son. Because of this affection, he asked the demigod Varuṇa to wait. Thus Varuṇa waited and waited for the time to come.





TEXT 16



rohitas tad abhijñāya

pituḥ karma cikīrṣitam

prāṇa-prepsur dhanuṣ-pāṇir

araṇyaṁ pratyapadyata

SYNONYMS



rohitaḥ-the son of Hariścandra; tat-this fact; abhijñāya-having thoroughly understood; pituḥ-of his father; karma-action; cikīrṣitam-which he was practically doing; prāṇa-prepsuḥ-wishing to save his life; dhanuḥ-pāṇiḥ-taking his bow and arrows; araṇyam-to the forest; pratyapadyata-left.





Rohita could understand that his father intended to offer him as the animal for sacrifice. Therefore, just to save himself from death, he equipped himself with bow and arrows and went to the forest.





TEXT 17



pitaraṁ varuṇa-grastaṁ

śrutvā jāta-mahodaram

rohito grāmam eyāya

tam indraḥ pratyaṣedhata

SYNONYMS



pitaram-about his father; varuṇa-grastam-having been attacked with dropsy by Varuṇa; śrutvā-after hearing; jāta-had grown; mahā-udaram-inflated abdomen; rohitaḥ-his son Rohita; grāmam eyāya-wanted to come back to the capital; tam-unto him (Rohita); indraḥ-King Indra; pratyaṣedhata-forbade to go there.





When Rohita heard that his father had been attacked by dropsy due to Varuṇa and that his abdomen had grown very large, he wanted to return to the capital, but King Indra forbade him to do so.





TEXT 18



bhūmeḥ paryaṭanaṁ puṇyaṁ

tīrtha-kṣetra-niṣevaṇaiḥ

rohitāyādiśac chakraḥ

so 'py araṇye 'vasat samām

SYNONYMS



bhūmeḥ-of the surface of the world; paryaṭanam-traveling; puṇyam-holy places; tīrtha-kṣetra-places of pilgrimage; niṣevaṇaiḥ-by serving or going to and coming from such places; rohitāya-unto Rohita; ādiśat-ordered; śakraḥ-King Indra; saḥ-he, Rohita; api-also; araṇye-in the forest; avasat-lived; samām-for one year.





King Indra advised Rohita to travel to different pilgrimage sites and holy places, for such activities are pious indeed. Following this instruction, Rohita went to the forest for one year.





TEXT 19



evaṁ dvitīye tṛtīye

caturthe pañcame tathā

abhyetyābhyetya sthaviro

vipro bhūtvāha vṛtra-hā

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; dvitīye-on the second year; tṛtīye-on the third year; caturthe-on the fourth year; pañcame-on the fifth year; tathā-as well as; abhyetya-coming before him; abhyetya-again coming before him; sthaviraḥ-a very old man; vipraḥ-a brāhmaṇa; bhūtvā-becoming so; āha-said; vṛtra-hā-Indra.





In this way, at the end of the second, third, fourth and fifth years, when Rohita wanted to return to his capital, the King of heaven, Indra, approached him as an old brāhmaṇa and forbade him to return, repeating the same words as in the previous year.





TEXT 20



ṣaṣṭhaṁ saṁvatsaraṁ tatra

caritvā rohitaḥ purīm

upavrajann ajīgartād

akrīṇān madhyamaṁ sutam

śunaḥśephaṁ paśuṁ pitre

pradāya samavandata

SYNONYMS



ṣaṣṭham-the sixth; saṁvatsaram-year; tatra-in the forest; caritvā-wandering; rohitaḥ-the son of Hariścandra; purīm-in his capital; upavrajan-went there; ajīgartāt-from Ajīgarta; akrīṇāt-purchased; madhyamam-the second; sutam-son; śunaḥśepham-whose name was Śunaḥśepha; paśum-to use as the sacrificial animal; pitre-unto his father; pradāya-offering; samavandata-respectfully offered his obeisances.





Thereafter, in the sixth year, after wandering in the forest, Rohita returned to the capital of his father. He purchased from Ajīgarta his second son, named Śunaḥśepha. Then he offered Śunaḥśepha to his father, Hariścandra, to be used as the sacrificial animal and offered Hariścandra his respectful obeisances.





It appears that in those days a man could be purchased for any purpose. Hariścandra was in need of a person to sacrifice as the animal in a yajña and thus fulfill his promise to Varuṇa, and a man was purchased from another man for this purpose. Millions of years ago, animal sacrifice and slave trade both existed. Indeed, they have existed since time immemorial.





TEXT 21



tataḥ puruṣa-medhena

hariścandro mahā-yaśāḥ

muktodaro 'yajad devān

varuṇādīn mahat-kathaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; puruṣa-medhena-by sacrificing a man in the yajña; hariścandraḥ-King Hariścandra; mahā-yaśāḥ-very famous; mukta-udaraḥ-became free from dropsy; ayajat-offered sacrifices; devān-unto the demigods; varuṇa-ādīn-headed by Varuṇa and others; mahat-kathaḥ-famous in history with other exalted personalities.





Thereafter, the famous King Hariścandra, one of the exalted persons in history, performed grand sacrifices by sacrificing a man and pleased all the demigods. In this way his dropsy created by Varuṇa was cured.





TEXT 22



viśvāmitro 'bhavat tasmin

hotā cādhvaryur ātmavān

jamadagnir abhūd brahmā

vasiṣṭho 'yāsyaḥ sāma-gaḥ

SYNONYMS



viśvāmitraḥ-the great sage and mystic Viśvāmitra; abhavat-became; tasmin-in that great sacrifice; hotā-the chief priest to offer oblations; ca-also; adhvaryuḥ-a person who recites hymns from the Yajur Veda and performs ritualistic ceremonies; ātmavān-fully self-realized; jamadagniḥ-Jamadagni; abhūt-became; brahmā-acting as the chief brāhmaṇa; vasiṣṭhaḥ-the great sage; ayāsyaḥ-another great sage; sāma-gaḥ-engaged as the reciter of the Sāma Veda mantras.





In that great human sacrifice, Viśvāmitra was the chief priest to offer oblations, the perfectly self-realized Jamadagni had the responsibility for chanting the mantras from the Yajur Veda, Vasiṣṭha was the chief brahminical priest, and the sage Ayāsya was the reciter of the hymns of the Sāma Veda.





TEXT 23



tasmai tuṣṭo dadāv indraḥ

śātakaumbhamayaṁ ratham

śunaḥśephasya māhātmyam

upariṣṭāt pracakṣyate

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto him, King Hariścandra; tuṣṭaḥ-being very pleased; dadau-delivered; indraḥ-the King of heaven; śātakaumbha-mayam-made of gold; ratham-a chariot; śunaḥśephasya-about Śunaḥśepha; māhātmyam-glories; upariṣṭāt-in the course of describing the sons of Viśvāmitra; pracakṣyate-will be narrated.





King Indra, being very pleased with Hariścandra, offered him a gift of a golden chariot. Śunaḥśepha's glories will be presented along with the description of the son of Viśvāmitra.





TEXT 24



satyaṁ sāraṁ dhṛtiṁ dṛṣṭvā

sabhāryasya ca bhūpateḥ

viśvāmitro bhṛśaṁ prīto

dadāv avihatāṁ gatim

SYNONYMS



satyam-truthfulness; sāram-firmness; dhṛtim-forbearance; dṛṣṭvā-by seeing; sa-bhāryasya-with his wife; ca-and; bhūpateḥ-of Mahārāja Hariścandra; viśvāmitraḥ-the great sage Viśvāmitra; bhṛśam-very much; prītaḥ-being pleased; dadau-gave him; avihatām gatim-imperishable knowledge.





The great sage Viśvāmitra saw that Mahārāja Hariścandra, along with his wife, was truthful, forbearing and concerned with the essence. Thus he gave them imperishable knowledge for fulfillment of the human mission.





TEXTS 25–26



manaḥ pṛthivyāṁ tām adbhis

tejasāpo 'nilena tat

khe vāyuṁ dhārayaṁs tac ca

bhūtādau taṁ mahātmani

tasmiñ jñāna-kalāṁ dhyātvā



tayājñānaṁ vinirdahan

hitvā tāṁ svena bhāvena

nirvāṇa-sukha-saṁvidā

anirdeśyāpratarkyeṇa

tasthau vidhvasta-bandhanaḥ

SYNONYMS



manaḥ-the mind (full of material desires for eating, sleeping, mating and defending); pṛthivyām-in the earth; tām-that; adbhiḥ-with water; tejasā-and with fire; apaḥ-the water; anilena-in the fire; tat-that; khe-in the sky; vāyum-the air; dhārayan-amalgamating; tat-that; ca-also; bhūta-ādau-in the false ego, the origin of material existence; tam-that (false ego); mahā-ātmani-in the mahat-tattva, the total material energy; tasmin-in the total material energy; jñāna-kalām-spiritual knowledge and its different branches; dhyātvā-by meditating; tayā-by this process; ajñānam-ignorance; vinirdahan-specifically subdued; hitvā-giving up; tām-material ambition; svena-by self-realization; bhāvena-in devotional service; nirvāṇa-sukha-saṁvidā-by transcendental bliss, putting an end to material existence; anirdeśya-imperceptible; apratarkyeṇa-inconceivable; tasthau-remained; vidhvasta-completely freed from; bandhanaḥ-material bondage.





Mahārāja Hariścandra first purified his mind, which was full of material enjoyment, by amalgamating it with the earth. Then he amalgamated the earth with water, the water with fire, the fire with the air, and the air with the sky. Thereafter, he amalgamated the sky with the total material energy, and the total material energy with spiritual knowledge. This spiritual knowledge is realization of one's self as part of the Supreme Lord. When the self-realized spiritual soul is engaged in service to the Lord, he is eternally imperceptible and inconceivable. Thus established in spiritual knowledge, he is completely freed from material bondage.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Descendants of King Māndhātā."



Chapter Eight



The Sons of Sagara Meet Lord Kapiladeva





In this Eighth Chapter the descendants of Rohita are described. In the dynasty of Rohita there was a king named Sagara, whose history is described in relation to Kapiladeva and the destruction of the sons of Sagara.





The son of Rohita was known as Harita, and the son of Harita was Campa, who constructed a township known as Campāpurī. The son of Campa was Sudeva, the son of Sudeva was Vijaya, the son of Vijaya was Bharuka, and the son of Bharuka was Vṛka. Bāhuka, the son of Vṛka, was greatly disturbed by his enemies, and therefore he left home with his wife and went to the forest. When he died there, his wife wanted to accept the principles of satī, dying with her husband, but when she was about to die a sage named Aurva found that she was pregnant and forbade her to do so. The co-wives of this wife of Bāhuka gave her poison with her food, but still her son was born with the poison. The son was therefore named Sagara (sa means "with," and gara means "poison"). Following the instructions of the great sage Aurva, King Sagara reformed many clans, including the Yavanas, Śakas, Haihayas and Barbaras. The king did not kill them, but reformed them. Then, again following the instructions of Aurva, King Sagara performed aśvamedha sacrifices, but the horse needed for such a sacrifice was stolen by Indra, the King of heaven. King Sagara had two wives, named Sumati and Keśinī. While searching for the horse, the sons of Sumati extensively dug up the surface of the earth and in this way dug a trench, which later became known as the Sāgara Ocean. In the course of this search, they came upon the great personality Kapiladeva and thought Him to have stolen the horse. With this offensive understanding, they attacked Him and were all burned to ashes. Keśinī, the second wife of King Sagara, had a son named Asamañjasa, whose son Aṁśumān later searched for the horse and delivered his uncles. Upon approaching Kapiladeva, Aṁśumān saw both the horse meant for sacrifice and a pile of ashes. Aṁśumān offered prayers to Kapiladeva, who was very pleased by his prayers and who returned the horse. After getting back the horse, however, Aṁśumān still stood before Kapiladeva, and Kapiladeva could understand that Aṁśumān was praying for the deliverance of his forefathers. Thus Kapiladeva offered the instruction that they could be delivered by water from the Ganges. Aṁśumān then offered respectful obeisances to Kapiladeva, circumambulated Him, and left that place with the horse for sacrifice. When King Sagara finished his yajña, he handed over the kingdom to Aṁśumān and, following the advice of Aurva, attained salvation.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

harito rohita-sutaś

campas tasmād vinirmitā

campāpurī sudevo 'to

vijayo yasya cātmajaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; haritaḥ-the king named Harita; rohita-sutaḥ-the son of King Rohita; campaḥ-by the name Campa; tasmāt-from Harita; vinirmitā-was constructed; campā-purī-the township known as Campāpurī; sudevaḥ-by the name Sudeva; ataḥ-thereafter (from Campa); vijayaḥ-by the name Vijaya; yasya-of whom (Sudeva); ca-also; ātma-jaḥ-the son.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The son of Rohita was Harita, and Harita's son was Campa, who constructed the town of Campāpurī. The son of Campa was Sudeva, and his son was Vijaya.





TEXT 2



bharukas tat-sutas tasmād

vṛkas tasyāpi bāhukaḥ

so 'ribhir hṛta-bhū rājā

sabhāryo vanam āviśat

SYNONYMS



bharukaḥ-by the name Bharuka; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Vijaya; tasmāt-from him (Bharuka); vṛkaḥ-by the name Vṛka; tasya-his; api-also; bāhukaḥ-by the name Bāhuka; saḥ-he, the King; aribhiḥ-by his enemies; hṛta-bhūḥ-his land having been taken away; rājā-the King (Bāhuka); sa-bhāryaḥ-with his wife; vanam-the forest; āviśat-entered.





The son of Vijaya was Bharuka, Bharuka's son was Vṛka, and Vṛka's son was Bāhuka. The enemies of King Bāhuka took away all his possessions, and therefore the King entered the order of vānaprastha and went to the forest with his wife.





TEXT 3



vṛddhaṁ taṁ pañcatāṁ prāptaṁ

mahiṣy anumariṣyatī

aurveṇa jānatātmānaṁ

prajāvantaṁ nivāritā

SYNONYMS



vṛddham-when he was old; tam-him; pañcatām-death; prāptam-who had obtained; mahiṣī-the queen; anumariṣyatī-who wanted to die with him and become satī; aurveṇa-by the great sage Aurva; jānatā-understanding that; ātmānam-the body of the queen; prajā-vantam-bore a son within the womb; nivāritā-was forbidden.





Bāhuka died when he was old, and one of his wives wanted to die with him, following the satī rite. At that time, however, Aurva Muni, knowing her to be pregnant, forbade her to die.





TEXT 4



ājñāyāsyai sapatnībhir

garo datto 'ndhasā saha

saha tenaiva sañjātaḥ

sagarākhyo mahā-yaśāḥ

sagaraś cakravarty āsīt

sāgaro yat-sutaiḥ kṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



ājñāya-knowing (this); asyai-unto that pregnant queen; sapatnībhiḥ-by the co-wives of the wife of Bāhuka; garaḥ-poison; dattaḥ-was given; andhasā saha-with her food; saha tena-with that poison; eva-also; sañjātaḥ-was born; sagara-ākhyaḥ-by the name Sagara; mahā-yaśāḥ-having a great reputation; sagaraḥ-King Sagara; cakravartī-the emperor; āsīt-became; sāgaraḥ-the place known as Gaṅgāsāgara; yat-sutaiḥ-by the sons of whom; kṛtaḥ-was excavated.





Knowing that she was pregnant, the co-wives of the wife of Bāhuka conspired to give her poison with her food, but it did not act. Instead, the son was born along with the poison. Therefore he became famous as Sagara ["one who is born with poison"]. Sagara later became the emperor. The place known as Gaṅgāsāgara was excavated by his sons.





TEXTS 5–6



yas tālajaṅghān yavanāñ

chakān haihaya-barbarān

nāvadhīd guru-vākyena

cakre vikṛta-veṣiṇaḥ

muṇḍāñ chmaśru-dharān kāṁścin



mukta-keśārdha-muṇḍitān

anantar-vāsasaḥ kāṁścid

abahir-vāsaso 'parān

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-Mahārāja Sagara who; tālajaṅghān-the uncivilized clan named Tālajaṅgha; yavanān-persons averse to the Vedic literature; śakān-another class of atheist; haihaya-the uncivilized; barbarān-and the Barbaras; na-not; avadhīt-did kill; guru-vākyena-by the order of his spiritual master; cakre-made them; vikṛta-veṣiṇaḥ-dressed awkwardly; muṇḍān-shaved clean; śmaśru-dharān-wearing mustaches; kāṁścit-some of them; mukta-keśa-loose hair; ardha-muṇḍitān-half-shaven; anantaḥ-vāsasaḥ-without underwear; kāṁścit-some of them; abahiḥ-vāsasaḥ-without covering garments; aparān-others.





Sagara Mahārāja, following the order of his spiritual master, Aurva, did not kill the uncivilized men like the Tālajaṅghas, Yavanas, Śakas, Haihayas and Barbaras. Instead, some of them he made dress awkwardly, some of them he shaved clean but allowed to wear mustaches, some of them he left wearing loose hair, some he half shaved, some he left without underwear, and some without external garments. Thus these different clans were made to dress differently, but King Sagara did not kill them.





TEXT 7



so 'śvamedhair ayajata

sarva-veda-surātmakam

aurvopadiṣṭa-yogena

harim ātmānam īśvaram

tasyotsṛṣṭaṁ paśuṁ yajñe

jahārāśvaṁ purandaraḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Mahārāja Sagara; aśvamedhaiḥ-by performing aśvamedha-yajñas; ayajata-worshiped; sarva-veda-of all Vedic knowledge; sura-and of all learned sages; ātmakam-the Supersoul; aurva-upadiṣṭa-yogena-by the mystic yoga practice advised by Aurva; harim-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmānam-unto the Supersoul; īśvaram-unto the supreme controller; tasya-of him (Sagara Mahārāja); utsṛṣṭam-which was meant for offering; paśum-the sacrificial animal; yajñe-in the sacrifice; jahāra-stole; aśvam-the horse; purandaraḥ-the King of heaven, Indra.





Following the instructions of the great sage Aurva, Sagara Mahārāja performed aśvamedha sacrifices and thus satisfied the Supreme Lord, who is the supreme controller, the Supersoul of all learned scholars, and the knower of all Vedic knowledge, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But Indra, the King of heaven, stole the horse meant to be offered at the sacrifice.





TEXT 8



sumatyās tanayā dṛptāḥ

pitur ādeśa-kāriṇaḥ

hayam anveṣamāṇās te

samantān nyakhanan mahīm

SYNONYMS



sumatyāḥ tanayāḥ-the sons born of Queen Sumati; dṛptāḥ-very proud of their prowess and influence; pituḥ-of their father (Mahārāja Sagara); ādeśa-kāriṇaḥ-following the order; hayam-the horse (stolen by Indra); anveṣamāṇāḥ-while seeking; te-all of them; samantāt-everywhere; nyakhanan-dug; mahīm-the earth.





[King Sagara had two wives, Sumati and Keśinī.] The sons of Sumati, who were very proud of their prowess and influence, following the order of their father, searched for the lost horse. While doing so, they dug into the earth very extensively.





TEXTS 9–10



prāg-udīcyāṁ diśi hayaṁ

dadṛśuḥ kapilāntike

eṣa vāji-haraś caura

āste mīlita-locanaḥ

hanyatāṁ hanyatāṁ pāpa



iti ṣaṣṭi-sahasriṇaḥ

udāyudhā abhiyayur

unmimeṣa tadā muniḥ

SYNONYMS



prāk-udīcyām-in the northeastern; diśi-direction; hayam-the horse; dadṛśuḥ-they saw; kapila-antike-near the āśrama of Kapila; eṣaḥ-here is; vāji-haraḥ-the horse thief; cauraḥ-the thief; āste-existing; mīlita-locanaḥ-with closed eyes; hanyatām hanyatām-kill him, kill him; pāpaḥ-a most sinful person; iti-in this way; ṣaṣṭi-sahasriṇaḥ-the sixty thousand sons of Sagara; udāyudhāḥ-raising their respective weapons; abhiyayuḥ-they approached; unmimeṣa-opened His eyes; tadā-at that time; muniḥ-Kapila Muni.





Thereafter, in the northeastern direction, they saw the horse near the āśrama of Kapila Muni. "Here is the man who has stolen the horse," they said. "He is staying there with closed eyes. Certainly he is very sinful. Kill him! Kill him!" Shouting like this, the sons of Sagara, sixty thousand all together, raised their weapons. When they approached the sage, the sage opened His eyes.





TEXT 11



sva-śarīrāgninā tāvan

mahendra-hṛta-cetasaḥ

mahad-vyatikrama-hatā

bhasmasād abhavan kṣaṇāt

SYNONYMS



sva-śarīra-agninā-by the fire emanating from their own bodies; tāvat-immediately; mahendra-by the tricks of Indra, the King of heaven; hṛta-cetasaḥ-their consciousness having been taken away; mahat-a great personality; vyatikrama-hatāḥ-defeated by the fault of insulting; bhasmasāt-turned to ashes; abhavan-became; kṣaṇāt-immediately.





By the influence of Indra, the King of heaven, the sons of Sagara had lost their intelligence and disrespected a great personality. Consequently, fire emanated from their own bodies, and they were immediately burned to ashes.





The material body is a combination of earth, water, fire, air and ether. There is already fire within the body, and our practical experience is that the heat of this fire sometimes increases and sometimes decreases. The fire within the bodies of the sons of Sagara Mahārāja became so much hotter that all of them burned to ashes. The fire's increased heat was due to their misbehavior toward a great personality. Such misbehavior is called mahad-vyatikrama. They were killed by the fire of their own bodies because of insulting a great personality.





TEXT 12



na sādhu-vādo muni-kopa-bharjitā

nṛpendra-putrā iti sattva-dhāmani

kathaṁ tamo roṣamayaṁ vibhāvyate

jagat-pavitrātmani khe rajo bhuvaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; sādhu-vādaḥ-the opinion of learned persons; muni-kopa-by the anger of Kapila Muni; bharjitāḥ-were burned to ashes; nṛpendra-putrāḥ-all the sons of Sagara Mahārāja; iti-thus; sattva-dhāmani-in Kapila Muni, in whom the mode of goodness was predominant; katham-how; tamaḥ-the mode of ignorance; roṣa-mayam-manifested in the form of anger; vibhāvyate-can be manifested; jagat-pavitra-ātmani-in He whose body can purify the whole world; khe-in the sky; rajaḥ-dust; bhuvaḥ-earthly.





It is sometimes argued that the sons of King Sagara were burned to ashes by the fire emanating from the eyes of Kapila Muni. This statement, however, is not approved by great learned persons, for Kapila Muni's body is completely in the mode of goodness and therefore cannot manifest the mode of ignorance in the form of anger, just as the pure sky cannot be polluted by the dust of the earth.





TEXT 13



yasyeritā sāṅkhyamayī dṛḍheha naur

yayā mumukṣus tarate duratyayam

bhavārṇavaṁ mṛtyu-pathaṁ vipaścitaḥ

parātma-bhūtasya kathaṁ pṛthaṅ-matiḥ

SYNONYMS



yasya-by whom; īritā-had been explained; sāṅkhya-mayī-having the form of the philosophy analyzing the material world (Sāṅkhya philosophy); dṛḍhā-very strong (to deliver people from this material world); iha-in this material world; nauḥ-a boat; yayā-by which; mumukṣuḥ-a person desiring to be liberated; tarate-can cross over; duratyayam-very difficult to cross; bhava-arṇavam-the ocean of nescience; mṛtyu-patham-a material life of repeated birth and death; vipaścitaḥ-of a learned person; parātma-bhūtasya-who has been elevated to the transcendental platform; katham-how; pṛthak-matiḥ-a sense of distinction (between enemy and friend).





Kapila Muni enunciated in this material world the Sāṅkhya philosophy, which is a strong boat with which to cross over the ocean of nescience. Indeed, a person eager to cross the ocean of the material world may take shelter of this philosophy. In such a greatly learned person, situated on the elevated platform of transcendence, how can there be any distinction between enemy and friend?





One who is promoted to the transcendental position (brahma-bhūta) is always jubilant (prasannātmā). He is unaffected by the false distinctions between good and bad in the material world. Therefore, such an exalted person is samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu; that is to say, he is equal toward everyone, not distinguishing between friend and enemy. Because he is on the absolute platform, free from material contamination, he is called parātma-bhūta or brahma-bhūta. Kapila Muni, therefore, was not at all angry at the sons of Sagara Mahārāja; rather, they were burnt to ashes by the heat of their own bodies.





TEXT 14



yo 'samañjasa ity uktaḥ

sa keśinyā nṛpātmajaḥ

tasya putro 'ṁśumān nāma

pitāmaha-hite rataḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-one of the sons of Sagara Mahārāja; asamañjasaḥ-whose name was Asamañjasa; iti-as such; uktaḥ-known; saḥ-he; keśinyāḥ-in the womb of Keśinī, the other queen of Sagara Mahārāja; nṛpa-ātmajaḥ-the son of the King; tasya-of him (Asamañjasa); putraḥ-the son; aṁśumān nāma-was known as Aṁśumān; pitāmaha-hite-in doing good for his grandfather, Sagara Mahārāja; rataḥ-always engaged.





Among the sons of Sagara Mahārāja was one named Asamañjasa, who was born from the King's second wife, Keśinī. The son of Asamañjasa was known as Aṁśumān, and he was always engaged in working for the good of Sagara Mahārāja, his grandfather.





TEXTS 15–16



asamañjasa ātmānaṁ

darśayann asamañjasam

jāti-smaraḥ purā saṅgād

yogī yogād vicālitaḥ

ācaran garhitaṁ loke



jñātīnāṁ karma vipriyam

sarayvāṁ krīḍato bālān

prāsyad udvejayañ janam

SYNONYMS



asamañjasaḥ-the son of Sagara Mahārāja; ātmānam-personally; darśayan-exhibiting; asamañjasam-very disturbing; jāti-smaraḥ-able to remember his past life; purā-formerly; saṅgāt-from bad association; yogī-although he was a great mystic yogī; yogāt-from the path of executing mystic yoga; vicālitaḥ-fell down; ācaran-behaving; garhitam-very badly; loke-in the society; jñātīnām-of his relatives; karma-activities; vipriyam-not very favorable; sarayvām-in the River Sarayū; krīḍataḥ-while engaged in sports; bālān-all the boys; prāsyat-would throw; udvejayan-giving trouble; janam-to people in general.





Formerly, in his previous birth, Asamañjasa had been a great mystic yogi, but by bad association he had fallen from his exalted position. Now, in this life, he was born in a royal family and was a jāti-smara; that is, he had the special advantage of being able to remember his past birth. Nonetheless, he wanted to display himself as a miscreant, and therefore he would do things that were abominable in the eyes of the public and unfavorable to his relatives. He would disturb the boys sporting in the River Sarayū by throwing them into the depths of the water.





TEXT 17



evaṁ vṛttaḥ parityaktaḥ

pitrā sneham apohya vai

yogaiśvaryeṇa bālāṁs tān

darśayitvā tato yayau

SYNONYMS



evam vṛttaḥ-thus engaged (in abominable activities); parityaktaḥ-condemned; pitrā-by his father; sneham-affection; apohya-giving up; vai-indeed; yoga-aiśvaryeṇa-by mystic power; bālān tān-all those boys (thrown in the water and killed); darśayitvā-after again showing them all to their parents; tataḥ yayau-he left that place.





Because Asamañjasa engaged in such abominable activities, his father gave up affection for him and had him exiled. Then Asamañjasa exhibited his mystic power by reviving the boys and showing them to the King and their parents. After this, Asamañjasa left Ayodhyā.





Asamañjasa was a jāti-smara; because of his mystic power, he did not forget his previous consciousness. Thus he could give life to the dead. By exhibiting wonderful activities in relation to the dead children, he certainly attracted the attention of the King and the people in general. Then he left that place immediately.





TEXT 18



ayodhyā-vāsinaḥ sarve

bālakān punar āgatān

dṛṣṭvā visismire rājan

rājā cāpy anvatapyata

SYNONYMS



ayodhyā-vāsinaḥ-the inhabitants of Ayodhyā; sarve-all of them; bālakān-their sons; punaḥ-again; āgatān-having come back to life; dṛṣṭvā-after seeing this; visismire-became astounded; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; rājā-King Sagara; ca-also; api-indeed; anvatapyata-very much lamented (the absence of his son).





O King Parīkṣit, when all the inhabitants of Ayodhyā saw that their boys had come back to life, they were astounded, and King Sagara greatly lamented the absence of his son.





TEXT 19



aṁśumāṁś codito rājñā

turagānveṣaṇe yayau

pitṛvya-khātānupathaṁ

bhasmānti dadṛśe hayam

SYNONYMS



aṁśumān-the son of Asamañjasa; coditaḥ-being ordered; rājñā-by the King; turaga-the horse; anveṣaṇe-to search for; yayau-went out; pitṛvya-khāta-as described by his father's brothers; anupatham-following that path; bhasma-anti-near the stack of ashes; dadṛśe-he saw; hayam-the horse.





Thereafter, Aṁśumān, the grandson of Mahārāja Sagara, was ordered by the King to search for the horse. Following the same path traversed by his uncles, Aṁśumān gradually reached the stack of ashes and found the horse nearby.





TEXT 20



tatrāsīnaṁ muniṁ vīkṣya

kapilākhyam adhokṣajam

astaut samāhita-manāḥ

prāñjaliḥ praṇato mahān

SYNONYMS



tatra-there; āsīnam-seated; munim-the great sage; vīkṣya-seeing; kapila-ākhyam-known as Kapila Muni; adhokṣajam-the incarnation of Viṣṇu; astaut-offered prayers; samāhita-manāḥ-with great attention; prāñjaliḥ-with folded hands; praṇataḥ-falling down, offered obeisances; mahān-Aṁśumān, the great personality.





The great Aṁśumān saw the sage named Kapila, the saint who is an incarnation of Viṣṇu, sitting there by the horse. Aṁśumān offered Him respectful obeisances, folded his hands and offered Him prayers with great attention.





TEXT 21



aṁśumān uvāca

na paśyati tvāṁ param ātmano 'jano

na budhyate 'dyāpi samādhi-yuktibhiḥ

kuto 'pare tasya manaḥ-śarīra-dhī-

visarga-sṛṣṭā vayam aprakāśāḥ

SYNONYMS



aṁśumān uvāca-Aṁśumān said; na-not; paśyati-can see; tvām-Your Lordship; param-transcendental; ātmanaḥ-of us living beings; ajanaḥ-Lord Brahmā; na-not; budhyate-can understand; adya api-even today; samādhi-by meditation; yuktibhiḥ-or by mental speculation; kutaḥ-how; apare-others; tasya-his; manaḥ-śarīra-dhī-who consider the body or mind to be the self; visarga-sṛṣṭāḥ-created beings within the material world; vayam-we; aprakāśāḥ-without transcendental knowledge.





Aṁśumān said: My Lord, even Lord Brahmā is to this very day unable to understand Your position, which is far beyond himself, either by meditation or by mental speculation. So what to speak of others like us, who have been created by Brahmā in various forms as demigods, animals, human beings, birds and beasts? We are completely in ignorance. Therefore, how can we know You, who are the Transcendence?





icchā-dveṣa-samutthena

dvandva-mohena bhārata

sarva-bhūtāni sammohaṁ

sarge yānti parantapa





"O scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conqueror of the foe, all living entities are born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desire and hate." (Bg. 7.27) All living beings in the material world are influenced by the three modes of material nature. Even Lord Brahmā is in the mode of goodness. Similarly, the demigods are generally in the mode of passion, and living entities lower than the demigods, such as human beings and animals, are in the mode of ignorance, or in mixed goodness, passion and ignorance. Therefore Aṁśumān wanted to explain that because his uncles, who had burnt to ashes, were under the modes of material nature, they could not understand Lord Kapiladeva. "Because You are beyond even the direct and indirect intelligence of Lord Brahmā," he prayed, "unless we are enlightened by Your Lordship it will not be possible for us to understand You."



athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan-mahimno

na cānya eko 'pi ciraṁ vicinvan





"My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years." (Bhāg. 10.14.29) The Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, can be understood by one who is favored by the Lord; the Lord cannot be understood by others.





TEXT 22



ye deha-bhājas tri-guṇa-pradhānā

guṇān vipaśyanty uta vā tamaś ca

yan-māyayā mohita-cetasas tvāṁ

viduḥ sva-saṁsthaṁ na bahiḥ-prakāśāḥ

SYNONYMS



ye-those persons who; deha-bhājaḥ-have accepted the material body; tri-guṇa-pradhānāḥ-influenced by the three modes of material nature; guṇān-the manifestation of the three modes of material nature; vipaśyanti-can see only; uta-it is so said; vā-either; tamaḥ-the mode of ignorance; ca-and; yat-māyayā-by the illusory energy of whom; mohita-has been bewildered; cetasaḥ-the core of whose heart; tvām-Your Lordship; viduḥ-know; sva-saṁstham-situated in one's own body; na-not; bahiḥ-prakāśāḥ-those who can see only the products of external energy.





My Lord, You are fully situated in everyone's heart, but the living entities, covered by the material body, cannot see You, for they are influenced by the external energy, conducted by the three modes of material nature. Their intelligence being covered by sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa, they can see only the actions and reactions of these three modes of material nature. Because of the actions and reactions of the mode of ignorance, whether the living entities are awake or sleeping, they can see only the workings of material nature; they cannot see Your Lordship.





Unless one is situated in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, one is unable to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is situated in everyone's heart. However, because the conditioned souls are influenced by material nature, they can see only the actions and reactions of material nature, but not the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One therefore must purify himself internally and externally:



apavitraḥ pavitro vā

sarvāvasthāṁ gato 'pi vā

yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ

sa bāhyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ





To keep ourselves externally clean we should bathe three times daily, and for internal cleanliness we must cleanse the heart by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. The members of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement must always follow this principle (bāhyābhyantaraḥ śuciḥ). Then it will one day be possible to see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face.





TEXT 23



taṁ tvāṁ ahaṁ jñāna-ghanaṁ svabhāva-

pradhvasta-māyā-guṇa-bheda-mohaiḥ

sanandanādyair munibhir vibhāvyaṁ

kathaṁ vimūḍhaḥ paribhāvayāmi

SYNONYMS



tam-that personality; tvām-unto You; aham-I; jñāna-ghanam-Your Lordship, who are concentrated knowledge; svabhāva-by spiritual nature; pradhvasta-free from contamination; māyā-guṇa-caused by the three modes of material nature; bheda-mohaiḥ-by exhibition of the bewilderment of differentiation; sanandana-ādyaiḥ-by such personalities as the four Kumāras (Sanat-kumāra, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanātana); munibhiḥ-by such great sages; vibhāvyam-worshipable; katham-how; vimūḍhaḥ-being fooled by the material nature; paribhāvayāmi-can I think of You.





O my Lord, sages freed from the influence of the three modes of material nature-sages such as the four Kumāras [Sanat, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanātana]-are able to think of You, who are concentrated knowledge. But how can an ignorant person like me think of You?





The word svabhāva refers to one's own spiritual nature or original constitutional position. When situated in this original position, the living entity is unaffected by the modes of material nature. Sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate (Bg. 14.26). As soon as one is freed from the influence of the three modes of material nature, he is situated on the Brahman platform. Vivid examples of personalities thus situated are the four Kumāras and Nārada. Such authorities can by nature understand the position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but a conditioned soul not freed from the influence of material nature is unable to realize the Supreme. In Bhagavad-gītā (2.45), therefore, Kṛṣṇa advises Arjuna, traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna: one must rise above the influence of the three modes of material nature. One who stays within the influence of the three material modes is unable to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 24



praśānta māyā-guṇa-karma-liṅgam

anāma-rūpaṁ sad-asad-vimuktam

jñānopadeśāya gṛhīta-dehaṁ

namāmahe tvāṁ puruṣaṁ purāṇam

SYNONYMS



praśānta-O completely peaceful one; māyā-guṇa-the modes of material nature; karma-liṅgam-symptomized by fruitive activities; anāma-rūpam-one who has no material name or form; sat-asat-vimuktam-transcendental to the manifested and nonmanifested modes of material nature; jñāna-upadeśāya-for distributing transcendental knowledge (as in Bhagavad-gītā); gṛhīta-deham-has assumed a form like a material body; namāmahe-I offer my respectful obeisances; tvām-unto You; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; purāṇam-the original.





O completely peaceful Lord, although material nature, fruitive activities and their consequent material names and forms are Your creation, You are unaffected by them. Therefore, Your transcendental name is different from material names, and Your form is different from material forms. You assume a form resembling a material body just to give us instructions like those of Bhagavad-gītā, but actually You are the supreme original person. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





Śrīla Yāmunācārya has recited this verse in his Stotra-ratna (43):



bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ

praśānta-niḥśeṣa-manorathāntaraḥ

kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ

praharṣayiṣyāmi sanātha-jīvitam





"By serving You constantly, one is freed from all material desires and is completely pacified. When shall I engage as Your permanent eternal servant and always feel joyful to have such a fitting master?"



Manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ: [SB 5.18.12] one who acts on the mental platform must descend to material activities. Material contamination, however, is completely absent from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotee. Therefore the Lord is addressed as praśānta, completely peaceful, free from the disturbances of material existence. The Supreme Lord has no material name or form; only the foolish think that the Lord's name and form are material (avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam [Bg. 9.11]). The identity of the Supreme Lord is that He is the original person. Nonetheless, those who have but a poor fund of knowledge think that the Lord is formless. The Lord is formless in the material sense, but He has His transcendental form (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]).





TEXT 25



tvan-māyā-racite loke

vastu-buddhyā gṛhādiṣu

bhramanti kāma-lobherṣyā-

moha-vibhrānta-cetasaḥ

SYNONYMS



tvat-māyā-through Your material energy; racite-which is manufactured; loke-in this world; vastu-buddhyā-accepting as factual; gṛha-ādiṣu-in hearth and home, etc.; bhramanti-wander; kāma-by lusty desires; lobha-by greed; īrṣyā-by envy; moha-and by illusion; vibhrānta-is bewildered; cetasaḥ-the cores of whose hearts.





O my Lord, those whose hearts are bewildered by the influence of lust, greed, envy and illusion are interested only in false hearth and home in this world created by Your māyā. Attached to home, wife and children, they wander in this material world perpetually.





TEXT 26



adya naḥ sarva-bhūtātman

kāma-karmendriyāśayaḥ

moha-pāśo dṛḍhaś chinno

bhagavaṁs tava darśanāt

SYNONYMS



adya-today; naḥ-our; sarva-bhūta-ātman-O You, who are the Supersoul; kāma-karma-indriya-āśayaḥ-being under the influence of lusty desires and fruitive activities; moha-pāśaḥ-this hard knot of illusion; dṛḍhaḥ-very strong; chinnaḥ-broken; bhagavan-O my Lord; tava darśanāt-simply by seeing You.





O Supersoul of all living entities, O Personality of Godhead, simply by seeing You I have now been freed from all lusty desires, which are the root cause of insurmountable illusion and bondage in the material world.





TEXT 27



śrī-śuka uvāca

itthaṁ gītānubhāvas taṁ

bhagavān kapilo muniḥ

aṁśumantam uvācedam

anugrāhya dhiyā nṛpa

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ittham-in this way; gīta-anubhāvaḥ-whose glories are described; tam-unto Him; bhagavān-the Personality of Godhead; kapilaḥ-named Kapila Muni; muniḥ-the great sage; aṁśumantam-unto Aṁśumān; uvāca-said; idam-this; anugrāhya-being very merciful; dhiyā-with the path of knowledge; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit.





O King Parīkṣit, when Aṁśumān had glorified the Lord in this way, the great sage Kapila, the powerful incarnation of Viṣṇu, being very merciful to him, explained to him the path of knowledge.





TEXT 28



śrī-bhagavān uvāca

aśvo 'yaṁ nīyatāṁ vatsa

pitāmaha-paśus tava

ime ca pitaro dagdhā

gaṅgāmbho 'rhanti netarat

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagavān uvāca-the great personality Kapila Muni said; aśvaḥ-horse; ayam-this; nīyatām-take; vatsa-O My son; pitāmaha-of your grandfather; paśuḥ-this animal; tava-your; ime-all these; ca-also; pitaraḥ-bodies of forefathers; dagdhāḥ-burnt to ashes; gaṅgā-ambhaḥ-the water of the Ganges; arhanti-can be saved; na-not; itarat-any other means.





The Personality of Godhead said: My dear Aṁśumān, here is the animal sought by your grandfather for sacrifice. Please take it. As for your forefathers, who have been burnt to ashes, they can be delivered only by Ganges water, and not by any other means.





TEXT 29



taṁ parikramya śirasā

prasādya hayam ānayat

sagaras tena paśunā

yajña-śeṣaṁ samāpayat

SYNONYMS



tam-that great sage; parikramya-after circumambulating; śirasā-(by bowing down) with his head; prasādya-making Him fully satisfied; hayam-the horse; ānayat-brought back; sagaraḥ-King Sagara; tena-by that; paśunā-animal; yajña-śeṣam-the last ritualistic ceremony of the sacrifice; samāpayat-executed.





Thereafter, Aṁśumān circumambulated Kapila Muni and offered Him respectful obeisances, bowing his head. After fully satisfying Him in this way, Aṁśumān brought back the horse meant for sacrifice, and with this horse Mahārāja Sagara performed the remaining ritualistic ceremonies.





TEXT 30



rājyam aṁśumate nyasya

niḥspṛho mukta-bandhanaḥ

aurvopadiṣṭa-mārgeṇa

lebhe gatim anuttamām

SYNONYMS



rājyam-his kingdom; aṁśumate-unto Aṁśumān; nyasya-after delivering; niḥspṛhaḥ-without further material desires; mukta-bandhanaḥ-completely freed from material bondage; aurva-upadiṣṭa-instructed by the great sage Aurva; mārgeṇa-by following that path; lebhe-achieved; gatim-destination; anuttamām-supreme.





After delivering charge of his kingdom to Aṁśumān and thus being freed from all material anxiety and bondage, Sagara Mahārāja, following the means instructed by Aurva Muni, achieved the supreme destination.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Sons of Sagara Meet Lord Kapiladeva."



Chapter Nine



The Dynasty of Aṁśumān





This chapter describes the history of the dynasty of Aṁśumān, up to Khaṭvāṅga, and it also describes how Bhagīratha brought the water of the Ganges to this earth.





The son of Mahārāja Aṁśumān was Dilīpa, who tried to bring the Ganges to this world but who died without success. Bhagīratha, the son of Dilīpa, was determined to bring the Ganges to the material world, and for this purpose he underwent severe austerities. Mother Ganges, being fully satisfied by his austerities, made herself visible to him, wanting to give him a benediction. Bhagīratha then asked her to deliver his forefathers. Although mother Ganges agreed to come down to earth, she made two conditions: first, she wanted some suitable male to be able to control her waves; second, although all sinful men would be freed from sinful reactions by bathing in the Ganges, mother Ganges did not want to keep all these sinful reactions. These two conditions were subject matters for consideration. Bhagīratha replied to mother Ganges, "The Personality of Godhead Lord Śiva will be completely able to control the waves of your water, and when pure devotees bathe in your water, the sinful reactions left by sinful men will be counteracted." Bhagīratha then performed austerities to satisfy Lord Śiva, who is called Āśutoṣa because he is naturally satisfied very easily. Lord Śiva agreed to Bhagīratha's proposal to check the force of the Ganges. In this way, simply by the touch of the Ganges, Bhagīratha's forefathers were delivered and allowed to go to the heavenly planets.





The son of Bhagīratha was Śruta, the son of Śruta was Nābha, and Nābha's son was Sindhudvīpa. The son of Sindhudvīpa was Ayutāyu, and the son of Ayutāyu was Ṛtūparṇa, who was a friend of Nala. Ṛtūparṇa gave Nala the art of gambling and learned from him the art of aśva-vidyā. The son of Ṛtūparṇa was known as Sarvakāma, the son of Sarvakāma was Sudāsa, and his son was Saudāsa. The wife of Saudāsa was named Damayantī or Madayantī, and Saudāsa was also known as Kalmāṣapāda. Because of some defect in his fruitive activities, Saudāsa was cursed by Vasiṣṭha to become a Rākṣasa. While walking through the forest, he saw a brāhmaṇa engaged in sex with his wife, and because he had become a Rākṣasa he wanted to devour the brāhmaṇa. Although the brāhmaṇa's wife pleaded with him in many ways, Saudāsa devoured the brāhmaṇa, and the wife therefore cursed him, saying, "As soon as you engage in sex you will die." After twelve years, therefore, even though Saudāsa was released from the curse of Vasiṣṭha Muni, he remained sonless. At that time, with Saudāsa's permission, Vasiṣṭha impregnated Saudāsa's wife, Madayantī. Because Madayantī bore the child for many years but still could not give birth, Vasiṣṭha struck her abdomen with a stone, and thus a son was born. The son was named Aśmaka.





The son of Aśmaka was known as Bālika. He was protected from the curse of Paraśurāma because of being surrounded by many women, and therefore he is also known as Nārīkavaca. When the entire world was devoid of kṣatriyas, he became the original father of more kṣatriyas. He is therefore sometimes called Mūlaka. From Bālika, Daśaratha was born, from Daśaratha came Aiḍaviḍi, and from Aiḍaviḍi came Viśvasaha. The son of Viśvasaha was Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga. Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga joined the demigods in fighting the demons and was victorious, and the demigods therefore wanted to give him a benediction. But when the King inquired how long he would live and understood that his life would last only a few seconds more, he immediately left the heavenly planets and returned to his own abode by airplane. He could understand that everything in this material world is insignificant, and thus he fully engaged in worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

aṁśumāṁś ca tapas tepe

gaṅgānayana-kāmyayā

kālaṁ mahāntaṁ nāśaknot

tataḥ kālena saṁsthitaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; aṁśumān-the king named Aṁśumān; ca-also; tapaḥ tepe-executed austerity; gaṅgā-the Ganges; ānayana-kāmyayā-with a desire to bring the Ganges to this material world to deliver his forefathers; kālam-time; mahāntam-for a long duration; na-not; aśaknot-was successful; tataḥ-thereafter; kālena-in due course of time; saṁsthitaḥ-died.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: King Aṁśumān, like his grandfather, performed austerities for a very long time. Nonetheless, he could not bring the Ganges to this material world, and thereafter, in due course of time, he died.





TEXT 2



dilīpas tat-sutas tadvad

aśaktaḥ kālam eyivān

bhagīrathas tasya sutas

tepe sa sumahat tapaḥ

SYNONYMS



dilīpaḥ-named Dilīpa; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Aṁśumān; tat-vat-like his father; aśaktaḥ-being unable to bring the Ganges to the material world; kālam eyivān-became a victim of time and died; bhagīrathaḥ tasya sutaḥ-his son Bhagīratha; tepe-executed penance; saḥ-he; su-mahat-very great; tapaḥ-austerity.





Like Aṁśumān himself, Dilīpa, his son, was unable to bring the Ganges to this material world, and he also became a victim of death in due course of time. Then Dilīpa's son, Bhagīratha, performed very severe austerities to bring the Ganges to this material world.





TEXT 3



darśayām āsa taṁ devī

prasannā varadāsmi te

ity uktaḥ svam abhiprāyaṁ

śaśaṁsāvanato nṛpaḥ

SYNONYMS



darśayām āsa-appeared; tam-unto him, King Bhagīratha; devī-mother Ganges; prasannā-being very much satisfied; varadā asmi-I shall bless with my benediction; te-unto you; iti uktaḥ-thus being addressed; svam-his own; abhiprāyam-desire; śaśaṁsa-explained; avanataḥ-very respectfully bowing down; nṛpaḥ-the King (Bhagīratha).





Thereafter, mother Ganges appeared before King Bhagīratha and said, "I am very much satisfied with your austerities and am now prepared to give you benedictions as you desire." Being thus addressed by Gaṅgādevī, mother Ganges, the King bowed his head before her and explained his desire.





The King's desire was to deliver his forefathers, who had been burnt to ashes because of disrespecting Kapila Muni.





TEXT 4



ko 'pi dhārayitā vegaṁ

patantyā me mahī-tale

anyathā bhū-talaṁ bhittvā

nṛpa yāsye rasātalam

SYNONYMS



kaḥ-who is that person; api-indeed; dhārayitā-who can sustain; vegam-the force of the waves; patantyāḥ-while falling down; me-of me; mahī-tale-upon this earth; anyathā-otherwise; bhū-talam-the surface of the earth; bhittvā-piercing; nṛpa-O King; yāsye-I shall go down; rasātalam-to Pātāla, the lower part of the universe.





Mother Ganges replied: When I fall from the sky to the surface of the planet earth, the water will certainly be very forceful. Who will sustain that force? If I am not sustained, I shall pierce the surface of the earth and go down to Rasātala, the Pātāla area of the universe.





TEXT 5



kiṁ cāhaṁ na bhuvaṁ yāsye

narā mayy āmṛjanty agham

mṛjāmi tad aghaṁ kvāhaṁ

rājaṁs tatra vicintyatām

SYNONYMS



kim ca-also; aham-I; na-not; bhuvam-to the planet earth; yāsye-shall go; narāḥ-the people in general; mayi-in me, in my water; āmṛjanti-cleanse; agham-the reactions of their sinful activity; mṛjāmi-I shall wash; tat-that; agham-accumulation of sinful reactions; kva-unto whom; aham-I; rājan-O King; tatra-on this fact; vicintyatām-please consider carefully and decide.





O King, I do not wish to go down to the planet earth, for there the people in general will bathe in my water to cleanse themselves of the reactions of their sinful deeds. When all these sinful reactions accumulate in me, how shall I become free from them? You must consider this very carefully.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead says:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ





"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." (Bg. 18.66) The Supreme Personality of Godhead can accept the reactions of anyone's sinful deeds and neutralize them because He is pavitra, pure, like the sun, which is never contaminated by any worldly infection. Tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya vahneḥ sama-bhujo yathā (Bhāg. 10.33.29). One who is very powerful is not affected by any sinful activity. But here we see that mother Ganges fears being burdened with the sins of the people in general who would bathe in her waters. This indicates that no one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is able to neutralize the reactions of sinful deeds, whether one's own or those of others. Sometimes the spiritual master, after accepting a disciple, must take charge of that disciple's past sinful activities and, being overloaded, must sometimes suffer-if not fully, then partially-for the sinful acts of the disciple. Every disciple, therefore, must be very careful not to commit sinful activities after initiation. The poor spiritual master is kind and merciful enough to accept a disciple and partially suffer for that disciple's sinful activities, but Kṛṣṇa, being merciful to His servant, neutralizes the reactions of sinful deeds for the servant who engages in preaching His glories. Even mother Ganges feared the sinful reactions of the people in general and was anxious about how she would counteract the burden of these sins.





TEXT 6



śrī-bhagīratha uvāca

sādhavo nyāsinaḥ śāntā

brahmiṣṭhā loka-pāvanāḥ

haranty aghaṁ te 'ṅga-saṅgāt

teṣv āste hy agha-bhid dhariḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bhagīrathaḥ uvāca-Bhagīratha said; sādhavaḥ-saintly persons; nyāsinaḥ-sannyāsīs; śāntāḥ-peaceful, free from material disturbances; brahmiṣṭhāḥ-expert in following the regulative principles of Vedic scripture; loka-pāvanāḥ-who are engaged in delivering the entire world from a fallen condition; haranti-shall remove; agham-the reactions of sinful life; te-of you (mother Ganges); aṅga-saṅgāt-by bathing in the Ganges water; teṣu-within themselves; āste-there is; hi-indeed; agha-bhit-the Supreme Personality, who can vanquish all sinful activities; hariḥ-the Lord.





Bhagīratha said: Those who are saintly because of devotional service and are therefore in the renounced order, free from material desires, and who are pure devotees, expert in following the regulative principles mentioned in the Vedas, are always glorious and pure in behavior and are able to deliver all fallen souls. When such pure devotees bathe in your water, the sinful reactions accumulated from other people will certainly be counteracted, for such devotees always keep in the core of their hearts the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can vanquish all sinful reactions.





Mother Ganges is available to everyone for bathing. Therefore, not only will sinful persons bathe in the Ganges water, but in Hardwar and other holy places where the Ganges flows, saintly persons and devotees will also bathe in the waters of the Ganges. Devotees and saintly persons advanced in the renounced order can deliver even the Ganges. Tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni svāntaḥ-sthena gadābhṛtā (Bhāg. 1.13.10). Because saintly devotees always keep the Lord within the core of their hearts, they can perfectly cleanse the holy places of all sinful reactions. Therefore, people in general must always respectfully honor saintly persons. It is ordered that as soon as one sees a Vaiṣṇava, or even a sannyāsī, one should immediately offer respects to such a holy man. If one forgets to show respect in this way, one must observe a fast for that day. This is a Vedic injunction. One must be extremely careful to refrain from committing offenses at the lotus feet of a devotee or saintly person.



There are methods of prāyaścitta, or atonement, but they are inadequate to cleanse one of sinful reactions. One can be cleansed of sinful reactions only by devotional service, as stated in regard to the history of Ajāmila:



kecit kevalayā bhaktyā

vāsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ

aghaṁ dhunvanti kārtsnyena

nīhāram iva bhāskaraḥ





"Only a rare person who has adopted complete, unalloyed devotional service to Kṛṣṇa can uproot the weeds of sinful actions with no possibility that they will revive. He can do this simply by discharging devotional service, just as the sun can immediately dissipate fog by its rays." (Bhāg. 6.1.15) If one is under the protection of a devotee and sincerely renders service unto him, by this process of bhakti-yoga one is certainly able to counteract all sinful reactions.





TEXT 7



dhārayiṣyati te vegaṁ

rudras tv ātmā śarīriṇām

yasminn otam idaṁ protaṁ

viśvaṁ śāṭīva tantuṣu

SYNONYMS



dhārayiṣyati-will sustain; te-your; vegam-force of the waves; rudraḥ-Lord Śiva; tu-indeed; ātmā-the Supersoul; śarīriṇām-of all embodied souls; yasmin-in whom; otam-is situated in its longitude; idam-this whole universe; protam-latitude; viśvam-the whole universe; śāṭī-a cloth; iva-as; tantuṣu-in threads.





Like a cloth woven of threads extending for its length and breadth, this entire universe, in all its latitude and longitude, is situated under different potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Śiva is the incarnation of the Lord, and thus he represents the Supersoul in the embodied soul. He can sustain your forceful waves on his head.





The water of the Ganges is supposed to rest on the head of Lord Śiva. Lord Śiva is an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who sustains the entire universe by different potencies. Lord Śiva is described in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.45):



kṣīraṁ yathā dadhi vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt

sañjāyate na hi tataḥ pṛthag asti hetoḥ

yaḥ śambhutām api tathā samupaiti kāryād

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"Milk changes into yogurt when mixed with a yogurt culture, but actually yogurt is constitutionally nothing but milk. Similarly, Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, assumes the form of Lord Śiva for the special purpose of material transactions. I offer my obeisances at Lord Govinda's lotus feet." Lord Śiva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the same sense that yogurt is also milk although at the same time it is not milk. For the maintenance of the material world there are three incarnations-Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara (Lord Śiva). Lord Śiva is Viṣṇu in an incarnation for the mode of ignorance. The material world exists predominantly in the mode of ignorance. Therefore Lord Śiva is compared here to the longitude and latitude of the entire universe, which resembles a cloth woven of threads extending for both its length and breadth.





TEXT 8



ity uktvā sa nṛpo devaṁ

tapasātoṣayac chivam

kālenālpīyasā rājaṁs

tasyeśaś cāśv atuṣyata

SYNONYMS



iti uktvā-after saying this; saḥ-he; nṛpaḥ-the King (Bhagīratha); devam-unto Lord Śiva; tapasā-by executing austerities; atoṣayat-pleased; śivam-Lord Śiva, the all-auspicious; kālena-by time; alpīyasā-which was not very long; rājan-O King; tasya-upon him (Bhagīratha); īśaḥ-Lord Śiva; ca-indeed; āśu-very soon; atuṣyata-became satisfied.





After saying this, Bhagīratha satisfied Lord Śiva by performing austerities. O King Parīkṣit, Lord Śiva was very quickly satisfied with Bhagīratha.





The words āśv atuṣyata indicate that Lord Śiva was satisfied very soon. Therefore another name for Lord Śiva is Āśutoṣa. Materialistic persons become attached to Lord Śiva because Lord Śiva bestows benedictions upon anyone and everyone very quickly, not caring to know how his devotees prosper or suffer. Although materialistic persons know that material happiness is nothing but another side of suffering, they want it, and to get it very quickly they worship Lord Śiva. We find that materialists are generally devotees of many demigods, especially Lord Śiva and mother Durgā. They do not actually want spiritual happiness, for it is almost unknown to them. But if one is serious about being happy spiritually, he must take shelter of Lord Viṣṇu, as the Lord personally demands:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ





"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." (Bg. 18.66)





TEXT 9



tatheti rājñābhihitaṁ

sarva-loka-hitaḥ śivaḥ

dadhārāvahito gaṅgāṁ

pāda-pūta-jalāṁ hareḥ

SYNONYMS



tathā-(let it be) so; iti-thus; rājñā abhihitam-having been addressed by the King (Bhagīratha); sarva-loka-hitaḥ-the Personality of Godhead, who is always auspicious to everyone; śivaḥ-Lord Śiva; dadhāra-sustained; avahitaḥ-with great attention; gaṅgām-the Ganges; pāda-pūta-jalām hareḥ-whose water is transcendentally pure because of emanating from the toes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu.





When King Bhagīratha approached Lord Śiva and requested him to sustain the forceful waves of the Ganges, Lord Śiva accepted the proposal by saying, "Let it be so." Then, with great attention, he sustained the Ganges on his head, for the water of the Ganges is purifying, having emanated from the toes of Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 10



bhagīrathaḥ sa rājarṣir

ninye bhuvana-pāvanīm

yatra sva-pitṝṇāṁ dehā

bhasmībhūtāḥ sma śerate

SYNONYMS



bhagīrathaḥ-King Bhagīratha; saḥ-he; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-the great saintly king; ninye-carried or brought; bhuvana-pāvanīm-mother Ganges, who can deliver the whole universe; yatra-in that place where; sva-pitṝṇām-of his forefathers; dehāḥ-the bodies; bhasmībhūtāḥ-having been burnt to ashes; sma śerate-were lying.





The great and saintly king Bhagīratha brought the Ganges, which can deliver all the fallen souls, to that place on earth where the bodies of his forefathers lay burnt to ashes.





TEXT 11



rathena vāyu-vegena

prayāntam anudhāvatī

deśān punantī nirdagdhān

āsiñcat sagarātmajān

SYNONYMS



rathena-on a chariot; vāyu-vegena-driving at the speed of the wind; prayāntam-Mahārāja Bhagīratha, who was going in front; anudhāvatī-running after; deśān-all the countries; punantī-sanctifying; nirdagdhān-who had been burnt to ashes; āsiñcat-sprinkled over; sagara-ātmajān-the sons of Sagara.





Bhagīratha mounted a swift chariot and drove before mother Ganges, who followed him, purifying many countries, until they reached the ashes of Bhagīratha's forefathers, the sons of Sagara, who were thus sprinkled with water from the Ganges.





TEXT 12



yaj-jala-sparśa-mātreṇa

brahma-daṇḍa-hatā api

sagarātmajā divaṁ jagmuḥ

kevalaṁ deha-bhasmabhiḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-jala-whose water; sparśa-mātreṇa-simply by touching; brahma-daṇḍa-hatāḥ-those who were condemned for offending brahma, the self; api-although; sagara-ātmajāḥ-the sons of Sagara; divam-to the heavenly planets; jagmuḥ-went; kevalam-only; deha-bhasmabhiḥ-by the remaining ashes of their burnt bodies.





Because the sons of Sagara Mahārāja had offended a great personality, the heat of their bodies had increased, and they were burnt to ashes. But simply by being sprinkled with water from the Ganges, all of them became eligible to go to the heavenly planets. What then is to be said of those who use the water of mother Ganges to worship her?





Mother Ganges is worshiped by the water of the Ganges: a devotee takes a little water from the Ganges and offers it back to the Ganges. When the devotee takes the water, mother Ganges does not lose anything, and when the water is offered back, mother Ganges does not increase, but in this way the worshiper of the Ganges is benefited. Similarly, a devotee of the Lord offers the Lord patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyam-a leaf, flower, fruit or water-in great devotion, but everything, including the leaf, flower, fruit and water, belongs to the Lord, and therefore there is nothing to renounce or to accept. One must simply take advantage of the bhakti process because by following this process one does not lose anything but one gains the favor of the Supreme Person.





TEXT 13



bhasmībhūtāṅga-saṅgena

svar yātāḥ sagarātmajāḥ

kiṁ punaḥ śraddhayā devīṁ

sevante ye dhṛta-vratāḥ

SYNONYMS



bhasmībhūta-aṅga-by the body which had been burnt to ashes; saṅgena-by contacting the water of the Ganges; svaḥ yātāḥ-went to the heavenly planets; sagara-ātmajāḥ-the sons of Sagara; kim-what to speak of; punaḥ-again; śraddhayā-with faith and devotion; devīm-unto mother Ganges; sevante-worship; ye-those persons who; dhṛta-vratāḥ-with vows of determination.





Simply by having water from the Ganges come in contact with the ashes of their burnt bodies, the sons of Sagara Mahārāja were elevated to the heavenly planets. Therefore, what is to be said of a devotee who worships mother Ganges faithfully with a determined vow? One can only imagine the benefit that accrues to such a devotee.





TEXT 14



na hy etat param āścaryaṁ

svardhunyā yad ihoditam

ananta-caraṇāmbhoja-

prasūtāyā bhava-cchidaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; etat-this; param-ultimate; āścaryam-wonderful thing; svardhunyāḥ-of the water of the Ganges; yat-which; iha-herewith; uditam-has been described; ananta-of the Supreme Lord; caraṇa-ambhoja-from the lotus of the feet; prasūtāyāḥ-of that which emanates; bhava-chidaḥ-which can liberate from material bondage.





Because mother Ganges emanates from the lotus toe of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Anantadeva, she is able to liberate one from material bondage. Therefore whatever is described herewith about her is not at all wonderful.





It has actually been seen that anyone who regularly worships mother Ganges simply by bathing in her water keeps very good health and gradually becomes a devotee of the Lord. This is the effect of bathing in the water of the Ganges. Bathing in the Ganges is recommended in all Vedic śāstras, and one who takes to this path will certainly be completely freed from all sinful reactions. The practical example of this is that the sons of Mahārāja Sagara went to the heavenly planets when water from the Ganges merely touched the ashes of their burnt bodies.





TEXT 15



sanniveśya mano yasmiñ

chraddhayā munayo 'malāḥ

traiguṇyaṁ dustyajaṁ hitvā

sadyo yātās tad-ātmatām

SYNONYMS



sanniveśya-giving full attention; manaḥ-the mind; yasmin-unto whom; śraddhayā-with faith and devotion; munayaḥ-great saintly persons; amalāḥ-freed from all contamination of sins; traiguṇyam-the three modes of material nature; dustyajam-very difficult to give up; hitvā-they can nonetheless give up; sadyaḥ-immediately; yātāḥ-achieved; tat-ātmatām-the spiritual quality of the Supreme.





Great sages, completely freed from material lusty desires, devote their minds fully to the service of the Lord. Such persons are liberated from material bondage without difficulty, and they become transcendentally situated, acquiring the spiritual quality of the Lord. This is the glory of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXTS 16–17



śruto bhagīrathāj jajñe

tasya nābho 'paro 'bhavat

sindhudvīpas tatas tasmād

ayutāyus tato 'bhavat

ṛtūparṇo nala-sakho



yo 'śva-vidyām ayān nalāt

dattvākṣa-hṛdayaṁ cāsmai

sarvakāmas tu tat-sutam

SYNONYMS



śrutaḥ-a son named Śruta; bhagīrathāt-from Bhagīratha; jajñe-was born; tasya-of Śruta; nābhaḥ-by the name Nābha; aparaḥ-different from the Nābha previously described; abhavat-was born; sindhudvīpaḥ-by the name Sindhudvīpa; tataḥ-from Nābha; tasmāt-from Sindhudvīpa; ayutāyuḥ-a son named Ayutāyu; tataḥ-thereafter; abhavat-was born; ṛtūparṇaḥ-a son named Ṛtūparṇa; nala-sakhaḥ-who was a friend of Nala; yaḥ-one who; aśva-vidyām-the art of controlling horses; ayāt-achieved; nalāt-from Nala; dattvā-after giving in exchange; akṣa-hṛdayam-the secrets of the art of gambling; ca-and; asmai-unto Nala; sarvakāmaḥ-by the name Sarvakāma; tu-indeed; tat-sutam-his son (the son of Ṛtūparṇa).





Bhagīratha had a son named Śruta, whose son was Nābha. This son was different from the Nābha previously described. Nābha had a son named Sindhudvīpa, from Sindhudvīpa came Ayutāyu, and from Ayutāyu came Ṛtūparṇa, who became a friend of Nalarāja. Ṛtūparṇa taught Nalarāja the art of gambling, and Nalarāja gave Ṛtūparṇa lessons in controlling and maintaining horses. The son of Ṛtūparṇa was Sarvakāma.





Gambling is also an art. Kṣatriyas are allowed to exhibit talent in this art of gambling. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa, the Pāṇḍavas lost everything by gambling and were deprived of their kingdom, wife, family and home because they were not expert in the gambling art. In other words, a devotee may not be expert in materialistic activities. It is therefore advised in the śāstra that materialistic activities are not at all suitable for the living entities, especially the devotees. A devotee should therefore be satisfied to eat whatever is sent as prasāda by the Supreme Lord. A devotee remains pure because he does not take to sinful activities such as gambling, intoxication, meat-eating and illicit sex.





TEXT 18



tataḥ sudāsas tat-putro

damayantī-patir nṛpaḥ

āhur mitrasahaṁ yaṁ vai

kalmāṣāṅghrim uta kvacit

vasiṣṭha-śāpād rakṣo 'bhūd

anapatyaḥ sva-karmaṇā

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Sarvakāma; sudāsaḥ-Sudāsa was born; tat-putraḥ-the son of Sudāsa; damayantī-patiḥ-the husband of Damayantī; nṛpaḥ-he became king; āhuḥ-it is said; mitrasaham-Mitrasaha; yam vai-also; kalmāṣāṅghrim-by Kalmāṣapāda; uta-known; kvacit-sometimes; vasiṣṭha-śāpāt-being cursed by Vasiṣṭha; rakṣaḥ-a man-eater; abhūt-became; anapatyaḥ-without any son; sva-karmaṇā-by his own sinful act.





Sarvakāma had a son named Sudāsa, whose son, known as Saudāsa, was the husband of Damayantī. Saudāsa is sometimes known as Mitrasaha or Kalmāṣapāda. Because of his own misdeed, Mitrasaha was sonless and was cursed by Vasiṣṭha to become a man-eater [Rākṣasa].





TEXT 19



śrī-rājovāca

kiṁ nimitto guroḥ śāpaḥ

saudāsasya mahātmanaḥ

etad veditum icchāmaḥ

kathyatāṁ na raho yadi

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; kim nimittaḥ-for what reason; guroḥ-of the spiritual master; śāpaḥ-curse; saudāsasya-of Saudāsa; mahā-ātmanaḥ-of the great soul; etat-this; veditum-to know; icchāmaḥ-I wish; kathyatām-please tell me; na-not; rahaḥ-confidential; yadi-if.





King Parīkṣit said: O Śukadeva Gosvāmī, why did Vasiṣṭha, the spiritual master of Saudāsa, curse that great soul? I wish to know of this. If it is not a confidential matter, please describe it to me.





TEXTS 20–21



śrī-śuka uvāca

saudāso mṛgayāṁ kiñcic

caran rakṣo jaghāna ha

mumoca bhrātaraṁ so 'tha

gataḥ praticikīrṣayā

sañcintayann aghaṁ rājñaḥ



sūda-rūpa-dharo gṛhe

gurave bhoktu-kāmāya

paktvā ninye narāmiṣam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saudāsaḥ-King Saudāsa; mṛgayām-in hunting; kiñcit-sometimes; caran-wandering; rakṣaḥ-a Rākṣasa, or man-eater; jaghāna-killed; ha-in the past; mumoca-released; bhrātaram-the brother of that Rākṣasa; saḥ-that brother; atha-thereafter; gataḥ-went; praticikīrṣayā-for taking revenge; sañcintayan-he thought; agham-to do some harm; rājñaḥ-of the King; sūda-rūpa-dharaḥ-disguised himself as a cook; gṛhe-in the house; gurave-unto the King's spiritual master; bhoktu-kāmāya-who came there to take dinner; paktvā-after cooking; ninye-gave him; nara-āmiṣam-the flesh of a human being.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Once Saudāsa went to live in the forest, where he killed a man-eater [Rākṣasa] but forgave and released the man-eater's brother. That brother, however, decided to take revenge. Thinking to harm the King, he became the cook at the King's house. One day, the King's spiritual master, Vasiṣṭha Muni, was invited for dinner, and the Rākṣasa cook served him human flesh.





TEXT 22



parivekṣyamāṇaṁ bhagavān

vilokyābhakṣyam añjasā

rājānam aśapat kruddho

rakṣo hy evaṁ bhaviṣyasi

SYNONYMS



parivekṣyamāṇam-while examining the eatables; bhagavān-the most powerful; vilokya-when he saw; abhakṣyam-unfit for consumption; añjasā-very easily by his mystic power; rājānam-unto the King; aśapat-cursed; kruddhaḥ-being very angry; rakṣaḥ-a man-eater; hi-indeed; evam-in this way; bhaviṣyasi-you shall become.





While examining the food given to him, Vasiṣṭha Muni, by his mystic power, could understand that it was unfit to eat, being the flesh of a human being. He was very angry at this and immediately cursed Saudāsa to become a man-eater.





TEXTS 23–24



rakṣaḥ-kṛtaṁ tad viditvā

cakre dvādaśa-vārṣikam

so 'py apo-'ñjalim ādāya

guruṁ śaptuṁ samudyataḥ

vārito madayantyāpo



ruśatīḥ pādayor jahau

diśaḥ kham avanīṁ sarvaṁ

paśyañ jīvamayaṁ nṛpaḥ

SYNONYMS



rakṣaḥ-kṛtam-having been done by the Rākṣasa only; tat-that serving of human flesh; viditvā-after understanding; cakre-(Vasiṣṭha) performed; dvādaśa-vārṣikam-twelve years of penance for atonement; saḥ-that Saudāsa; api-also; apaḥ-añjalim-a palmful of water; ādāya-taking; gurum-his spiritual master, Vasiṣṭha; śaptum-to curse; samudyataḥ-was preparing; vāritaḥ-being forbidden; madayantyā-by his wife, who was also known as Madayantī; apaḥ-water; ruśatīḥ-strong by chanting of a mantra; pādayoḥ jahau-threw on his legs; diśaḥ-all directions; kham-in the sky; avanīm-on the surface of the world; sarvam-everywhere; paśyan-seeing; jīva-mayam-full of living entities; nṛpaḥ-the King.





When Vasiṣṭha understood that the human flesh had been served by the Rākṣasa, not by the King, he undertook twelve years of austerity to cleanse himself for having cursed the faultless King. Meanwhile, King Saudāsa took water and chanted the śapa-mantra, preparing to curse Vasiṣṭha, but his wife, Madayantī, forbade him to do so. Then the King saw that the ten directions, the sky and the surface of the globe were full of living entities everywhere.





TEXT 25



rākṣasaṁ bhāvam āpannaḥ

pāde kalmāṣatāṁ gataḥ

vyavāya-kāle dadṛśe

vanauko-dampatī dvijau

SYNONYMS



rākṣasam-man-eating; bhāvam-propensity; āpannaḥ-having gotten; pāde-on the leg; kalmāṣatām-a black spot; gataḥ-obtained; vyavāya-kāle-at the time of sexual intercourse; dadṛśe-he saw; vana-okaḥ-living in the forest; dam-patī-a husband and wife; dvijau-who were brāhmaṇas.





Saudāsa thus acquired the propensity of a man-eater and received on his leg a black spot, for which he was known as Kalmāṣapāda. Once King Kalmāṣapāda saw a brāhmaṇa couple engaged in sexual intercourse in the forest.





TEXTS 26–27



kṣudhārto jagṛhe vipraṁ

tat-patny āhākṛtārthavat

na bhavān rākṣasaḥ sākṣād

ikṣvākūṇāṁ mahā-rathaḥ

madayantyāḥ patir vīra



nādharmaṁ kartum arhasi

dehi me 'patya-kāmāyā

akṛtārthaṁ patiṁ dvijam

SYNONYMS



kṣudhā-ārtaḥ-being aggrieved by hunger; jagṛhe-caught; vipram-the brāhmaṇa; tat-patnī-his wife; āha-said; akṛta-artha-vat-being unsatisfied, poor and hungry; na-not; bhavān-yourself; rākṣasaḥ-a man-eater; sākṣāt-directly or factually; ikṣvākūṇām-among the descendants of Mahārāja Ikṣvāku; mahā-rathaḥ-a great fighter; madayantyāḥ-of Madayantī; patiḥ-the husband; vīra-O hero; na-not; adharmam-irreligious act; kartum-to do; arhasi-you deserve; dehi-please deliver; me-my; apatya-kāmāyāḥ-desiring to get a son; akṛta-artham-whose desire has not been fulfilled; patim-husband; dvijam-who is a brāhmaṇa.





Being influenced by the propensity of a Rākṣasa and being very hungry, King Saudāsa seized the brāhmaṇa. Then the poor woman, the brāhmaṇa's wife, said to the King: O hero, you are not actually a man-eater; rather, you are among the descendants of Mahārāja Ikṣvāku. Indeed, you are a great fighter, the husband of Madayantī. You should not act irreligiously in this way. I desire to have a son. Please, therefore, return my husband, who has not yet impregnated me.





TEXT 28



deho 'yaṁ mānuṣo rājan

puruṣasyākhilārthadaḥ

tasmād asya vadho vīra

sarvārtha-vadha ucyate

SYNONYMS



dehaḥ-body; ayam-this; mānuṣaḥ-human; rājan-O King; puruṣasya-of the living being; akhila-universal; artha-daḥ-beneficial; tasmāt-therefore; asya-of the body of my husband; vadhaḥ-the killing; vīra-O hero; sarva-artha-vadhaḥ-killing all beneficial opportunities; ucyate-it is said.





O King, O hero, this human body is meant for universal benefits. If you kill this body untimely, you will kill all the benefits of human life.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung:



hari hari viphale janama goṅāinu

manuṣya-janama pāiyā, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā,

jāniyā śuniyā viṣa khāinu

The body of a human being is extremely valuable because in this body one can understand the instructions of Kṛṣṇa and attain the ultimate destination of the living entity. The living entity is within the material world to fulfill the mission of going back home, back to Godhead. In the material world, one hankers for happiness, but because one does not know the ultimate destination, one changes bodies one after another. However, if one gets the opportunity to possess a human form of body, in this body he can fulfill the four principles of dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa, and if one is properly regulated he makes further progress, after liberation, to engage in the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This is the success of life: to stop the process of repeated birth and death and go back home, back to Godhead (mām eti), to be engaged in the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, taking a human body is meant for completing one's progress in life. Throughout human society, killing of a human being is taken very seriously. Hundreds and thousands of animals are killed in slaughterhouses, and no one cares about them, but the killing of even one human being is taken very seriously. Why? Because the human form of body is extremely important in executing the mission of life.





TEXT 29



eṣa hi brāhmaṇo vidvāṁs

tapaḥ-śīla-guṇānvitaḥ

ārirādhayiṣur brahma

mahā-puruṣa-saṁjñitam

sarva-bhūtātma-bhāvena

bhūteṣv antarhitaṁ guṇaiḥ

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this; hi-indeed; brāhmaṇaḥ-a qualified brāhmaṇa; vidvān-learned in Vedic knowledge; tapaḥ-austerity; śīla-good behavior; guṇa-anvitaḥ-endowed with all good qualities; ārirādhayiṣuḥ-desiring to be engaged in worshiping; brahma-the Supreme Brahman; mahā-puruṣa-the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa; saṁjñitam-known as; sarva-bhūta-of all living entities; ātma-bhāvena-as the Supersoul; bhūteṣu-in every living entity; antarhitam-within the core of the heart; guṇaiḥ-by qualities.





Here is a learned, highly qualified brāhmaṇa, engaged in performing austerity and eagerly desiring to worship the Supreme Lord, the Supersoul who lives within the core of the heart in all living entities.





The wife of the brāhmaṇa did not regard her husband as a superficial brāhmaṇa who was called a brāhmaṇa merely because he was born of a brāhmaṇa family. Rather, this brāhmaṇa was actually qualified with the brahminical symptoms. Yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktam (Bhāg. 7.11.35). The symptoms of a brāhmaṇa are stated in the śāstra:



śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ

kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca

jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ

brahma-karma svabhāvajam





"Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, wisdom, knowledge, and religiousness-these are the qualities by which the brāhmaṇas work." (Bg. 18.42) Not only must a brāhmaṇa be qualified, but he must also engage in actual brahminical activities. Simply to be qualified is not enough; one must engage in a brāhmaṇa's duties. The duty of a brāhmaṇa is to know the paraṁ brahma, Kṛṣṇa (paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]). Because this brāhmaṇa was actually qualified and was also engaged in brahminical activities (brahma-karma), killing him would be a greatly sinful act, and the brāhmaṇa's wife requested that he not be killed.





TEXT 30



so 'yaṁ brahmarṣi-varyas te

rājarṣi-pravarād vibho

katham arhati dharma-jña

vadhaṁ pitur ivātmajaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, the brāhmaṇa; ayam-this; brahma-ṛṣi-varyaḥ-not only a brāhmaṇa but the best of great sages, or brahmarṣis; te-also from you; rāja-ṛṣi-pravarāt-who are the best of all saintly kings, or rājarṣis; vibho-O master of the state; katham-how; arhati-he deserves; dharma-jña-O you, who are quite aware of religious principles; vadham-killing; pituḥ-from the father; iva-like; ātmajaḥ-the son.





My lord, you are completely aware of the religious principles. As a son never deserves to be killed by his father, here is a brāhmaṇa who should be protected by the king, and never killed. How does he deserve to be killed by a rājarṣi like you?





The word rājarṣi refers to a king who behaves like a ṛṣi, or sage. Such a king is also called naradeva because he is considered a representative of the Supreme Lord. Because his duty is to rule the kingdom to maintain brahminical culture, he never desires to kill a brāhmaṇa. Generally, a brāhmaṇa, woman, child, old man or cow is never regarded as punishable. Thus the wife of the brāhmaṇa requested the King to refrain from this sinful act.





TEXT 31



tasya sādhor apāpasya

bhrūṇasya brahma-vādinaḥ

kathaṁ vadhaṁ yathā babhror

manyate san-mato bhavān

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him; sādhoḥ-of the great saintly person; apāpasya-of one who has no sinful life; bhrūṇasya-of the embryo; brahma-vādinaḥ-of one who is well versed in Vedic knowledge; katham-how; vadham-the killing; yathā-as; babhroḥ-of a cow; manyate-you are thinking; sat-mataḥ-well recognized by higher circles; bhavān-your good self.





You are well known and worshiped in learned circles. How dare you kill this brāhmaṇa, who is a saintly, sinless person, well versed in Vedic knowledge? Killing him would be like destroying the embryo within the womb or killing a cow.





As stated in the Amara-kośa dictionary, bhrūṇo'rbhake bāla-garbhe: the word bhrūṇa refers either to the cow or to the living entity in embryo. According to Vedic culture, destroying the undeveloped embryo of the soul in the womb is as sinful as killing a cow or a brāhmaṇa. In the embryo, the living entity is present in an undeveloped stage. The modern scientific theory that life is a combination of chemicals is nonsense; scientists cannot manufacture living beings, even like those born from eggs. The idea that scientists can develop a chemical situation resembling that of an egg and bring life from it is nonsensical. Their theory that a chemical combination can have life may be accepted, but these rascals cannot create such a combination. This verse refers to bhrūṇasya vadham-the killing of a bhrūṇa or destruction of the embryo. Here is a challenge from the Vedic literature. The crude, atheistic understanding that the living entity is a combination of matter belongs to the grossest ignorance.





TEXT 32



yady ayaṁ kriyate bhakṣyas

tarhi māṁ khāda pūrvataḥ

na jīviṣye vinā yena

kṣaṇaṁ ca mṛtakaṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



yadi-if; ayam-this brāhmaṇa; kriyate-is accepted; bhakṣyaḥ-as eatable; tarhi-then; mām-me; khāda-eat; pūrvataḥ-before that; na-not; jīviṣye-I shall live; vinā-without; yena-whom (my husband); kṣaṇam ca-even for a moment; mṛtakam-a dead body; yathā-like.





Without my husband, I cannot live for a moment. If you want to eat my husband, it would be better to eat me first, for without my husband I am as good as a dead body.





In the Vedic culture there is a system known as satī or saha-maraṇa, in which a woman dies with her husband. According to this system, if the husband dies, the wife will voluntarily die by falling in the blazing funeral pyre of her husband. Here, in this verse, the feelings inherent in this culture are expressed by the wife of the brāhmaṇa. A woman without a husband is like a dead body. Therefore according to Vedic culture a girl must be married. This is the responsibility of her father. A girl may be given in charity, and a husband may have more than one wife, but a girl must be married. This is Vedic culture. A woman is supposed to be always dependent-in her childhood she is dependent on her father, in youth on her husband, and in old age on her elderly sons. According to Manu-saṁhitā, she is never independent. Independence for a woman means miserable life. In this age, so many girls are unmarried and falsely imagining themselves free, but their life is miserable. Here is an instance in which a woman felt that without her husband she was nothing but a dead body.





TEXT 33



evaṁ karuṇa-bhāṣiṇyā

vilapantyā anāthavat

vyāghraḥ paśum ivākhādat

saudāsaḥ śāpa-mohitaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; karuṇa-bhāṣiṇyāḥ-while the brāhmaṇa's wife was speaking very pitiably; vilapantyāḥ-lamenting severely; anātha-vat-exactly like a woman who has no protector; vyāghraḥ-a tiger; paśum-prey animal; iva-like; akhādat-ate up; saudāsaḥ-King Saudāsa; śāpa-by the curse; mohitaḥ-because of being condemned.





Being condemned by the curse of Vasiṣṭha, King Saudāsa devoured the brāhmaṇa, exactly as a tiger eats its prey. Even though the brāhmaṇa's wife spoke so pitiably, Saudāsa was unmoved by her lamentation.





This is an example of destiny. King Saudāsa was condemned by the curse of Vasiṣṭha, and therefore even though he was well qualified he could not restrain himself from becoming a tigerlike Rākṣasa, for this was his destiny. Tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukham (Bhāg. 1.5.18). As one is put into distress by destiny, destiny can also put one in a happy situation. Destiny is extremely strong, but one can change destiny if one comes to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājām (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.54).





TEXT 34



brāhmaṇī vīkṣya didhiṣuṁ

puruṣādena bhakṣitam

śocanty ātmānam urvīśam

aśapat kupitā satī

SYNONYMS



brāhmaṇī-the wife of the brāhmaṇa; vīkṣya-after seeing; didhiṣum-her husband, who was about to give the seed of a child; puruṣa-adena-by the man-eater (Rākṣasa); bhakṣitam-having been eaten up; śocantī-lamenting very much; ātmānam-for her body or her self; urvīśam-unto the King; aśapat-cursed; kupitā-being angry; satī-the chaste woman.





When the chaste wife of the brāhmaṇa saw that her husband, who was about to discharge semen, had been eaten by the man-eater, she was overwhelmed with grief and lamentation. Thus she angrily cursed the King.





TEXT 35



yasmān me bhakṣitaḥ pāpa

kāmārtāyāḥ patis tvayā

tavāpi mṛtyur ādhānād

akṛta-prajña darśitaḥ

SYNONYMS



yasmāt-because; me-my; bhakṣitaḥ-was eaten up; pāpa-O sinful one; kāma-ārtāyāḥ-of a woman very much bereaved because of sexual desire; patiḥ-husband; tvayā-by you; tava-your; api-also; mṛtyuḥ-death; ādhānāt-when you try to discharge semen in your wife; akṛta-prajña-O foolish rascal; darśitaḥ-this curse is placed upon you.





O foolish, sinful person, because you have eaten my husband when I was sexually inclined and desiring to have the seed of a child, I shall also see you die when you attempt to discharge semen in your wife. In other words, whenever you attempt to sexually unite with your wife, you shall die.





TEXT 36



evaṁ mitrasahaṁ śaptvā

pati-loka-parāyaṇā

tad-asthīni samiddhe 'gnau

prāsya bhartur gatiṁ gatā

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; mitrasaham-King Saudāsa; śaptvā-after cursing; pati-loka-parāyaṇā-because of being inclined to go with her husband; tat-asthīni-her husband's bones; samiddhe agnau-in the burning fire; prāsya-after placing; bhartuḥ-of her husband; gatim-to the destination; gatā-she also went.





Thus the wife of the brāhmaṇa cursed King Saudāsa, known as Mitrasaha. Then, being inclined to go with her husband, she set fire to her husband's bones, fell into the fire herself, and went with him to the same destination.





TEXT 37



viśāpo dvādaśābdānte

maithunāya samudyataḥ

vijñāpya brāhmaṇī-śāpaṁ

mahiṣyā sa nivāritaḥ

SYNONYMS



viśāpaḥ-being released from the period of the curse; dvādaśa-abda-ante-after twelve years; maithunāya-for sexual intercourse with his wife; samudyataḥ-when Saudāsa was prepared to do it; vijñāpya-reminding him about; brāhmaṇī-śāpam-the curse given by the brāhmaṇī; mahiṣyā-by the Queen; saḥ-he (the King); nivāritaḥ-checked.





After twelve years, when King Saudāsa was released from the curse by Vasiṣṭha, he wanted to have sexual intercourse with his wife. But the Queen reminded him about the curse by the brāhmaṇī, and thus he was checked from sexual intercourse.





TEXT 38



ata ūrdhvaṁ sa tatyāja

strī-sukhaṁ karmaṇāprajāḥ

vasiṣṭhas tad-anujñāto

madayantyāṁ prajām adhāt

SYNONYMS



ataḥ-in this way; ūrdhvam-in the near future; saḥ-he, the King; tatyāja-gave up; strī-sukham-the happiness of sexual intercourse; karmaṇā-by destiny; aprajāḥ-remained sonless; vasiṣṭhaḥ-the great saint Vasiṣṭha; tat-anujñātaḥ-being permitted by the King to beget a son; madayantyām-in the womb of Madayantī, King Saudāsa's wife; prajām-a child; adhāt-begot.





After being thus instructed, the King gave up the future happiness of sexual intercourse and by destiny remained sonless. Later, with the King's permission, the great saint Vasiṣṭha begot a child in the womb of Madayantī.





TEXT 39



sā vai sapta samā garbham

abibhran na vyajāyata

jaghne 'śmanodaraṁ tasyāḥ

so 'śmakas tena kathyate

SYNONYMS



sā-she, Queen Madayantī; vai-indeed; sapta-seven; samāḥ-years; garbham-the child within the womb; abibhrat-continued to bear; na-not; vyajāyata-gave delivery; jaghne-struck; aśmanā-by a stone; udaram-abdomen; tasyāḥ-of her; saḥ-a son; aśmakaḥ-by the name Aśmaka; tena-because of this; kathyate-was called.





Madayantī bore the child within the womb for seven years and did not give birth. Therefore Vasiṣṭha struck her abdomen with a stone, and then the child was born. Consequently, the child was known as Aśmaka ["the child born of a stone"].





TEXT 40



aśmakād bāliko jajñe

yaḥ strībhiḥ parirakṣitaḥ

nārī-kavaca ity ukto

niḥkṣatre mūlako 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



aśmakāt-from that son named Aśmaka; bālikaḥ-a son named Bālika; jajñe-was born; yaḥ-this child Bālika; strībhiḥ-by women; parirakṣitaḥ-was protected; nārī-kavacaḥ-having a shield of women; iti uktaḥ-was known as such; niḥkṣatre-when there were no kṣatriyas (all kṣatriyas having been vanquished by Paraśurāma); mūlakaḥ-Mūlaka, the progenitor of the kṣatriyas; abhavat-he became.





From Aśmaka, Bālika took birth. Because Bālika was surrounded by women and was therefore saved from the anger of Paraśurāma, he was known as Nārīkavaca ["one who is protected by women"]. When Paraśurāma vanquished all the kṣatriyas, Bālika became the progenitor of more kṣatriyas. Therefore he was known as Mūlaka, the root of the kṣatriya dynasty.





TEXT 41



tato daśarathas tasmāt

putra aiḍaviḍis tataḥ

rājā viśvasaho yasya

khaṭvāṅgaś cakravarty abhūt

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Bālika; daśarathaḥ-a son named Daśaratha; tasmāt-from him; putraḥ-a son; aiḍaviḍiḥ-named Aiḍaviḍi; tataḥ-from him; rājā viśvasahaḥ-the famous King Viśvasaha was born; yasya-of whom; khaṭvāṅgaḥ-the king named Khaṭvāṅga; cakravartī-emperor; abhūt-became.





From Bālika came a son named Daśaratha, from Daśaratha came a son named Aiḍaviḍi, and from Aiḍaviḍi came King Viśvasaha. The son of King Viśvasaha was the famous Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga.





TEXT 42



yo devair arthito daityān

avadhīd yudhi durjayaḥ

muhūrtam āyur jñātvaitya

sva-puraṁ sandadhe manaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-King Khaṭvāṅga who; devaiḥ-by the demigods; arthitaḥ-being requested; daityān-the demons; avadhīt-killed; yudhi-in a fight; durjayaḥ-very fierce; muhūrtam-for a second only; āyuḥ-duration of life; jñātvā-knowing; etya-approached; sva-puram-his own abode; sandadhe-fixed; manaḥ-the mind.





King Khaṭvāṅga was unconquerable in any fight. Requested by the demigods to join them in fighting the demons, he won victory, and the demigods, being very pleased, wanted to give him a benediction. The King inquired from them about the duration of his life and was informed that he had only one moment more. Thus he immediately left his palace and went to his own residence, where he engaged his mind fully on the lotus feet of the Lord.





The example of Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga in performing devotional service is brilliant. Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga engaged himself for only a moment in devotional service to the Lord, but he was promoted back to Godhead. Therefore, if one practices devotional service from the beginning of his life, surely he will return home, back to Godhead, without a doubt (asaṁśaya).



In Bhagavad-gītā the word asaṁśaya is used to describe the devotee. There the Lord Himself gives this instruction:



mayy āsakta-manāḥ pārtha

yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśrayaḥ

asaṁśayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ

yathā jñāsyasi tac chṛṇu





"Now hear, O son of Pṛthā [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free from doubt." (Bg. 7.1)



The Lord also instructs:



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." (Bg. 4.9)



Therefore, from the very beginning of one's life one should practice bhakti-yoga, which increases one's attachment for Kṛṣṇa. If one daily sees the Deity in the temple, makes offerings by worshiping the Deity, chants the holy name of the Personality of Godhead, and preaches about the glorious activities of the Lord as much as possible, he thus becomes attached to Kṛṣṇa. This attachment is called āsakti. When one's mind is attached to Kṛṣṇa (mayy āsakta-manāḥ), one can fulfill the mission of life in one human birth. If one misses this opportunity, one does not know where he is going, how long he will remain in the cycle of birth and death, and when he will again achieve the human form of life and the chance to return home, back to Godhead. The most intelligent person, therefore, uses every moment of his life to render loving service to the Lord.





TEXT 43



na me brahma-kulāt prāṇāḥ

kula-daivān na cātmajāḥ

na śriyo na mahī rājyaṁ

na dārāś cātivallabhāḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; me-my; brahma-kulāt-than the groups of brāhmaṇas; prāṇāḥ-life; kula-daivāt-than the personalities worshipable for my family; na-not; ca-also; ātmajāḥ-sons and daughters; na-nor; śriyaḥ-opulence; na-nor; mahī-the earth; rājyam-kingdom; na-nor; dārāḥ-wife; ca-also; ati-vallabhāḥ-extremely dear.





Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga thought: Not even my life is dearer to me than the brahminical culture and the brāhmaṇas, who are worshiped by my family. What then is to be said of my kingdom, land, wife, children and opulence? Nothing is dearer to me than the brāhmaṇas.





Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga, being in favor of the brahminical culture, wanted to utilize one moment's time by fully surrendering unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is worshiped with this prayer:



namo brāhmaṇya-devāya

go brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca

jagad-dhitāya kṛṣṇāya

govindāya namo namaḥ





"I offer my respectful obeisances to the Supreme Absolute Truth, Kṛṣṇa, who is the well-wisher of the cows and the brāhmaṇas as well as the living entities in general. I offer my repeated obeisances to Govinda, who is the pleasure reservoir for all the senses." A devotee of Kṛṣṇa is very much attached to brahminical culture. Indeed, an expert personality who knows who Kṛṣṇa is and what He wants is a real brāhmaṇa. Brahma jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ. Kṛṣṇa is the Parabrahman, and therefore all Kṛṣṇa conscious persons, or devotees of Kṛṣṇa, are exalted brāhmaṇas. Khaṭvāṅga Mahārāja regarded the devotees of Kṛṣṇa as the real brāhmaṇas and the real light for human society. One who desires to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and spiritual understanding must give the utmost importance to brahminical culture and must understand Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇāya govindāya). Then his life will be successful.





TEXT 44



na bālye 'pi matir mahyam

adharme ramate kvacit

nāpaśyam uttamaślokād

anyat kiñcana vastv aham

SYNONYMS



na-not; bālye-in childhood; api-indeed; matiḥ-attraction; mahyam-of me; adharme-in irreligious principles; ramate-enjoys; kvacit-at any time; na-nor; apaśyam-I saw; uttamaślokāt-than the Personality of Godhead; anyat-anything else; kiñcana-anything; vastu-substance; aham-I.





I was never attracted, even in my childhood, by insignificant things or irreligious principles. I did not find anything more substantial than the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga provides a typical example of a Kṛṣṇa conscious person. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not see anything to be important but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nor does he accept anything within this material world as being unconnected to the Supreme Lord. As stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 8.274):



sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe, nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti





"The mahā-bhāgavata, the advanced devotee, certainly sees everything mobile and immobile, but he does not exactly see their forms. Rather, everywhere he immediately sees manifest the form of the Supreme Lord." Although a devotee is within the material world, he has no connection with it. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe. He accepts this material world in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A devotee may be engaged in earning money, but he uses that money for propagating the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement by constructing large temples and establishing worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Khaṭvāṅga Mahārāja, therefore, was not a materialist. A materialist is always attached to wife, children, home, property and many other things for sense gratification, but, as stated above, Khaṭvāṅga Mahārāja was not attached to such things, nor could he think of anything existing without the purpose of the Supreme Lord. Īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvam: everything is related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Of course, this consciousness is not for the ordinary person, but if one takes to the path of devotional service, as prescribed in The Nectar of Devotion, he can be trained in this consciousness and attain perfect understanding. For a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, nothing is palatable without a relationship with Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 45



devaiḥ kāma-varo datto

mahyaṁ tri-bhuvaneśvaraiḥ

na vṛṇe tam ahaṁ kāmaṁ

bhūtabhāvana-bhāvanaḥ

SYNONYMS



devaiḥ-by the demigods; kāma-varaḥ-the benediction to have whatever he wanted; dattaḥ-was given; mahyam-unto me; tri-bhuvana-īśvaraiḥ-by the demigods, the protectors of the three worlds (who can do whatever they like within this material world); na vṛṇe-did not accept; tam-that; aham-I; kāmam-everything desirable within this material world; bhūtabhāvana-bhāvanaḥ-being fully absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead (and therefore not interested in anything material).





The demigods, the directors of the three worlds, wanted to give me whatever benediction I desired. I did not want their benedictions, however, because I am interested in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who created everything in this material world. I am more interested in the Supreme Personality of Godhead than in all material benedictions.





A devotee is always transcendentally situated. paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate: one who has seen the Supreme Personality of Godhead is no longer interested in material sense enjoyment. Even such an exalted devotee as Dhruva Mahārāja went to the forest for the sake of material benefit, but when he actually saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he refused to accept any material benediction. He said, svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce: "My dear Lord, I am fully satisfied with whatever You have given me or not given me. I have nothing to ask from You, for I am fully satisfied to be engaged in Your service." This is the mentality of a pure devotee, who does not want anything, material or spiritual, from the Personality of Godhead. Our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore called kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta-saṅgha, the association of persons who are simply satisfied in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa. Being absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa is neither expensive nor troublesome. Kṛṣṇa says, man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru: "Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship Me." (Bg. 9.34) Anyone can always think of Kṛṣṇa, without difficulties or obstacles. This is called kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta. One who is absorbed in kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta has no material benefits to ask from Kṛṣṇa. Instead, such a person prays to the Lord for the benediction of being able to spread His glories all over the world. Mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi. A Kṛṣṇa conscious person does not even want to stop his cycle of birth and death. He simply prays, "I may take birth as You like, but my only prayer is that I may be engaged in Your service."





TEXT 46



ye vikṣiptendriya-dhiyo

devās te sva-hṛdi sthitam

na vindanti priyaṁ śaśvad

ātmānaṁ kim utāpare

SYNONYMS



ye-which personalities; vikṣipta-indriya-dhiyaḥ-whose senses, mind and intelligence are always agitated because of material conditions; devāḥ-like the demigods; te-such persons; sva-hṛdi-in the core of the heart; sthitam-situated; na-not; vindanti-know; priyam-the dearmost Personality of Godhead; śaśvat-constantly, eternally; ātmānam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kim uta-what to speak of; apare-others (like human beings).





Even though the demigods have the advantages of being situated in the higher planetary system, their minds, senses and intelligence are agitated by material conditions. Therefore, even such elevated persons fail to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is eternally situated in the core of the heart. What then is to be said of others, such as human beings, who have fewer advantages?





It is a fact that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always situated in everyone's heart (īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe 'rjuna tiṣṭhati [Bg. 18.61]). But because of our material anxieties, which are inevitable in this material world, we cannot understand the Supreme Lord, although He is situated so near to us. For those always agitated by material conditions, the yogic process is recommended so that one may concentrate his mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the heart. Dhyānāvasthita-tad-gatena manasā paśyanti yaṁ yoginaḥ [SB 12.13.1]. Because in material conditions the mind and senses are always agitated, by the yogic procedures like dhāraṇā, āsana and dhyāna one must quiet the mind and concentrate it upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, the yogic process is a material attempt to realize the Lord, whereas bhakti, devotional service, is the spiritual process by which to realize Him. Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga accepted the spiritual path, and therefore he was no longer interested in anything material. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.55), bhaktyā mām abhijānāti: "Only by devotional service can I be understood." One can understand Kṛṣṇa, the Parabrahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only through devotional service. The Lord never says that one can understand Him by performing mystic yoga or by philosophically speculating. Bhakti is above all such material attempts. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam [Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.11]. Bhakti is uncontaminated, being unalloyed even by jñāna or pious activities.





TEXT 47



atheśa-māyā-raciteṣu saṅgaṁ

guṇeṣu gandharva-puropameṣu

rūḍhaṁ prakṛtyātmani viśva-kartur

bhāvena hitvā tam ahaṁ prapadye

SYNONYMS



atha-therefore; īśa-māyā-by the external potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; raciteṣu-in things manufactured; saṅgam-attachment; guṇeṣu-in the modes of material nature; gandharva-pura-upameṣu-which are compared to the illusion of a gandharva-pura, a town or houses seen in the forest or on a hill; rūḍham-very powerful; prakṛtyā-by material nature; ātmani-unto the Supersoul; viśva-kartuḥ-of the creator of the whole universe; bhāvena-by devotional service; hitvā-giving up; tam-unto Him (the Lord); aham-I; prapadye-surrender.





Therefore I should now give up my attachment for things created by the external energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I should engage in thought of the Lord and should thus surrender unto Him. This material creation, having been created by the external energy of the Lord, is like an imaginary town visualized on a hill or in a forest. Every conditioned soul has a natural attraction and attachment for material things, but one must simply give up this attachment and surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





When passing through a mountainous region in an airplane, one may sometimes see a city in the sky with towers and palaces, or one may see similar things in a big forest. This is called a gandharva-pura, a phantasmagoria. This entire world resembles such a phantasmagoria, and every materially situated person has attachment for it. But Khaṭvāṅga Mahārāja, because of his advanced Kṛṣṇa consciousness, was not interested in such things. Even though a devotee may engage in apparently materialistic activities, he knows his position very well. Nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate. If one engages all material things in relation with the loving service of the Lord, one is situated in yukta-vairāgya, proper renunciation. In this material world, nothing should be accepted for one's sense gratification: everything should be accepted for the service of the Lord. This is the mentality of the spiritual world. Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga advises that one give up material attachments and surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one achieves success in life. This is pure bhakti-yoga, which involves vairāgya-vidyā-renunciation and knowledge.



vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga-

śikṣārtham ekaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-śarīra-dhārī

kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye

[Cc. Madya 6.254]





"Let me surrender unto the Personality of Godhead who has appeared now as Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is the ocean of all mercy and has come down to teach us material detachment, learning and devotional service to Himself." (Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka 6.74) Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu inaugurated this movement of vairāgya-vidyā, by which one detaches himself from material existence and engages in loving devotional service. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement of devotional service is the only process by which to counteract our false prestige in this material world.





TEXT 48



iti vyavasito buddhyā

nārāyaṇa-gṛhītayā

hitvānya-bhāvam ajñānaṁ

tataḥ svaṁ bhāvam āsthitaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; vyavasitaḥ-having firmly decided; buddhyā-by proper intelligence; nārāyaṇa-gṛhītayā-completely controlled by the mercy of Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hitvā-giving up; anya-bhāvam-consciousness other than Kṛṣṇa consciousness; ajñānam-which is nothing but constant ignorance and darkness; tataḥ-thereafter; svam-his original position as an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa; bhāvam-devotional service; āsthitaḥ-situated.





Thus Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga, by his advanced intelligence in rendering service to the Lord, gave up false identification with the body full of ignorance. In his original position of eternal servitorship, he engaged himself in rendering service to the Lord.





When one actually becomes purely Kṛṣṇa conscious, no one has any right to rule over him. When situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one is no longer in the darkness of ignorance, and when freed from all such darkness, one is situated in his original position. Jīvera 'svarūpa' haya-kṛṣṇera 'nitya-dāsa.' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]. The living entity is eternally the servant of the Lord, and thus when he engages himself in the service of the Lord in all respects, he enjoys the perfection of life.





TEXT 49



yat tad brahma paraṁ sūkṣmam

aśūnyaṁ śūnya-kalpitam

bhagavān vāsudeveti

yaṁ gṛṇanti hi sātvatāḥ

SYNONYMS



yat-that which; tat-such; brahma param-Parabrahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; sūkṣmam-spiritual, beyond all material conceptions; aśūnyam-not impersonal or void; śūnya-kalpitam-imagined to be void by less intelligent men; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa; iti-thus; yam-whom; gṛṇanti-sing about; hi-indeed; sātvatāḥ-pure devotees.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is extremely difficult to understand for unintelligent men who accept Him as impersonal or void, which He is not. The Lord is therefore understood and sung about by pure devotees.





As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11):



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate





The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases-as Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. Bhagavān is the origin of everything. Brahman is a partial representation of Bhagavān, and Vāsudeva, the Supersoul living everywhere and in everyone's heart, is also an advanced realization of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But when one comes to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead (vāsudevaḥ samam iti), when one realizes that Vāsudeva is both Paramātmā and the impersonal Brahman, he is then in perfect knowledge. Kṛṣṇa is therefore described by Arjuna as paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]. The words paraṁ brahma refer to the shelter of the impersonal Brahman and also of the all-pervading Supersoul. When Kṛṣṇa says tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9], this means that the perfect devotee, after perfect realization, returns home, back to Godhead. Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga accepted the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and because of his full surrender he achieved perfection.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasty of Aṁśumān."



Chapter Ten



The Pastimes of the Supreme Lord, Rāmacandra





This Tenth Chapter describes how Lord Rāmacandra appeared in the dynasty of Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga. It also describes the Lord's activities, telling how He killed Rāvaṇa and returned to Ayodhyā, the capital of His kingdom.





The son of Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga was Dīrghabāhu, and his son was Raghu. The son of Raghu was Aja, the son of Aja was Daśaratha, and the son of Daśaratha was Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When the Lord descended into this world in His full quadruple expansion-as Lord Rāmacandra, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna-great sages like Vālmīki who were actually in knowledge of the Absolute Truth described His transcendental pastimes. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes these pastimes in brief.





Lord Rāmacandra went with Viśvāmitra and killed Rākṣasas like Mārīca. After breaking the stout and strong bow known as Haradhanu, the Lord married mother Sītā and cut down the prestige of Paraśurāma. To obey the order of His father, He entered the forest, accompanied by Lakṣmaṇa and Sītā. There He cut off the nose of Śūrpaṇakhā and killed the associates of Rāvaṇa, headed by Khara and Dūṣaṇa. Rāvaṇa's kidnapping of Sītādevī was the beginning of this demon's misfortune. When Mārīca assumed the form of a golden deer, Lord Rāmacandra went to bring the deer to please Sītādevī, but in the meantime Rāvaṇa took advantage of the Lord's absence to kidnap her. When Sītādevī was kidnapped, Lord Rāmacandra, accompanied by Lakṣmaṇa, searched for her throughout the forest. In the course of this search, They met Jaṭāyu. Then the Lord killed the demon Kabandha and the commander Vāli and established a friendly relationship with Sugrīva. After organizing the military strength of the monkeys and going with them to the shore of the sea, the Lord awaited the arrival of Samudra, the ocean personified, but when Samudra did not come, the Lord, the master of Samudra, became angry. Then Samudra came to the Lord with great haste and surrendered to Him, wanting to help Him in every way. The Lord then attempted to bridge the ocean, and, with the help of advice from Vibhīṣaṇa, He attacked Rāvaṇa's capital, Laṅkā. Previously, Hanumān, the eternal servant of the Lord, had set fire to Laṅkā, and now, with the help of Lakṣmaṇa, the forces of Lord Rāmacandra killed all the Rākṣasa soldiers. Then Lord Rāmacandra personally killed Rāvaṇa. Mandodarī and other wives lamented for Rāvaṇa, and in accordance with Lord Rāmacandra's order, Vibhīṣaṇa performed the funeral ceremonies for all the dead in the family. Lord Rāmacandra then gave Vibhīṣaṇa the right to rule Laṅkā and also granted him a long duration of life. The Lord delivered Sītādevī from the Aśoka forest and carried her in a flower airplane to His capital Ayodhyā, where He was received by His brother Bharata. When Lord Rāmacandra entered Ayodhyā, Bharata brought His wooden shoes, Vibhīṣaṇa and Sugrīva held a whisk and fan, Hanumān carried an umbrella, Śatrughna carried the Lord's bow and two quivers, and Sītādevī carried a waterpot containing water from holy places. Aṅgada carried a sword, and Jāmbavān (Ṛkṣarāja) carried a shield. After Lord Rāmacandra, accompanied by Lord Lakṣmaṇa and mother Sītādevī, met all His relatives, the great sage Vasiṣṭha enthroned Him as King. The chapter ends with a short description of Lord Rāmacandra's rule in Ayodhyā.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

khaṭvāṅgād dīrghabāhuś ca

raghus tasmāt pṛthu-śravāḥ

ajas tato mahā-rājas

tasmād daśaratho 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; khaṭvāṅgāt-from Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga; dīrghabāhuḥ-the son named Dīrghabāhu; ca-and; raghuḥ tasmāt-from him Raghu was born; pṛthu-śravāḥ-saintly and celebrated; ajaḥ-the son named Aja; tataḥ-from him; mahā-rājaḥ-the great king called Mahārāja Daśaratha; tasmāt-from Aja; daśarathaḥ-by the name Daśaratha; abhavat-was born.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The son of Mahārāja Khaṭvāṅga was Dīrghabāhu, and his son was the celebrated Mahārāja Raghu. From Mahārāja Raghu came Aja, and from Aja was born the great personality Mahārāja Daśaratha.





TEXT 2



tasyāpi bhagavān eṣa

sākṣād brahmamayo hariḥ

aṁśāṁśena caturdhāgāt

putratvaṁ prārthitaḥ suraiḥ

rāma-lakṣmaṇa-bharata-

śatrughnā iti saṁjñayā

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him, Mahārāja Daśaratha; api-also; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eṣaḥ-all of them; sākṣāt-directly; brahma-mayaḥ-the Supreme Parabrahman, the Absolute Truth; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aṁśa-aṁśena-by an expansion of a plenary portion; caturdhā-by fourfold expansions; agāt-accepted; putratvam-sonhood; prārthitaḥ-being prayed for; suraiḥ-by the demigods; rāma-Lord Rāmacandra; lakṣmaṇa-Lord Lakṣmaṇa; bharata-Lord Bharata; śatrughnāḥ-and Lord Śatrughna; iti-thus; saṁjñayā-by different names.





Being prayed for by the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth Himself, directly appeared with His expansion and expansions of the expansion. Their holy names were Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna. These celebrated incarnations thus appeared in four forms as the sons of Mahārāja Daśaratha.





Lord Rāmacandra and His brothers, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna, are all viṣṇu-tattva, not jīva-tattva. The Supreme Personality of Godhead expands into many, many forms. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam [Bs 5.33]. Although they are one and the same, viṣṇu-tattva has many forms and incarnations. As confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.39), rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan. The Lord is situated in many forms, such as Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna, and these forms may exist in any part of His creation. All these forms exist permanently, eternally, as individual Personalities of Godhead, and they resemble many candles, all equally powerful. Lord Rāmacandra, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna, who, being viṣṇu-tattva, are all equally powerful, became the sons of Mahārāja Daśaratha in response to prayers by the demigods.





TEXT 3



tasyānucaritaṁ rājann

ṛṣibhis tattva-darśibhiḥ

śrutaṁ hi varṇitaṁ bhūri

tvayā sītā-pater muhuḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Rāmacandra and His brothers; anucaritam-transcendental activities; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); ṛṣibhiḥ-by great sages or saintly persons; tattva-darśibhiḥ-by persons who know the Absolute Truth; śrutam-have all been heard; hi-indeed; varṇitam-as they have been so nicely described; bhūri-many; tvayā-by you; sītā-pateḥ-of Lord Rāmacandra, the husband of mother Sītā; muhuḥ-more than often.





O King Parīkṣit, the transcendental activities of Lord Rāmacandra have been described by great saintly persons who have seen the truth. Because you have heard again and again about Lord Rāmacandra, the husband of mother Sītā, I shall describe these activities only in brief. Please listen.





Modern Rākṣasas, posing as educationally advanced merely because they have doctorates, have tried to prove that Lord Rāmacandra is not the Supreme Personality of Godhead but an ordinary person. But those who are learned and spiritually advanced will never accept such notions; they will accept the descriptions of Lord Rāmacandra and His activities only as presented by tattva-darśīs, those who know the Absolute Truth. In Bhagavad-gītā (4.34) the Supreme Personality of Godhead advises:



tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ





"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Unless one is tattva-darśī, in complete knowledge of the Absolute Truth, one cannot describe the activities of the Personality of Godhead. Therefore although there are many so-called Rāmāyaṇas, or histories of Lord Rāmacandra's activities, some of them are not actually authoritative. Sometimes Lord Rāmacandra's activities are described in terms of one's own imaginations, speculations or material sentiments. But the characteristics of Lord Rāmacandra should not be handled as something imaginary. While describing the history of Lord Rāmacandra, Śukadeva Gosvāmī told Mahārāja Parīkṣit, "You have already heard about the activities of Lord Rāmacandra." Apparently, therefore, five thousand years ago there were many Rāmāyaṇas, or histories of Lord Rāmacandra's activities, and there are many still. But we must select only those books written by tattva-darśīs (jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ), not the books of so-called scholars who claim knowledge only on the basis of a doctorate. This is a warning by Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Ṛṣibhis tattva-darśibhiḥ. Although the Rāmāyaṇa composed by Vālmīki is a huge literature, the same activities are summarized here by Śukadeva Gosvāmī in a few verses.





TEXT 4



gurv-arthe tyakta-rājyo vyacarad anuvanaṁ padma-padbhyāṁ priyāyāḥ

pāṇi-sparśākṣamābhyāṁ mṛjita-patha-rujo yo harīndrānujābhyām

vairūpyāc chūrpaṇakhyāḥ priya-viraha-ruṣāropita-bhrū-vijṛmbha-

trastābdhir baddha-setuḥ khala-dava-dahanaḥ kosalendro 'vatān naḥ

SYNONYMS



guru-arthe-for the sake of keeping the promise of His father; tyakta-rājyaḥ-giving up the position of king; vyacarat-wandered; anuvanam-from one forest to another; padma-padbhyām-by His two lotus feet; priyāyāḥ-with His very dear wife, mother Sītā; pāṇi-sparśa-akṣamābhyām-which were so delicate that they were unable to bear even the touch of Sītā's palm; mṛjita-patha-rujaḥ-whose fatigue due to walking on the street was diminished; yaḥ-the Lord who; harīndra-anujābhyām-accompanied by the king of the monkeys, Hanumān, and His younger brother Lakṣmaṇa; vairūpyāt-because of being disfigured; śūrpaṇakhyāḥ-of the Rākṣasī (demoness) named Śūrpaṇakhā; priya-viraha-being aggrieved by separation from His very dear wife; ruṣā āropita-bhrū-vijṛmbha-by flickering of His raised eyebrows in anger; trasta-fearing; abdhiḥ-the ocean; baddha-setuḥ-one who constructed a bridge over the ocean; khala-dava-dahanaḥ-killer of envious persons like Rāvaṇa, like a fire devouring a forest; kosala-indraḥ-the King of Ayodhyā; avatāt-be pleased to protect; naḥ-us.





To keep the promise of His father intact, Lord Rāmacandra immediately gave up the position of king and, accompanied by His wife, mother Sītā, wandered from one forest to another on His lotus feet, which were so delicate that they were unable to bear even the touch of Sītā's palms. The Lord was also accompanied by Hanumān [or by another monkey, Sugrīva], king of the monkeys, and by His own younger brother Lord Lakṣmaṇa, both of whom gave Him relief from the fatigue of wandering in the forest. Having cut off the nose and ears of Śūrpaṇakhā, thus disfiguring her, the Lord was separated from mother Sītā. He therefore became angry, moving His eyebrows and thus frightening the ocean, who then allowed the Lord to construct a bridge to cross the ocean. Subsequently, the Lord entered the kingdom of Rāvaṇa to kill him, like a fire devouring a forest. May that Supreme Lord, Rāmacandra, give us all protection.





TEXT 5



viśvāmitrādhvare yena

mārīcādyā niśā-carāḥ

paśyato lakṣmaṇasyaiva

hatā nairṛta-puṅgavāḥ

SYNONYMS



viśvāmitra-adhvare-in the sacrificial arena of the great sage Viśvāmitra; yena-by whom (Lord Rāmacandra); mārīca-ādyāḥ-headed by Mārīca; niśā-carāḥ-the uncivilized persons wandering at night in the darkness of ignorance; paśyataḥ lakṣmaṇasya-being seen by Lakṣmaṇa; eva-indeed; hatāḥ-were killed; nairṛta-puṅgavāḥ-the great chiefs of the Rākṣasas.





In the arena of the sacrifice performed by Viśvāmitra, Lord Rāmacandra, the King of Ayodhyā, killed many demons, Rākṣasas and uncivilized men who wandered at night in the mode of darkness. May Lord Rāmacandra, who killed these demons in the presence of Lakṣmaṇa, be kind enough to give us protection.





TEXTS 6–7



yo loka-vīra-samitau dhanur aiśam ugraṁ

sītā-svayaṁvara-gṛhe triśatopanītam

ādāya bāla-gaja-līla ivekṣu-yaṣṭiṁ

sajjyī-kṛtaṁ nṛpa vikṛṣya babhañja madhye

jitvānurūpa-guṇa-śīla-vayo 'ṅga-rūpāṁ



sītābhidhāṁ śriyam urasy abhilabdhamānām

mārge vrajan bhṛgupater vyanayat prarūḍhaṁ

darpaṁ mahīm akṛta yas trir arāja-bījām

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra who; loka-vīra-samitau-in the society or in the midst of many heroes of this world; dhanuḥ-the bow; aiśam-of Lord Śiva; ugram-very fierce; sītā-svayaṁvara-gṛhe-in the hall where mother Sītā stood to select her husband; triśata-upanītam-the bow carried by three hundred men; ādāya-taking (that bow); bāla-gaja-līlaḥ-acting like a baby elephant in a forest of sugarcane; iva-like that; ikṣu-yaṣṭim-a stick of sugarcane; sajjyī-kṛtam-fastened the string of the bow; nṛpa-O King; vikṛṣya-by bending; babhañja-broke it; madhye-in the middle; jitvā-gaining by victory; anurūpa-just befitting His position and beauty; guṇa-qualities; śīla-behavior; vayaḥ-age; aṅga-body; rūpām-beauty; sītā-abhidhām-the girl named Sītā; śriyam-the goddess of fortune; urasi-on the chest; abhilabdhamānām-had gotten her previously; mārge-on the way; vrajan-while walking; bhṛgupateḥ-of Bhṛgupati; vyanayat-destroyed; prarūḍham-rooted very deep; darpam-pride; mahīm-the earth; akṛta-finished; yaḥ-one who; triḥ-three times (seven); arāja-without a royal dynasty; bījām-seed.





O King, the pastimes of Lord Rāmacandra were wonderful, like those of a baby elephant. In the assembly where mother Sītā was to choose her husband, in the midst of the heroes of this world, He broke the bow belonging to Lord Śiva. This bow was so heavy that it was carried by three hundred men, but Lord Rāmacandra bent and strung it and broke it in the middle, just as a baby elephant breaks a stick of sugarcane. Thus the Lord achieved the hand of mother Sītā, who was equally as endowed with transcendental qualities of form, beauty, behavior, age and nature. Indeed, she was the goddess of fortune who constantly rests on the chest of the Lord. While returning from Sītā's home after gaining her at the assembly of competitors, Lord Rāmacandra met Paraśurāma. Although Paraśurāma was very proud, having rid the earth of the royal order twenty-one times, he was defeated by the Lord, who appeared to be a kṣatriya of the royal order.





TEXT 8



yaḥ satya-pāśa-parivīta-pitur nideśaṁ

straiṇasya cāpi śirasā jagṛhe sabhāryaḥ

rājyaṁ śriyaṁ praṇayinaḥ suhṛdo nivāsaṁ

tyaktvā yayau vanam asūn iva mukta-saṅgaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra who; satya-pāśa-parivīta-pituḥ-of His father, who was bound by the promise to his wife; nideśam-the order; straiṇasya-of the father who was very much attached to his wife; ca-also; api-indeed; śirasā-on His head; jagṛhe-accepted; sa-bhāryaḥ-with His wife; rājyam-the kingdom; śriyam-opulence; praṇayinaḥ-relatives; suhṛdaḥ-friends; nivāsam-residence; tyaktvā-giving up; yayau-went; vanam-to the forest; asūn-life; iva-like; mukta-saṅgaḥ-a liberated soul.





Carrying out the order of His father, who was bound by a promise to his wife, Lord Rāmacandra left behind His kingdom, opulence, friends, well-wishers, residence and everything else, just as a liberated soul gives up his life, and went to the forest with Sītā.





Mahārāja Daśaratha had three wives. One of them, Kaikeyī, served him very pleasingly, and he therefore wanted to give her a benediction. Kaikeyī, however, said that she would ask for the benediction when it was necessary. At the time of the coronation of Prince Rāmacandra, Kaikeyī requested her husband to enthrone her son Bharata and send Rāmacandra to the forest. Mahārāja Daśaratha, being bound by his promise, ordered Rāmacandra to go to the forest, according to the dictation of his beloved. And the Lord, as an obedient son, accepted the order immediately. He left everything without hesitation, just as a liberated soul or great yogī gives up his life without material attraction.





TEXT 9



rakṣaḥ-svasur vyakṛta rūpam aśuddha-buddhes

tasyāḥ khara-triśira-dūṣaṇa-mukhya-bandhūn

jaghne caturdaśa-sahasram apāraṇīya-

kodaṇḍa-pāṇir aṭamāna uvāsa kṛcchram

SYNONYMS



rakṣaḥ-svasuḥ-of Śūrpaṇakhā, the sister of the Rākṣasa (Rāvaṇa); vyakṛta-(Lord Rāma) deformed; rūpam-the form; aśuddha-buddheḥ-because her intelligence was polluted by lusty desires; tasyāḥ-of her; khara-triśira-dūṣaṇa-mukhya-bandhūn-many friends, headed by Khara, Triśira and Dūṣaṇa; jaghne-He (Lord Rāmacandra) killed; caturdaśa-sahasram-fourteen thousand; apāraṇīya-invincible; kodaṇḍa-bows and arrows; pāṇiḥ-in His hand; aṭamānaḥ-wandering in the forest; uvāsa-lived there; kṛcchram-with great difficulties.





While wandering in the forest, where He accepted a life of hardship, carrying His invincible bow and arrows in His hand, Lord Rāmacandra deformed Rāvaṇa's sister, who was polluted with lusty desires, by cutting off her nose and ears. He also killed her fourteen thousand Rākṣasa friends, headed by Khara, Triśira and Dūṣaṇa.





TEXT 10



sītā-kathā-śravaṇa-dīpita-hṛc-chayena

sṛṣṭaṁ vilokya nṛpate daśa-kandhareṇa

jaghne 'dbhutaiṇa-vapuṣāśramato 'pakṛṣṭo

mārīcam āśu viśikhena yathā kam ugraḥ

SYNONYMS



sītā-kathā-topics about Sītādevī; śravaṇa-by hearing; dīpita-agitated; hṛt-śayena-lusty desires within the mind of Rāvaṇa; sṛṣṭam-created; vilokya-seeing that; nṛpate-O King Parīkṣit; daśa-kandhareṇa-by Rāvaṇa, who had ten heads; jaghne-the Lord killed; adbhuta-eṇa-vapuṣā-by a deer made of gold; āśramataḥ-from His residence; apakṛṣṭaḥ-distracted to a distance; mārīcam-the demon Mārīca, who assumed the form of a golden deer; āśu-immediately; viśikhena-by a sharp arrow; yathā-as; kam-Dakṣa; ugraḥ-Lord Śiva.





O King Parīkṣit, when Rāvaṇa, who had ten heads on his shoulders, heard about the beautiful and attractive features of Sītā, his mind was agitated by lusty desires, and he went to kidnap her. To distract Lord Rāmacandra from His āśrama, Rāvaṇa sent Mārīca in the form of a golden deer, and when Lord Rāmacandra saw that wonderful deer, He left His residence and followed it and finally killed it with a sharp arrow, just as Lord Śiva killed Dakṣa.





TEXT 11



rakṣo-'dhamena vṛkavad vipine 'samakṣaṁ

vaideha-rāja-duhitary apayāpitāyām

bhrātrā vane kṛpaṇavat priyayā viyuktaḥ

strī-saṅgināṁ gatim iti prathayaṁś cacāra

SYNONYMS



rakṣaḥ-adhamena-by the most wicked among Rākṣasas, Rāvaṇa; vṛka-vat-like a tiger; vipine-in the forest; asamakṣam-unprotected; vaideha-rāja-duhitari-by this condition of mother Sītā, the daughter of the King of Videha; apayāpitāyām-having been kidnapped; bhrātrā-with His brother; vane-in the forest; kṛpaṇa-vat-as if a very distressed person; priyayā-by his dear wife; viyuktaḥ-separated; strī-saṅginām-of persons attracted to or connected with women; gatim-destination; iti-thus; prathayan-giving an example; cacāra-wandered.





When Rāmacandra entered the forest and Lakṣmaṇa was also absent, the worst of the Rākṣasas, Rāvaṇa, kidnapped Sītādevī, the daughter of the King of Videha, just as a tiger seizes unprotected sheep when the shepherd is absent. Then Lord Rāmacandra wandered in the forest with His brother Lakṣmaṇa as if very much distressed due to separation from His wife. Thus He showed by His personal example the condition of a person attached to women.





In this verse the words strī-saṅgināṁ gatim iti indicate that the condition of a person attached to women was shown by the Lord Himself. According to moral instructions, gṛhe nārīṁ vivarjayet: when one goes on a tour, one should not bring his wife. Formerly men used to travel without conveyances, but still, as far as possible, when one leaves home one should not take his wife with him, especially if one is in such a condition as Lord Rāmacandra when banished by the order of His father. Whether in the forest or at home, if one is attached to women this attachment is always troublesome, as shown by the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His personal example.



Of course, this is the material side of strī-saṅgī, but the situation of Lord Rāmacandra is spiritual, for He does not belong to the material world. Nārāyaṇaḥ paro 'vyaktāt: Nārāyaṇa is beyond the material creation. Because He is the creator of the material world, He is not subject to the conditions of the material world. The separation of Lord Rāmacandra from Sītā is spiritually understood as vipralambha, which is an activity of the hlādinī potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead belonging to the śṛṅgāra-rasa, the mellow of conjugal love in the spiritual world. In the spiritual world the Supreme Personality of Godhead has all the dealings of love, displaying the symptoms called sāttvika, sañcārī, vilāpa, mūrcchā and unmāda. Thus when Lord Rāmacandra was separated from Sītā, all these spiritual symptoms were manifested. The Lord is neither impersonal nor impotent. Rather, He is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], the eternal form of knowledge and bliss. Thus He has all the symptoms of spiritual bliss. Feeling separation from one's beloved is also an item of spiritual bliss. As explained by Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, rādhā-kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktiḥ: the dealings of love between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are displayed as the pleasure potency of the Lord. The Lord is the original source of all pleasure, the reservoir of all pleasure. Lord Rāmacandra, therefore, manifested the truth both spiritually and materially. Materially those who are attached to women suffer, but spiritually when there are feelings of separation between the Lord and His pleasure potency the spiritual bliss of the Lord increases. This is further explained in Bhagavad-gītā (9.11):



avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram





One who does not know the spiritual potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead thinks of the Lord as an ordinary human being. But the Lord's mind, intelligence and senses can never be affected by material conditions. This fact is further explained in the Skanda Purāṇa, as quoted by Madhvācārya:



nitya-pūrṇa-sukha-jñāna-

svarūpo 'sau yato vibhuḥ

ato 'sya rāma ity ākhyā

tasya duḥkhaṁ kuto 'ṇv api





tathāpi loka-śikṣārtham

aduḥkho duḥkha-vartivat

antarhitāṁ loka-dṛṣṭyā

sītām āsīt smarann iva





jñāpanārthaṁ punar nitya-

sambandhaḥ svātmanaḥ śriyāḥ

ayodhyāyā vinirgacchan

sarva-lokasya ceśvaraḥ

pratyakṣaṁ tu śriyā sārdhaṁ

jagāmānādir avyayaḥ





nakṣatra-māsa-gaṇitaṁ

trayodaśa-sahasrakam

brahmaloka-samaṁ cakre

samastaṁ kṣiti-maṇḍalam





rāmo rāmo rāma iti

sarveṣām abhavat tadā

sarvoramamayo loko

yadā rāmas tv apālayat





It was actually impossible for Rāvaṇa to take away Sītā. The form of Sītā taken by Rāvaṇa was an illusory representation of mother Sītā-maya-sītā. When Sītā was tested in the fire, this māyā-sītā was burnt, and the real Sītā came out of the fire.



A further understanding to be derived from this example is that a woman, however powerful she may be in the material world, must be given protection, for as soon as she is unprotected she will be exploited by Rākṣasas like Rāvaṇa. Here the words vaideha-rāja-duhitari indicate that before mother Sītā was married to Lord Rāmacandra she was protected by her father, Vaideha-rāja. And when she was married she was protected by her husband. Therefore the conclusion is that a woman should always be protected. According to the Vedic rule, there is no scope for a woman's being independent (asamakṣam), for a woman cannot protect herself independently.





TEXT 12



dagdhvātma-kṛtya-hata-kṛtyam ahan kabandhaṁ

sakhyaṁ vidhāya kapibhir dayitā-gatiṁ taiḥ

buddhvātha vālini hate plavagendra-sainyair

velām agāt sa manujo 'ja-bhavārcitāṅghriḥ

SYNONYMS



dagdhvā-by burning; ātma-kṛtya-hata-kṛtyam-after performing religious rituals required after the death of Jaṭāyu, who died for the Lord's cause; ahan-killed; kabandham-the demon Kabandha; sakhyam-friendship; vidhāya-after creating; kapibhiḥ-with the monkey chiefs; dayitā-gatim-the arrangement for delivering Sītā; taiḥ-by them; buddhvā-knowing; atha-thereafter; vālini hate-when Vāli had been killed; plavaga-indra-sainyaiḥ-with the help of the soldiers of the monkeys; velām-to the beach of the ocean; agāt-went; saḥ-He, Lord Rāmacandra; manu-jaḥ-appearing as a human being; aja-by Lord Brahmā; bhava-and by Lord Śiva; arcita-aṅghriḥ-whose lotus feet are worshiped.





Lord Rāmacandra, whose lotus feet are worshiped by Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, had assumed the form of a human being. Thus He performed the funeral ceremony of Jaṭāyu, who was killed by Rāvaṇa. The Lord then killed the demon named Kabandha, and after making friends with the monkey chiefs, killing Vāli and arranging for the deliverance of mother Sītā, He went to the beach of the ocean.





When Rāvaṇa kidnapped Sītā, he was obstructed on the way by Jaṭāyu, a large bird. But the powerful Rāvaṇa defeated Jaṭāyu in the fight and cut his wing. When Rāmacandra was searching for Sītā, He found Jaṭāyu almost dead and was informed that Sītā has been carried off by Rāvaṇa. When Jaṭāyu died, Lord Rāmacandra did the duty of a son by performing the funeral ceremony, and then He made friends with the monkeys to deliver Sītādevī.





TEXT 13



yad-roṣa-vibhrama-vivṛtta-kaṭākṣa-pāta-

sambhrānta-nakra-makaro bhaya-gīrṇa-ghoṣaḥ

sindhuḥ śirasy arhaṇaṁ parigṛhya rūpī

pādāravindam upagamya babhāṣa etat

SYNONYMS



yat-roṣa-whose anger; vibhrama-induced by; vivṛtta-turned; kaṭākṣa-pāta-by the glance; sambhrānta-agitated; nakra-crocodiles; makaraḥ-and sharks; bhaya-gīrṇa-ghoṣaḥ-whose loud sound was silenced through fear; sindhuḥ-the ocean; śirasi-on his head; arhaṇam-all paraphernalia for worshiping the Lord; parigṛhya-carrying; rūpī-taking form; pāda-aravindam-the lotus feet of the Lord; upagamya-reaching; babhāṣa-said; etat-the following.





After reaching the beach, Lord Rāmacandra fasted for three days, awaiting the arrival of the ocean personified. When the ocean did not come, the Lord exhibited His pastimes of anger, and simply by His glancing over the ocean, all the living entities within it, including the crocodiles and sharks, were agitated by fear. Then the personified ocean fearfully approached Lord Rāmacandra, taking all paraphernalia to worship Him. Falling at the Lord's lotus feet, the personified ocean spoke as follows.





TEXT 14



na tvāṁ vayaṁ jaḍa-dhiyo nu vidāma bhūman

kūṭa-stham ādi-puruṣaṁ jagatām adhīśam

yat-sattvataḥ sura-gaṇā rajasaḥ prajeśā

manyoś ca bhūta-patayaḥ sa bhavān guṇeśaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; tvām-Your Lordship; vayam-we; jaḍa-dhiyaḥ-dull-minded, possessing blunt intelligence; nu-indeed; vidāmaḥ-can know; bhūman-O Supreme; kūṭa-stham-within the core of the heart; ādi-puruṣam-the original Personality of Godhead; jagatām-of the universes, which progressively go on; adhīśam-the supreme master; yat-fixed under Your direction; sattvataḥ-infatuated with sattva-guṇa; sura-gaṇāḥ-such demigods; rajasaḥ-infatuated with rajo-guṇa; prajā-īśāḥ-the Prajāpatis; manyoḥ-influenced by tamo-guṇa; ca-and; bhūta-patayaḥ-rulers of ghosts; saḥ-such a personality; bhavān-Your Lordship; guṇa-īśaḥ-the master of all three modes of material nature.





O all-pervading Supreme Person, we are dull-minded and did not understand who You are, but now we understand that You are the Supreme Person, the master of the entire universe, the unchanging and original Personality of Godhead. The demigods are infatuated with the mode of goodness, the Prajāpatis with the mode of passion, and the lord of ghosts with the mode of ignorance, but You are the master of all these qualities.





The word jaḍa-dhiyaḥ refers to intelligence like that of an animal. A person with such intelligence cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Without being beaten, an animal cannot understand the purpose of a man. Similarly, those who are dull-minded cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when punished severely by the modes of material nature, they begin to understand Him. A Hindi poet has said:



duḥkha se saba hari bhaje

sukha se bhaje koī

sukha se agar hari bhaje

duḥkha kāthāṅ se haya





When one is distressed he goes to the church or temple to worship the Lord, but when opulent he forgets the Lord. Therefore, punishment by the Lord through material nature is necessary in human society, for without it men forget the supremacy of the Lord due to their dull, blunt intelligence.





TEXT 15



kāmaṁ prayāhi jahi viśravaso 'vamehaṁ

trailokya-rāvaṇam avāpnuhi vīra patnīm

badhnīhi setum iha te yaśaso vitatyai

gāyanti dig-vijayino yam upetya bhūpāḥ

SYNONYMS



kāmam-as You like; prayāhi-You may go over my water; jahi-just conquer; viśravasaḥ-of Viśravā Muni; avameham-pollution, like urine; trailokya-for the three worlds; rāvaṇam-the person known as Rāvaṇa, the cause of weeping; avāpnuhi-regain; vīra-O great hero; patnīm-Your wife; badhnīhi-just construct; setum-a bridge; iha-here (on this water); te-of Your good self; yaśasaḥ-fame; vitatyai-to expand; gāyanti-will glorify; dik-vijayinaḥ-great heroes who have conquered all directions; yam-which (bridge); upetya-coming near; bhūpāḥ-great kings.





My Lord, You may use my water as You like. Indeed, You may cross it and go to the abode of Rāvaṇa, who is the great source of disturbance and crying for the three worlds. He is the son of Viśravā, but is condemned like urine. Please go kill him and thus regain Your wife, Sītādevī. O great hero, although my water presents no impediment to Your going to Laṅkā, please construct a bridge over it to spread Your transcendental fame. Upon seeing this wonderfully uncommon deed of Your Lordship, all the great heroes and kings in the future will glorify You.





It is said that a son and urine emanate from the same source-the genitals. When a son is a devotee or a great learned person, the seminal discharge for begetting a son is successful, but if the son is unqualified and brings no glory to his family, he is no better than urine. Here Rāvaṇa is compared to urine because he was a cause of disturbances to the three worlds. Thus the ocean personified wanted him killed by Lord Rāmacandra.



One feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Rāmacandra is omnipotence. The Lord can act without regard to material impediments or inconveniences, but to prove that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and was not merely advertised as Godhead or elected by popular vote, He constructed a wonderful bridge over the ocean. Nowadays it has become fashionable to create some artificial God who performs no uncommon activities; a little magic will bewilder a foolish person into selecting an artificial God because he does not understand how powerful God is. Lord Rāmacandra, however, constructed a bridge over the water with stone by making the stone float. This is proof of God's uncommonly wonderful power. Why should someone be accepted as God without displaying extraordinary potency by doing something never to be done by any common man? We accept Lord Rāmacandra as the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He constructed this bridge, and we accept Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead because He lifted Govardhana Hill when He was only seven years old. We should not accept any rascal as God or an incarnation of God, for God displays special features in His various activities. Therefore, the Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." The activities of the Lord are not common; they are all transcendentally wonderful and not able to be performed by any other living being. The symptoms of the Lord's activities are all mentioned in the śāstras, and after one understands them one can accept the Lord as He is.





TEXT 16



baddhvodadhau raghu-patir vividhādri-kūṭaiḥ

setuṁ kapīndra-kara-kampita-bhūruhāṅgaiḥ

sugrīva-nīla-hanumat-pramukhair anīkair

laṅkāṁ vibhīṣaṇa-dṛśāviśad agra-dagdhām

SYNONYMS



baddhvā-after constructing; udadhau-in the water of the ocean; raghu-patiḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; vividha-varieties of; adri-kūṭaiḥ-with peaks of great mountains; setum-a bridge; kapi-indra-of powerful monkeys; kara-kampita-moved by the great hands; bhūruha-aṅgaiḥ-with the trees and plants; sugrīva-Sugrīva; nīla-Nīla; hanumat-Hanumān; pramukhaiḥ-led by; anīkaiḥ-with such soldiers; laṅkām-Laṅkā, the kingdom of Rāvaṇa; vibhīṣaṇa-dṛśā-by the direction of Vibhīṣaṇa, the brother of Rāvaṇa; āviśat-entered; agra-dagdhām-which was previously burnt (by the monkey soldier Hanumān).





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After constructing a bridge over the ocean by throwing into the water the peaks of mountains whose trees and other vegetation had been shaken by the hands of great monkeys, Lord Rāmacandra went to Laṅkā to release Sītādevī from the clutches of Rāvaṇa. With the direction and help of Vibhīṣaṇa, Rāvaṇa's brother, the Lord, along with the monkey soldiers, headed by Sugrīva, Nīla and Hanumān, entered Rāvaṇa's kingdom, Laṅkā, which had previously been burnt by Hanumān.





Great mountain peaks covered with trees and plants were thrown into the sea by the monkey soldiers and began to float by the supreme will of the Lord. By the supreme will of the Lord, many great planets float weightlessly in space like swabs of cotton. If this is possible, why should great mountain peaks not be able to float on water? This is the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He can do anything and everything He likes, because He is not under the control of the material nature; indeed, material nature is controlled by Him. Mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sacarācaram: [Bg. 9.10] only under His direction does prakṛti, or material nature, work. Similar information is given in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.52):



yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





Describing how material nature works, the Brahma-saṁhitā says that the sun moves as desired by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Consequently, for Lord Rāmacandra to construct a bridge over the Indian Ocean with the help of monkey soldiers who threw great mountain peaks into the water is not at all wonderful; it is wonderful only in the sense that it has kept the name and fame of Lord Rāmacandra eternally celebrated.





TEXT 17



sā vānarendra-bala-ruddha-vihāra-koṣṭha-

śrī-dvāra-gopura-sado-valabhī-viṭaṅkā

nirbhajyamāna-dhiṣaṇa-dhvaja-hema-kumbha-

śṛṅgāṭakā gaja-kulair hradinīva ghūrṇā

SYNONYMS



sā-the place known as Laṅkā; vānara-indra-of the great chiefs of the monkeys; bala-by the strength; ruddha-stopped, encircled; vihāra-pleasure houses; koṣṭha-the places where food grains were stocked; śrī-the treasury houses; dvāra-the doors of palaces; gopura-the gates of the city; sadaḥ-the assembly houses; valabhī-the frontage of great palaces; viṭaṅkā-the rest houses for the pigeons; nirbhajyamāna-in the process of being dismantled; dhiṣaṇa-platforms; dhvaja-the flags; hema-kumbha-golden waterpots on the domes; śṛṅgāṭakā-and the crossroads; gaja-kulaiḥ-by herds of elephants; hradinī-a river; iva-like; ghūrṇā-agitated.





After entering Laṅkā, the monkey soldiers, led by chiefs like Sugrīva, Nīla and Hanumān, occupied all the sporting houses, granaries, treasuries, palace doorways, city gates, assembly houses, palace frontages and even the resting houses of the pigeons. When the city's crossroads, platforms, flags and golden waterpots on its domes were all destroyed, the entire city of Laṅkā appeared like a river disturbed by a herd of elephants.





TEXT 18



rakṣaḥ-patis tad avalokya nikumbha-kumbha-

dhūmrākṣa-durmukha-surāntaka-narāntakādīn

putraṁ prahastam atikāya-vikampanādīn

sarvānugān samahinod atha kumbhakarṇam

SYNONYMS



rakṣaḥ-patiḥ-the master of the Rākṣasas (Rāvaṇa); tat-such disturbances; avalokya-after seeing; nikumbha-Nikumbha; kumbha-Kumbha; dhūmrākṣa-Dhūmrākṣa; durmukha-Durmukha; surāntaka-Surāntaka; narāntaka-Narāntaka; ādīn-all of them together; putram-his son, Indrajit; prahastam-Prahasta; atikāya-Atikāya; vikampana-Vikampana; ādīn-all of them together; sarva-anugān-all followers of Rāvaṇa; samahinot-ordered (to fight with the enemies); atha-at last; kumbhakarṇam-Kumbhakarṇa, the most important brother.





When Rāvaṇa, the master of the Rākṣasas, saw the disturbances created by the monkey soldiers, he called for Nikumbha, Kumbha, Dhūmrākṣa, Durmukha, Surāntaka, Narāntaka and other Rākṣasas and also his son Indrajit. Thereafter he called for Prahasta, Atikāya, Vikampana and finally Kumbhakarṇa. Then he induced all his followers to fight against the enemies.





TEXT 19



tāṁ yātudhāna-pṛtanām asi-śūla-cāpa-

prāsarṣṭi-śaktiśara-tomara-khaḍga-durgām

sugrīva-lakṣmaṇa-marutsuta-gandhamāda-

nīlāṅgadarkṣa-panasādibhir anvito 'gāt

SYNONYMS



tām-all of them; yātudhāna-pṛtanām-the soldiers of the Rākṣasas; asi-by swords; śūla-by lances; cāpa-by bows; prāsa-ṛṣṭi-prāsa weapons and ṛṣṭi weapons; śakti-śara-śakti arrows; tomara-tomara weapons; khaḍga-by a type of sword; durgām-all invincible; sugrīva-by the monkey named Sugrīva; lakṣmaṇa-by Lord Rāmacandra's younger brother; marut-suta-by Hanumān; gandhamāda-by Gandhamāda, another monkey; nīla-by the monkey named Nīla; aṅgada-Aṅgada; ṛkṣa-Ṛkṣa; panasa-Panasa; ādibhiḥ-and by other soldiers; anvitaḥ-being surrounded, Lord Rāmacandra; agāt-came in front of (for the sake of fighting).





Lord Rāmacandra, surrounded by Lakṣmaṇa and monkey soldiers like Sugrīva, Hanumān, Gandhamāda, Nīla, Aṅgada, Jāmbavān and Panasa, attacked the soldiers of the Rākṣasas, who were fully equipped with various invincible weapons like swords, lances, bows, prāsas, ṛṣṭis, śakti arrows, khaḍgas and tomaras.





TEXT 20



te 'nīkapā raghupater abhipatya sarve

dvandvaṁ varūtham ibha-patti-rathāśva-yodhaiḥ

jaghnur drumair giri-gadeṣubhir aṅgadādyāḥ

sītābhimarṣa-hata-maṅgala-rāvaṇeśān

SYNONYMS



te-all of them; anīka-pāḥ-the commanders of the soldiers; raghupateḥ-of Lord Śrī Rāmacandra; abhipatya-chasing the enemy; sarve-all of them; dvandvam-fighting; varūtham-the soldiers of Rāvaṇa; ibha-by elephants; patti-by infantry; ratha-by chariots; aśva-by horses; yodhaiḥ-by such warriors; jaghnuḥ-killed them; drumaiḥ-by throwing big trees; giri-by peaks of mountains; gadā-by clubs; iṣubhiḥ-by arrows; aṅgada-ādyāḥ-all the soldiers of Lord Rāmacandra, headed by Aṅgada and others; sītā-of mother Sītā; abhimarṣa-by the anger; hata-had been condemned; maṅgala-whose auspiciousness; rāvaṇa-īśān-the followers or dependents of Rāvaṇa.





Aṅgada and the other commanders of the soldiers of Rāmacandra faced the elephants, infantry, horses and chariots of the enemy and hurled against them big trees, mountain peaks, clubs and arrows. Thus the soldiers of Lord Rāmacandra killed Rāvaṇa's soldiers, who had lost all good fortune because Rāvaṇa had been condemned by the anger of mother Sītā.





The soldiers Lord Rāmacandra recruited in the jungle were all monkeys and did not have proper equipment with which to fight the soldiers of Rāvaṇa, for Rāvaṇa's soldiers were equipped with weapons of modern warfare whereas the monkeys could only throw stones, mountain peaks and trees. It was only Lord Rāmacandra and Lakṣmaṇa who shot some arrows. But because the soldiers of Rāvaṇa were condemned by the curse of mother Sītā, the monkeys were able to kill them simply by throwing stones and trees. There are two kinds of strength-daiva and puruṣākāra. Daiva refers to the strength achieved from the Transcendence, and puruṣākāra refers to the strength organized by one's own intelligence and power. Transcendental power is always superior to the power of the materialist. Depending on the mercy of the Supreme Lord, one must fight one's enemies even though one may not be equipped with modern weapons. Therefore Kṛṣṇa instructed Arjuna, mām anusmara yudhya ca: [Bg. 8.7] "Think of Me and fight." We should fight our enemy to the best of our ability, but for victory we must depend on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 21



rakṣaḥ-patiḥ sva-bala-naṣṭim avekṣya ruṣṭa

āruhya yānakam athābhisasāra rāmam

svaḥ-syandane dyumati mātalinopanīte

vibhrājamānam ahanan niśitaiḥ kṣurapraiḥ

SYNONYMS



rakṣaḥ-patiḥ-the leader of the Rākṣasas, Rāvaṇa; sva-bala-naṣṭim-the destruction of his own soldiers; avekṣya-after observing; ruṣṭaḥ-became very angry; āruhya-riding on; yānakam-his beautiful airplane decorated with flowers; atha-thereafter; abhisasāra-proceeded toward; rāmam-Lord Rāmacandra; svaḥ-syandane-in the celestial chariot of Indra; dyumati-glittering; mātalinā-by Mātali, the chariot driver of Indra; upanīte-having been brought; vibhrājamānam-Lord Rāmacandra, as if brilliantly illuminating; ahanat-Rāvaṇa struck him; niśitaiḥ-very sharp; kṣurapraiḥ-with arrows.





Thereafter, when Rāvaṇa, the king of the Rākṣasas, observed that his soldiers had been lost, he was extremely angry. Thus he mounted his airplane, which was decorated with flowers, and proceeded toward Lord Rāmacandra, who sat on the effulgent chariot brought by Mātali, the chariot driver of Indra. Then Rāvaṇa struck Lord Rāmacandra with sharp arrows.





TEXT 22



rāmas tam āha puruṣāda-purīṣa yan naḥ

kāntāsamakṣam asatāpahṛtā śvavat te

tyakta-trapasya phalam adya jugupsitasya

yacchāmi kāla iva kartur alaṅghya-vīryaḥ

SYNONYMS



rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; tam-unto him, Rāvaṇa; āha-said; puruṣa-ada-purīṣa-you are the stool of the man-eaters (Rākṣasas); yat-because; naḥ-My; kāntā-wife; asamakṣam-helpless because of My absence; asatā-by you, the most sinful; apahṛtā-was kidnapped; śva-vat-like a dog who takes food from the kitchen in the absence of the proprietor; te-of you; tyakta-trapasya-because you are shameless; phalam adya-I shall give you the result today; jugupsitasya-of you, the most abominable; yacchāmi-I shall punish you; kālaḥ iva-like death; kartuḥ-of you, who are the performer of all sinful activities; alaṅghya-vīryaḥ-but I, being omnipotent, never fail in My attempt.





Lord Rāmacandra said to Rāvaṇa: You are the most abominable of the man-eaters. Indeed, you are like their stool. You resemble a dog, for as a dog steals eatables from the kitchen in the absence of the householder, in My absence you kidnapped My wife, Sītādevī. Therefore as Yamarāja punishes sinful men, I shall also punish you. You are most abominable, sinful and shameless. Today, therefore, I, whose attempt never fails, shall punish you.





Na ca daivāt paraṁ balam: no one can surpass the strength of the Transcendence. Rāvaṇa was so sinful and shameless that he did not know what the result would be of kidnapping mother Sītā, the pleasure potency of Rāmacandra. This is the disqualification of the Rākṣasas. Asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te jagad āhur anīśvaram [Bg. 16.8]. The Rākṣasas are unaware that the Supreme Lord is the ruler of the creation. They think that everything has come about by chance or accident and that there is no ruler, king or controller. Therefore the Rākṣasas act independently, as they like, going even so far as to kidnap the goddess of fortune. This policy of Rāvaṇa's is extremely dangerous for the materialist; indeed, it brings ruin to the materialistic civilization. Nonetheless, because atheists are Rākṣasas, they dare to do things that are most abominable, and thus they are punished without fail. Religion consists of the orders of the Supreme Lord, and one who carries out these orders is religious. One who fails to carry out the Lord's orders is irreligious, and he is to be punished.





TEXT 23



evaṁ kṣipan dhanuṣi sandhitam utsasarja

bāṇaṁ sa vajram iva tad-dhṛdayaṁ bibheda

so 'sṛg vaman daśa-mukhair nyapatad vimānād

dhāheti jalpati jane sukṛtīva riktaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; kṣipan-chastising (Rāvaṇa); dhanuṣi-on the bow; sandhitam-fixed an arrow; utsasarja-released (toward him); bāṇam-the arrow; saḥ-that arrow; vajram iva-like a thunderbolt; tat-hṛdayam-the heart of Rāvaṇa; bibheda-pierced; saḥ-he, Rāvaṇa; asṛk-blood; vaman-vomiting; daśa-mukhaiḥ-through the ten mouths; nyapatat-fell down; vimānāt-from his airplane; hāhā-alas, what happened; iti-thus; jalpati-roaring; jane-when all the people present there; sukṛtī iva-like a pious man; riktaḥ-when the results of his pious activities are finished.





After thus rebuking Rāvaṇa, Lord Rāmacandra fixed an arrow to His bow, aimed at Rāvaṇa, and released the arrow, which pierced Rāvaṇa's heart like a thunderbolt. Upon seeing this, Rāvaṇa's followers raised a tumultuous sound, crying, "Alas! Alas! What has happened? What has happened?" as Rāvaṇa, vomiting blood from his ten mouths, fell from his airplane, just as a pious man falls to earth from the heavenly planets when the results of his pious activities are exhausted.





In Bhagavad-gītā (9.21) it is said, kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti: "When the results of their pious activities are exhausted, those who have enjoyed in the heavenly planets fall again to earth." The fruitive activities of this material world are such that whether one acts piously or impiously one must remain within the material world according to different conditions, for neither pious nor impious actions can relieve one from māyā's clutches of repeated birth and death. Somehow or other, Rāvaṇa was raised to an exalted position as the king of a great kingdom with all material opulences, but because of his sinful act of kidnapping mother Sītā, all the results of his pious activities were destroyed. If one offends an exalted personality, especially the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one certainly becomes most abominable; bereft of the results of pious activities, one must fall down like Rāvaṇa and other demons. It is therefore advised that one transcend both pious and impious activities and remain in the pure state of freedom from all designations (sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). When one is fixed in devotional service, he is above the material platform. On the material platform there are higher and lower positions, but when one is above the material platform he is always fixed in a spiritual position (sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate [Bg. 14.26]). Rāvaṇa or those like him may be very powerful and opulent in this material world, but theirs is not a secure position, because, after all, they are bound by the results of their karma (karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa). We should not forget that we are completely dependent on the laws of nature.



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself the doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by nature." (Bg. 3.27) One should not be proud of one's exalted position and act like Rāvaṇa, thinking oneself independent of material nature's laws.





TEXT 24



tato niṣkramya laṅkāyā

yātudhānyaḥ sahasraśaḥ

mandodaryā samaṁ tatra

prarudantya upādravan

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; niṣkramya-coming out; laṅkāyāḥ-from Laṅkā; yātudhānyaḥ-the wives of the Rākṣasas; sahasraśaḥ-by thousands and thousands; mandodaryā-headed by Mandodarī, the wife of Rāvaṇa; samam-with; tatra-there; prarudantyaḥ-crying in lamentation; upādravan-came near (their dead husbands).





Thereafter, all the women whose husbands had fallen in the battle, headed by Mandodarī, the wife of Rāvaṇa, came out of Laṅkā. Continuously crying, they approached the dead bodies of Rāvaṇa and the other Rākṣasas.





TEXT 25



svān svān bandhūn pariṣvajya

lakṣmaṇeṣubhir arditān

ruruduḥ susvaraṁ dīnā

ghnantya ātmānam ātmanā

SYNONYMS



svān svān-their own respective husbands; bandhūn-friends; pariṣvajya-embracing; lakṣmaṇa-iṣubhiḥ-by the arrows of Lakṣmaṇa; arditān-who were killed; ruruduḥ-all the wives cried piteously; su-svaram-it was very sweet to hear; dīnāḥ-very poor; ghnantyaḥ-striking; ātmānam-their breasts; ātmanā-by themselves.





Striking their breasts in affliction because their husbands had been killed by the arrows of Lakṣmaṇa, the women embraced their respective husbands and cried piteously in voices appealing to everyone.





TEXT 26



hā hatāḥ sma vayaṁ nātha

loka-rāvaṇa rāvaṇa

kaṁ yāyāc charaṇaṁ laṅkā

tvad-vihīnā parārditā

SYNONYMS



hā-alas; hatāḥ-killed; sma-in the past; vayam-all of us; nātha-O protector; loka-rāvaṇa-O husband, who created the crying of so many other people; rāvaṇa-O Rāvaṇa, one who can cause crying of others; kam-unto whom; yāyāt-will go; śaraṇam-shelter; laṅkā-the state of Laṅkā; tvat-vihīnā-being bereft of your good self; para-arditā-being defeated by the enemies.





O my lord, O master! You epitomized trouble for others, and therefore you were called Rāvaṇa. But now that you have been defeated, we also are defeated, for without you the state of Laṅkā has been conquered by the enemy. To whom will it go for shelter?





Rāvaṇa's wife Mandodarī and the other wives knew very well how cruel a person Rāvaṇa was. The very word "Rāvaṇa" means "one who causes crying for others." Rāvaṇa continuously caused trouble for others, but when his sinful activities culminated in giving trouble to Sītādevī, he was killed by Lord Rāmacandra.





TEXT 27



na vai veda mahā-bhāga

bhavān kāma-vaśaṁ gataḥ

tejo 'nubhāvaṁ sītāyā

yena nīto daśām imām

SYNONYMS



na-not; vai-indeed; veda-did know; mahā-bhāga-O greatly fortunate one; bhavān-yourself; kāma-vaśam-influenced by lusty desires; gataḥ-having become; tejaḥ-by influence; anubhāvam-as a result of such influence; sītāyāḥ-of mother Sītā; yena-by which; nītaḥ-brought into; daśām-condition; imām-like this (destruction).





O greatly fortunate one, you came under the influence of lusty desires, and therefore you could not understand the influence of mother Sītā. Now, because of her curse, you have been reduced to this state, having been killed by Lord Rāmacandra.





Not only was mother Sītā powerful, but any woman who follows in the footsteps of mother Sītā can also become similarly powerful. There are many instances of this in the history of Vedic literature. Whenever we find a description of ideal chaste women, mother Sītā is among them. Mandodarī, the wife of Rāvaṇa, was also very chaste. Similarly, Draupadī was one of five exalted chaste women. As a man must follow great personalities like Brahmā and Nārada, a woman must follow the path of such ideal women as Sītā, Mandodarī and Draupadī. By staying chaste and faithful to her husband, a woman enriches herself with supernatural power. It is a moral principle that one should not be influenced by lusty desires for another's wife. Mātṛvat para-dāreṣu: an intelligent person must look upon another's wife as being like his mother. This is a moral injunction from Cāṇakya-śloka (10).



mātṛvat para-dāreṣu

para-dravyeṣu loṣṭravat

ātmavat sarva-bhūteṣu

yaḥ paśyati sa paṇḍitaḥ





"One who considers another's wife as his mother, another's possessions as a lump of dirt and treats all other living beings as he would himself, is considered to be learned." Thus Rāvaṇa was condemned not only by Lord Rāmacandra but even by his own wife, Mandodarī. Because she was a chaste woman, she knew the power of another chaste woman, especially such a wife as mother Sītādevī.





TEXT 28



kṛtaiṣā vidhavā laṅkā

vayaṁ ca kula-nandana

dehaḥ kṛto 'nnaṁ gṛdhrāṇām

ātmā naraka-hetave

SYNONYMS



kṛtā-made by you; eṣā-all of this; vidhavā-without a protector; laṅkā-the state of Laṅkā; vayam ca-and us; kula-nandana-O pleasure of the Rākṣasas; dehaḥ-the body; kṛtaḥ-made by you; annam-eatable; gṛdhrāṇām-of the vultures; ātmā-and your soul; naraka-hetave-for going to hell.





O pleasure of the Rākṣasa dynasty, because of you the state of Laṅkā and also we ourselves now have no protector. By your deeds you have made your body fit to be eaten by vultures and your soul fit to go to hell.





One who follows the path of Rāvaṇa is condemned in two ways: his body is fit to be eaten by dogs and vultures, and the soul goes to hell. As stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (16.19):



tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān

saṁsāreṣu narādhamān

kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān

āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu





"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life." Thus the destination of godless atheists such as Rāvaṇa, Hiraṇyakaśipu, Kaṁsa and Dantavakra is a hellish condition of life. Mandodarī, the wife of Rāvaṇa, could understand all this because she was a chaste woman. Although lamenting for the death of her husband, she knew what would happen to his body and soul, for although one cannot see directly with one's material eyes, one can see with eyes of knowledge (paśyanti jñāna-cakṣuṣaḥ). In Vedic history there are many instances of how one becomes godless and is condemned by the laws of nature.





TEXT 29



śrī-śuka uvāca

svānāṁ vibhīṣaṇaś cakre

kosalendrānumoditaḥ

pitṛ-medha-vidhānena

yad uktaṁ sāmparāyikam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; svānām-of his own family members; vibhīṣaṇaḥ-Vibhīṣaṇa, the brother of Rāvaṇa and devotee of Lord Rāmacandra; cakre-executed; kosala-indra-anumoditaḥ-approved by the King of Kosala, Lord Rāmacandra; pitṛ-medha-vidhānena-by the funeral ceremony performed by the son after the death of his father or some family member; yat uktam-which have been prescribed; sāmparāyikam-duties to be performed after a person's death to save him from the path to hell.





Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Vibhīṣaṇa, the pious brother of Rāvaṇa and devotee of Lord Rāmacandra, received approval from Lord Rāmacandra, the King of Kosala. Then he performed the prescribed funeral ceremonies for his family members to save them from the path to hell.





After giving up the body, one is transferred to another body, but sometimes, if one is too sinful, he is checked from transmigrating to another body, and thus he becomes a ghost. To save a diseased person from ghostly life, the funeral ceremony, or śrāddha ceremony, as prescribed in authorized śāstra, must be performed. Rāvaṇa was killed by Lord Rāmacandra and was destined for hellish life, but by Lord Rāmacandra's advice, Vibhīṣaṇa, Rāvaṇa's brother, performed all the duties prescribed in relation to the dead. Thus Lord Rāmacandra was kind to Rāvaṇa even after Rāvaṇa's death.





TEXT 30



tato dadarśa bhagavān

aśoka-vanikāśrame

kṣāmāṁ sva-viraha-vyādhiṁ

śiṁśapā-mūlam-āśritām

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; dadarśa-saw; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aśoka-vanika-āśrame-in a small cottage in the forest of Aśoka trees; kṣāmām-very lean and thin; sva-viraha-vyādhim-suffering from the disease of separation from Lord Rāmacandra; śiṁśapā-of the tree known as Siṁśapā; mūlam-the root; āśritām-taking shelter of.





Thereafter, Lord Rāmacandra found Sītādevī sitting in a small cottage beneath the tree named Siṁśapā in a forest of Aśoka trees. She was lean and thin, being aggrieved because of separation from Him.





TEXT 31



rāmaḥ priyatamāṁ bhāryāṁ

dīnāṁ vīkṣyānvakampata

ātma-sandarśanāhlāda-

vikasan-mukha-paṅkajām

SYNONYMS



rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; priya-tamām-upon His dearmost; bhāryām-wife; dīnām-so poorly situated; vīkṣya-looking; anvakampata-became very compassionate; ātma-sandarśana-when one sees his beloved; āhlāda-an ecstasy of joyful life; vikasat-manifesting; mukha-mouth; paṅkajām-like a lotus.





Seeing His wife in that condition, Lord Rāmacandra was very compassionate. When Rāmacandra came before her, she was exceedingly happy to see her beloved, and her lotuslike mouth showed her joy.





TEXT 32



āropyāruruhe yānaṁ

bhrātṛbhyāṁ hanumad-yutaḥ

vibhīṣaṇāya bhagavān

dattvā rakṣo-gaṇeśatām

laṅkām āyuś ca kalpāntaṁ

yayau cīrṇa-vrataḥ purīm

SYNONYMS



āropya-keeping or placing; āruruhe-got up; yānam-on the airplane; bhrātṛbhyām-with His brother Lakṣmaṇa and the commander Sugrīva; hanumat-yutaḥ-accompanied by Hanumān; vibhīṣaṇāya-unto Vibhīṣaṇa, the brother of Rāvaṇa; bhagavān-the Lord; dattvā-gave charge; rakṣaḥ-gaṇa-īśatām-the power to rule over the Rākṣasa population of Laṅkā; laṅkām-the state of Laṅkā; āyuḥ ca-and the duration of life; kalpa-antam-for many, many years, until the end of one kalpa; yayau-returned home; cīrṇa-vrataḥ-finishing the duration of time living in the forest; purīm-to Ayodhyā-purī.





After giving Vibhīṣaṇa the power to rule the Rākṣasa population of Laṅkā for the duration of one kalpa, Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead [Bhagavān], placed Sītādevī on an airplane decorated with flowers and then got on the plane Himself. The period for His living in the forest having ended, the Lord returned to Ayodhyā, accompanied by Hanumān, Sugrīva and His brother Lakṣmaṇa.





TEXT 33



avakīryamāṇaḥ sukusumair

lokapālārpitaiḥ pathi

upagīyamāna-caritaḥ

śatadhṛty-ādibhir mudā

SYNONYMS



avakīryamāṇaḥ-being overflooded; su-kusumaiḥ-by fragrant and beautiful flowers; loka-pāla-arpitaiḥ-offered by the princely order; pathi-on the road; upagīyamāna-caritaḥ-being glorified for His uncommon activities; śatadhṛti-ādibhiḥ-by personalities like Lord Brahmā and other demigods; mudā-with great jubilation.





When Lord Rāmacandra returned to His capital, Ayodhyā, He was greeted on the road by the princely order, who showered His body with beautiful, fragrant flowers, while great personalities like Lord Brahmā and other demigods glorified the activities of the Lord in great jubilation.





TEXT 34



go-mūtra-yāvakaṁ śrutvā

bhrātaraṁ valkalāmbaram

mahā-kāruṇiko 'tapyaj

jaṭilaṁ sthaṇḍile-śayam

SYNONYMS



go-mūtra-yāvakam-eating barley boiled in the urine of a cow; śrutvā-hearing; bhrātaram-His brother Bharata; valkala-ambaram-covered with the bark of trees; mahā-kāruṇikaḥ-the supremely merciful Lord Rāmacandra; atapyat-lamented very much; jaṭilam-wearing matted locks of hair; sthaṇḍile-śayam-lying down on a grass mattress, or kuśāsana.





Upon reaching Ayodhyā, Lord Rāmacandra heard that in His absence His brother Bharata was eating barley cooked in the urine of a cow, covering His body with the bark of trees, wearing matted locks of hair, and lying on a mattress of kuśa. The most merciful Lord very much lamented this.





TEXTS 35–38



bharataḥ prāptam ākarṇya

paurāmātya-purohitaiḥ

pāduke śirasi nyasya

rāmaṁ pratyudyato 'grajam

nandigrāmāt sva-śibirād



gīta-vāditra-niḥsvanaiḥ

brahma-ghoṣeṇa ca muhuḥ

paṭhadbhir brahmavādibhiḥ

svarṇa-kakṣa-patākābhir



haimaiś citra-dhvajai rathaiḥ

sad-aśvai rukma-sannāhair

bhaṭaiḥ puraṭa-varmabhiḥ

śreṇībhir vāra-mukhyābhir



bhṛtyaiś caiva padānugaiḥ

pārameṣṭhyāny upādāya

paṇyāny uccāvacāni ca

pādayor nyapatat premṇā

praklinna-hṛdayekṣaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



bharataḥ-Lord Bharata; prāptam-coming back home; ākarṇya-hearing; paura-all kinds of citizens; amātya-all the ministers; purohitaiḥ-accompanied by all the priests; pāduke-the two wooden shoes; śirasi-on the head; nyasya-keeping; rāmam-unto Lord Rāmacandra; pratyudyataḥ-going forward to receive; agrajam-His eldest brother; nandigrāmāt-from His residence, known as Nandigrāma; sva-śibirāt-from His own camp; gīta-vāditra-songs and vibrations of drums and other musical instruments; niḥsvanaiḥ-accompanied by such sounds; brahma-ghoṣeṇa-by the sound of chanting of Vedic mantras; ca-and; muhuḥ-always; paṭhadbhiḥ-reciting from the Vedas; brahma-vādibhiḥ-by first-class brāhmaṇas; svarṇa-kakṣa-patākābhiḥ-decorated with flags with golden embroidery; haimaiḥ-golden; citra-dhvajaiḥ-with decorated flags; rathaiḥ-with chariots; sat-aśvaiḥ-having very beautiful horses; rukma-golden; sannāhaiḥ-with harnesses; bhaṭaiḥ-by soldiers; puraṭa-varmabhiḥ-covered with armor made of gold; śreṇībhiḥ-by such a line or procession; vāra-mukhyābhiḥ-accompanied by beautiful, well-dressed prostitutes; bhṛtyaiḥ-by servants; ca-also; eva-indeed; pada-anugaiḥ-by infantry; pārameṣṭhyāni-other paraphernalia befitting a royal reception; upādāya-taking all together; paṇyāni-valuable jewels, etc.; ucca-avacāni-of different values; ca-also; pādayoḥ-at the lotus feet of the Lord; nyapatat-fell down; premṇā-in ecstatic love; praklinna-softened, moistened; hṛdaya-the core of the heart; īkṣaṇaḥ-whose eyes.





When Lord Bharata understood that Lord Rāmacandra was returning to the capital, Ayodhyā, He immediately took upon His own head Lord Rāmacandra's wooden shoes and came out from His camp at Nandigrāma. Lord Bharata was accompanied by ministers, priests and other respectable citizens, by professional musicians vibrating pleasing musical sounds, and by learned brāhmaṇas loudly chanting Vedic hymns. Following in the procession were chariots drawn by beautiful horses with harnesses of golden rope. These chariots were decorated by flags with golden embroidery and by other flags of various sizes and patterns. There were soldiers bedecked with golden armor, servants bearing betel nut, and many well-known and beautiful prostitutes. Many servants followed on foot, bearing an umbrella, whisks, different grades of precious jewels, and other paraphernalia befitting a royal reception. Accompanied in this way, Lord Bharata, His heart softened in ecstasy and His eyes full of tears, approached Lord Rāmacandra and fell at His lotus feet with great ecstatic love.





TEXTS 39–40



pāduke nyasya purataḥ

prāñjalir bāṣpa-locanaḥ

tam āśliṣya ciraṁ dorbhyāṁ

snāpayan netrajair jalaiḥ

rāmo lakṣmaṇa-sītābhyāṁ



viprebhyo ye 'rha-sattamāḥ

tebhyaḥ svayaṁ namaścakre

prajābhiś ca namaskṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



pāduke-the two wooden shoes; nyasya-after placing; purataḥ-before Lord Rāmacandra; prāñjaliḥ-with folded hands; bāṣpa-locanaḥ-with tears in the eyes; tam-unto Him, Bharata; āśliṣya-embracing; ciram-for a long time; dorbhyām-with His two arms; snāpayan-bathing; netra-jaiḥ-coming from His eyes; jalaiḥ-with the water; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; lakṣmaṇa-sītābhyām-with Lakṣmaṇa and mother Sītā; viprebhyaḥ-unto the learned brāhmaṇas; ye-also others who; arha-sattamāḥ-worthy of being worshiped; tebhyaḥ-unto them; svayam-personally; namaḥ-cakre-offered respectful obeisances; prajābhiḥ-by the citizens; ca-and; namaḥ-kṛtaḥ-was offered obeisances.





After offering the wooden shoes before Lord Rāmacandra, Lord Bharata stood with folded hands, His eyes full of tears, and Lord Rāmacandra bathed Bharata with tears while embracing Him with both arms for a long time. Accompanied by mother Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa, Lord Rāmacandra then offered His respectful obeisances unto the learned brāhmaṇas and the elderly persons in the family, and all the citizens of Ayodhyā offered their respectful obeisances unto the Lord.





TEXT 41



dhunvanta uttarāsaṅgān

patiṁ vīkṣya cirāgatam

uttarāḥ kosalā mālyaiḥ

kiranto nanṛtur mudā

SYNONYMS



dhunvantaḥ-waving; uttara-āsaṅgān-the upper cloths covering the body; patim-the Lord; vīkṣya-seeing; cira-āgatam-returned after many years of banishment; uttarāḥ kosalāḥ-the citizens of Ayodhyā; mālyaiḥ kirantaḥ-offering Him garlands; nanṛtuḥ-began to dance; mudā-in great jubilation.





The citizens of Ayodhyā, upon seeing their King return after a long absence, offered Him flower garlands, waved their upper cloths, and danced in great jubilation.





TEXTS 42–43



pāduke bharato 'gṛhṇāc

cāmara-vyajanottame

vibhīṣaṇaḥ sasugrīvaḥ

śveta-cchatraṁ marut-sutaḥ

dhanur-niṣaṅgāñ chatrughnaḥ



sītā tīrtha-kamaṇḍalum

abibhrad aṅgadaḥ khaḍgaṁ

haimaṁ carmarkṣa-rāṇ nṛpa

SYNONYMS



pāduke-the two wooden shoes; bharataḥ-Lord Bharata; agṛhṇāt-carried; cāmara-whisk; vyajana-fan; uttame-very opulent; vibhīṣaṇaḥ-the brother of Rāvaṇa; sa-sugrīvaḥ-with Sugrīva; śveta-chatram-a white umbrella; marut-sutaḥ-Hanumān, the son of the wind-god; dhanuḥ-the bow; niṣaṅgān-with two quivers; śatrughnaḥ-one of the brothers of Lord Rāmacandra; sītā-mother Sītā; tīrtha-kamaṇḍalum-the waterpot filled with water from holy places; abibhrat-carried; aṅgadaḥ-the monkey commander named Aṅgada; khaḍgam-the sword; haimam-made of gold; carma-shield; ṛkṣa-rāṭ-the King of the Ṛkṣas, Jāmbavān; nṛpa-O King.





O King, Lord Bharata carried Lord Rāmacandra's wooden shoes, Sugrīva and Vibhīṣaṇa carried a whisk and an excellent fan, Hanumān carried a white umbrella, Śatrughna carried a bow and two quivers, and Sītādevī carried a waterpot filled with water from holy places. Aṅgada carried a sword, and Jāmbavān, King of the Ṛkṣas, carried a golden shield.





TEXT 44



puṣpaka-stho nutaḥ strībhiḥ

stūyamānaś ca vandibhiḥ

vireje bhagavān rājan

grahaiś candra ivoditaḥ

SYNONYMS



puṣpaka-sthaḥ-seated on the airplane made of flowers; nutaḥ-worshiped; strībhiḥ-by the women; stūyamānaḥ-being offered prayers; ca-and; vandibhiḥ-by the reciters; vireje-beautified; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Rāmacandra; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; grahaiḥ-among the planets; candraḥ-the moon; iva-like; uditaḥ-risen.





O King Parīkṣit, as the Lord sat on His airplane of flowers, with women offering Him prayers and reciters chanting about His characteristics, He appeared like the moon with the stars and planets.





TEXTS 45–46



bhrātrābhinanditaḥ so 'tha

sotsavāṁ prāviśat purīm

praviśya rāja-bhavanaṁ

guru-patnīḥ sva-mātaram

gurūn vayasyāvarajān



pūjitaḥ pratyapūjayat

vaidehī lakṣmaṇaś caiva

yathāvat samupeyatuḥ

SYNONYMS



bhrātrā-by His brother (Bharata); abhinanditaḥ-being welcomed properly; saḥ-He, Lord Rāmacandra; atha-thereafter; sa-utsavām-in the midst of a festival; prāviśat-entered; purīm-the city of Ayodhyā; praviśya-after entering; rāja-bhavanam-the royal palace; guru-patnīḥ-Kaikeyī and other stepmothers; sva-mātaram-His own mother (Kauśalyā); gurūn-the spiritual masters (Śrī Vasiṣṭha and others); vayasya-unto friends of the same age; avara-jān-and those who were younger than He; pūjitaḥ-being worshiped by them; pratyapūjayat-He returned the obeisances; vaidehī-mother Sītā; lakṣmaṇaḥ-Lakṣmaṇa; ca eva-and; yathā-vat-in a befitting way; samupeyatuḥ-being welcomed, entered the palace.





Thereafter, having been welcomed by His brother Bharata, Lord Rāmacandra entered the city of Ayodhyā in the midst of a festival. When He entered the palace, He offered obeisances to all the mothers, including Kaikeyī and the other wives of Mahārāja Daśaratha, and especially His own mother, Kauśalyā. He also offered obeisances to the spiritual preceptors, such as Vasiṣṭha. Friends of His own age and younger friends worshiped Him, and He returned their respectful obeisances, as did Lakṣmaṇa and mother Sītā. In this way they all entered the palace.





TEXT 47



putrān sva-mātaras tās tu

prāṇāṁs tanva ivotthitāḥ

āropyāṅke 'bhiṣiñcantyo

bāṣpaughair vijahuḥ śucaḥ

SYNONYMS



putrān-the sons; sva-mātaraḥ-Their mothers; tāḥ-they, headed by Kauśalyā and Kaikeyī; tu-but; prāṇān-life; tanvaḥ-bodies; iva-like; utthitāḥ-arisen; āropya-keeping; aṅke-on the lap; abhiṣiñcantyaḥ-moistening (the bodies of their sons); bāṣpa-by tears; oghaiḥ-continuously pouring; vijahuḥ-gave up; śucaḥ-lamentation due to separation from their sons.





Upon seeing their sons, the mothers of Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna immediately arose, like unconscious bodies returning to consciousness. The mothers placed their sons on their laps and bathed Them with tears, thus relieving themselves of the grief of long separation.





TEXT 48



jaṭā nirmucya vidhivat

kula-vṛddhaiḥ samaṁ guruḥ

abhyaṣiñcad yathaivendraṁ

catuḥ-sindhu-jalādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



jaṭāḥ-the matted locks of hair on the head; nirmucya-shaving clean; vidhi-vat-according to regulative principles; kula-vṛddhaiḥ-the elderly persons in the family; samam-with; guruḥ-the family priest or spiritual master, Vasiṣṭha; abhyaṣiñcat-performed the abhiṣeka ceremony of Lord Rāmacandra; yathā-as; eva-like; indram-unto King Indra; catuḥ-sindhu-jala-with the water of the four oceans; ādibhiḥ-and with other paraphernalia for bathing.





The family priest or spiritual master, Vasiṣṭha, had Lord Rāmacandra cleanly shaved, freeing Him from His matted locks of hair. Then, with the cooperation of the elderly members of the family, he performed the bathing ceremony [abhiṣeka] for Lord Rāmacandra with the water of the four seas and with other substances, just as it was performed for King Indra.





TEXT 49



evaṁ kṛta-śiraḥ-snānaḥ

suvāsāḥ sragvy-alaṅkṛtaḥ

svalaṅkṛtaiḥ suvāsobhir

bhrātṛbhir bhāryayā babhau

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; kṛta-śiraḥ-snānaḥ-having completely bathed, washing the head; su-vāsāḥ-being nicely dressed; sragvi-alaṅkṛtaḥ-being decorated with a garland; su-alaṅkṛtaiḥ-decorated nicely; su-vāsobhiḥ-dressed nicely; bhrātṛbhiḥ-with His brothers; bhāryayā-and with His wife, Sītā; babhau-the Lord became very brilliant.





Lord Rāmacandra, fully bathed and His head clean-shaven, dressed Himself very nicely and was decorated with a garland and ornaments. Thus He shone brightly, surrounded by His brothers and wife, who were similarly dressed and ornamented.





TEXT 50



agrahīd āsanaṁ bhrātrā

praṇipatya prasāditaḥ

prajāḥ sva-dharma-niratā

varṇāśrama-guṇānvitāḥ

jugopa pitṛvad rāmo

menire pitaraṁ ca tam

SYNONYMS



agrahīt-accepted; āsanam-the throne of the state; bhrātrā-by His brother (Bharata); praṇipatya-after fully surrendering unto Him; prasāditaḥ-having been pleased; prajāḥ-and the citizens; sva-dharma-niratāḥ-fully engaged in their respective occupational duties; varṇāśrama-according to the system of varṇa and āśrama; guṇa-anvitāḥ-all of them being qualified in that process; jugopa-the Lord protected them; pitṛ-vat-exactly like a father; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; menire-they considered; pitaram-exactly like a father; ca-also; tam-Him, Lord Rāmacandra.





Being pleased by the full surrender and submission of Lord Bharata, Lord Rāmacandra then accepted the throne of the state. He cared for the citizens exactly like a father, and the citizens, being fully engaged in their occupational duties of varṇa and āśrama, accepted Him as their father.





People are very fond of the pattern of Rāma-rājya, and even today politicians sometimes form a party called Rāma-rājya, but unfortunately they have no obedience to Lord Rāma. It is sometimes said that people want the kingdom of God without God. Such an aspiration, however, is never to be fulfilled. Good government can exist when the relationship between the citizens and the government is like that exemplified by Lord Rāmacandra and His citizens. Lord Rāmacandra ruled His kingdom exactly as a father takes care of his children, and the citizens, being obliged to the good government of Lord Rāmacandra, accepted the Lord as their father. Thus the relationship between the citizens and the government should be exactly like that between father and son. When the sons in a family are well trained, they are obedient to the father and mother, and when the father is well qualified, he takes good care of the children. As indicated here by the words sva-dharma-niratā varṇāśrama-guṇān-vitāḥ, the people were good citizens because they accepted the institution of varṇa and āśrama, which arranges society in the varṇa divisions of brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra and the āśrama divisions of brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. This is actual human civilization. People must be trained according to the different varṇāśrama occupational duties. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.13), cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ: the four varṇas must be established according to varying qualities and work. The first principle for good government is that it must institute this varṇāśrama system. The purpose of varṇāśrama is to enable people to become God conscious. Varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān viṣṇur ārādhyate. The entire varṇāśrama scheme is intended to enable people to become Vaiṣṇavas. Viṣṇur asya devatā. When people worship Lord Viṣṇu as the Supreme Lord, they become Vaiṣṇavas. Thus people should be trained to become Vaiṣṇavas through the system of varṇa and āśrama, as they were during the reign of Lord Rāmacandra, when everyone was fully trained to follow the varṇāśrama principles.



Simply enforcing laws and ordinances cannot make the citizens obedient and lawful. That is impossible. Throughout the entire world there are so many states, legislative assemblies and parliaments, but still the citizens are rogues and thieves. Good citizenship, therefore, cannot be enforced; the citizens must be trained. As there are schools and colleges to train students to become chemical engineers, lawyers or specialists in many other departments of knowledge, there must be schools and colleges to train students to become brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdras, brahmacārīs, gṛhasthas, vānaprasthas and sannyāsīs. This will provide the preliminary condition for good citizenship (varṇāśrama-guṇān-vitāḥ). Generally speaking, if the king or president is a rājarṣi, the relationship between the citizens and the chief executive will be clear, and there will be no possibility of disruption in the state, because the number of thieves and rogues will decrease. In Kali-yuga, however, because the varṇāśrama system is neglected, people are generally thieves and rogues. In the system of democracy, such thieves and rogues naturally collect money from other thieves and rogues, and thus there is chaos in every government, and no one is happy. But here the example of good government is to be found in the reign of Lord Rāmacandra. If people follow this example, there will be good government all over the world.





TEXT 51



tretāyāṁ vartamānāyāṁ

kālaḥ kṛta-samo 'bhavat

rāme rājani dharma-jñe

sarva-bhūta-sukhāvahe

SYNONYMS



tretāyām-in the Tretā-yuga; vartamānāyām-although situated in that period; kālaḥ-the period; kṛta-with Satya-yuga; samaḥ-equal; abhavat-it so became; rāme-because of Lord Rāmacandra's being present; rājani-as the ruling king; dharma-jñe-because He was fully religious; sarva-bhūta-of all living entities; sukha-āvahe-giving full happiness.





Lord Rāmacandra became King during Tretā-yuga, but because of His good government, the age was like Satya-yuga. Everyone was religious and completely happy.





Among the four yugas-Satya, Tretā, Dvāpara and Kali-the Kali-yuga is the worst, but if the process of varṇāśrama-dharma is introduced, even in this age of Kali, the situation of Satya-yuga can be invoked. The Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, is meant for this purpose.



kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann

asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ

kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya

mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet





"My dear King, although Kali-yuga is full of faults, there is still one good quality about this age: simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, one can become free from material bondage and be promoted to the transcendental kingdom." (Bhāg. 12.3.51) If people take to this saṅkīrtana movement of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Rāma, they will certainly be freed from the contamination of Kali-yuga, and the people of this age will be happy, as people were in Satya-yuga, the golden age. Anyone, anywhere, can easily take to this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement; one need only chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, observe the rules and regulations, and stay free from the contamination of sinful life. Even if one is sinful and cannot give up sinful life immediately, if he chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra with devotion and faith he will certainly be freed from all sinful activities, and his life will be successful. Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam. This is the blessing of Lord Rāmacandra, who has appeared in this age of Kali as Lord Gaurasundara.





TEXT 52



vanāni nadyo girayo

varṣāṇi dvīpa-sindhavaḥ

sarve kāma-dughā āsan

prajānāṁ bharatarṣabha

SYNONYMS



vanāni-the forests; nadyaḥ-the rivers; girayaḥ-the hills and mountains; varṣāṇi-various parts of the states or divisions on the surface of the earth; dvīpa-islands; sindhavaḥ-the oceans and seas; sarve-all of them; kāma-dughāḥ-full of their respective opulences; āsan-existed like that; prajānām-of all the living beings; bharata-ṛṣabha-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Bharata dynasty.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Bharata dynasty, during the reign of Lord Rāmacandra the forests, the rivers, the hills and mountains, the states, the seven islands and the seven seas were all favorable in supplying the necessities of life for all living beings.





TEXT 53



nādhi-vyādhi-jarā-glāni-

duḥkha-śoka-bhaya-klamāḥ

mṛtyuś cānicchatāṁ nāsīd

rāme rājany adhokṣaje

SYNONYMS



na-not; ādhi-adhyātmika, adhibhautika and adhidaivika sufferings (that is, sufferings from the body and mind, from other living entities and from nature); vyādhi-diseases; jarā-old age; glāni-bereavement; duḥkha-grief; śoka-lamentation; bhaya-fear; klamāḥ-and fatigue; mṛtyuḥ-death; ca-also; anicchatām-of those who did not like it; na āsīt-there was not; rāme-during the rule of Lord Rāmacandra; rājani-because of His being the king; adhokṣaje-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond this material world.





When Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was the King of this world, all bodily and mental suffering, disease, old age, bereavement, lamentation, distress, fear and fatigue were completely absent. There was even no death for those who did not want it.





All these facilities existed because of Lord Rāmacandra's presence as the King of the entire world. A similar situation could be introduced immediately, even in this age called Kali, the worst of all ages. It is said, kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra: Kṛṣṇa descends in this Kali-yuga in the form of His holy name-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Rāma. If we chant offenselessly, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa are still present in this age. The kingdom of Rāma was immensely popular and beneficial, and the spreading of this Hare Kṛṣṇa movement can immediately introduce a similar situation, even in this Kali-yuga.





TEXT 54



eka-patnī-vrata-dharo

rājarṣi-caritaḥ śuciḥ

sva-dharmaṁ gṛha-medhīyaṁ

śikṣayan svayam ācarat

SYNONYMS



eka-patnī-vrata-dharaḥ-taking a vow not to accept a second wife or to have any connection with any other woman; rāja-ṛṣi-like a saintly king; caritaḥ-whose character; śuciḥ-pure; sva-dharmam-one's own occupational duty; gṛha-medhīyam-especially of persons situated in household life; śikṣayan-teaching (by personal behavior); svayam-personally; ācarat-executed His duty.





Lord Rāmacandra took a vow to accept only one wife and have no connection with any other women. He was a saintly king, and everything in His character was good, untinged by qualities like anger. He taught good behavior for everyone, especially for householders, in terms of varṇāśrama-dharma. Thus He taught the general public by His personal activities.





Eka-patnī-vrata, accepting only one wife, was the glorious example set by Lord Rāmacandra. One should not accept more than one wife. In those days, of course, people did marry more than one wife. Even Lord Rāmacandra's father accepted more wives than one. But Lord Rāmacandra, as an ideal king, accepted only one wife, mother Sītā. When mother Sītā was kidnapped by Rāvaṇa and the Rākṣasas, Lord Rāmacandra, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, could have married hundreds and thousands of Sītās, but to teach us how faithful He was to His wife, He fought with Rāvaṇa and finally killed him. The Lord punished Rāvaṇa and rescued His wife to instruct men to have only one wife. Lord Rāmacandra accepted only one wife and manifested sublime character, thus setting an example for householders. A householder should live according to the ideal of Lord Rāmacandra, who showed how to be a perfect person. Being a householder or living with a wife and children is never condemned, provided one lives according to the regulative principles of varṇāśrama-dharma. Those who live in accordance with these principles, whether as householders, brahmacārīs or vānaprasthas, are all equally important.





TEXT 55



premṇānuvṛttyā śīlena

praśrayāvanatā satī

bhiyā hriyā ca bhāva-jñā

bhartuḥ sītāharan manaḥ

SYNONYMS



premṇā anuvṛttyā-because of service rendered to the husband with love and faith; śīlena-by such good character; praśraya-avanatā-always very submissive and ready to satisfy the husband; satī-chaste; bhiyā-by being afraid; hriyā-by shyness; ca-also; bhāva-jñā-understanding the attitude (of the husband); bhartuḥ-of her husband, Lord Rāmacandra; sītā-mother Sītā; aharat-simply captivated; manaḥ-the mind.





Mother Sītā was very submissive, faithful, shy and chaste, always understanding the attitude of her husband. Thus by her character and her love and service she completely attracted the mind of the Lord.





As Lord Rāmacandra is the ideal husband (eka-patnī-vrata), mother Sītā is the ideal wife. Such a combination makes family life very happy. Yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥ: whatever example a great man sets, common people follow. If the kings, the leaders, and the brāhmaṇas, the teachers, would set forth the examples we receive from Vedic literature, the entire world would be heaven; indeed, there would no longer be hellish conditions within this material world.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Pastimes of the Supreme Lord, Rāmacandra."



Chapter Eleven



Lord Rāmacandra Rules the World





This chapter describes how Lord Rāmacandra resided in Ayodhyā with His younger brothers and performed various sacrifices.





Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, performed various sacrifices by which to worship Himself, and at the end of these sacrifices He gave land to the hotā, adhvaryu, udgātā and brahmā priests. He gave them the eastern, western, northern and southern directions respectively, and the balance He gave to the ācārya. Lord Rāmacandra's faith in the brāhmaṇas and affection for His servants was observed by all the brāhmaṇas, who then offered their prayers to the Lord and returned whatever they had taken from Him. They regarded the enlightenment given to them by the Lord within the core of their hearts as a sufficient contribution. Lord Rāmacandra subsequently dressed Himself like an ordinary person and began wandering within the capital to understand what impression the citizens had of Him. By chance, one night He heard a man talking to his wife, who had gone to another man's house. In the course of rebuking his wife, the man spoke suspiciously of the character of Sītādevī. The Lord immediately returned home, and, fearing such rumors, He superficially decided to give up Sītādevī's company. Thus He banished Sītādevī, who was pregnant, to the shelter of Vālmīki Muni, where she gave birth to twin sons, named Lava and Kuśa. In Ayodhyā, Lakṣmaṇa begot two sons named Aṅgada and Citraketu, Bharata begot two sons named Takṣa and Puṣkala, and Śatrughna begot two sons named Subāhu and Śrutasena. When Bharata went out to conquer various lands on behalf of the emperor, Lord Rāmacandra, He fought many millions of Gandharvas. By killing them in the fight, He acquired immense wealth, which He then brought home. Śatrughna killed a demon named Lavaṇa at Madhuvana and thus established the capital of Mathurā. Meanwhile, Sītādevī placed her two sons in the care of Vālmīki Muni and then entered into the earth. Upon hearing of this, Lord Rāmacandra was very much aggrieved, and thus He performed sacrifices for thirteen thousand years. After describing the pastimes of Lord Rāmacandra's disappearance and establishing that the Lord appears for His pastimes only, Śukadeva Gosvāmī ends this chapter by describing the results of hearing about the activities of Lord Rāmacandra and by describing how the Lord protected His citizens and displayed affection for His brothers.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

bhagavān ātmanātmānaṁ

rāma uttama-kalpakaiḥ

sarva-devamayaṁ devam

īje 'thācāryavān makhaiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmanā-by Himself; ātmānam-Himself; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; uttama-kalpakaiḥ-with very opulent paraphernalia; sarva-deva-mayam-the heart and soul of all the demigods; devam-the Supreme Lord Himself; īje-worshiped; atha-thus; ācāryavān-under the guidance of an ācārya; makhaiḥ-by performing sacrifices.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thereafter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Rāmacandra, accepted an ācārya and performed sacrifices [yajñas] with opulent paraphernalia. Thus He Himself worshiped Himself, for He is the Supreme Lord of all demigods.





Sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā. If Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is worshiped, then everyone is worshiped. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.14):



yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā





"As pouring water on the root of a tree nourishes the trunk, branches, twigs and leaves, and as supplying food to the stomach enlivens the senses and limbs of the body, worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead satisfies the demigods, who are part of that Supreme Personality." Performing yajña involves worshiping the Supreme Lord. Here the Supreme Lord worshiped the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is said, bhagavān ātmanātmānam īje: the Lord worshiped Himself by Himself. This does not, of course, justify the Māyāvāda philosophy, by which one thinks himself the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The jīva, the living entity, is always different from the Supreme Lord. The living entities (vibhinnāṁśa) never become one with the Lord, although Māyāvādīs sometimes imitate the Lord's worship of Himself. Lord Kṛṣṇa meditated upon Himself every morning as a gṛhastha, and similarly Lord Rāmacandra performed yajñas to satisfy Himself, but this does not mean that an ordinary living being should imitate the Lord by accepting the process of ahaṅgraha-upāsanā. Such unauthorized worship is not recommended herein.





TEXT 2



hotre 'dadād diśaṁ prācīṁ

brahmaṇe dakṣiṇāṁ prabhuḥ

adhvaryave pratīcīṁ vā

uttarāṁ sāmagāya saḥ

SYNONYMS



hotre-unto the hotā priest, who offers oblations; adadāt-gave; diśam-direction; prācīm-the whole eastern side; brahmaṇe-unto the brahmā priest, who supervises what is done in the sacrificial arena; dakṣiṇām-the southern side; prabhuḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; adhvaryave-unto the adhvaryu priest; pratīcīm-the whole western side; vā-also; uttarām-the northern side; sāma-gāya-unto the udgātā priest, who sings the Sāma Veda; saḥ-He (Lord Rāmacandra).





Lord Rāmacandra gave the entire east to the hotā priest, the entire south to the brahmā priest, the west to the adhvaryu priest, and the north to the udgātā priest, the reciter of the Sāma Veda. In this way, He donated His kingdom.





TEXT 3



ācāryāya dadau śeṣāṁ

yāvatī bhūs tad-antarā

manyamāna idaṁ kṛtsnaṁ

brāhmaṇo 'rhati niḥspṛhaḥ

SYNONYMS



ācāryāya-unto the ācārya, the spiritual master; dadau-gave; śeṣām-the balance; yāvatī-whatever; bhūḥ-land; tat-antarā-existing between the east, west, north and south; manyamānaḥ-thinking; idam-all this; kṛtsnam-wholly; brāhmaṇaḥ-the brāhmaṇas; arhati-deserve to possess; niḥspṛhaḥ-having no desire.





Thereafter, thinking that because the brāhmaṇas have no material desires they should possess the entire world, Lord Rāmacandra delivered the land between the east, west, north and south to the ācārya.





TEXT 4



ity ayaṁ tad-alaṅkāra-

vāsobhyām avaśeṣitaḥ

tathā rājñy api vaidehī

saumaṅgalyāvaśeṣitā

SYNONYMS



iti-in this way (after giving everything to the brāhmaṇas); ayam-Lord Rāmacandra; tat-His; alaṅkāra-vāsobhyām-with personal ornaments and garments; avaśeṣitaḥ-remained; tathā-as well as; rājñī-the Queen (mother Sītā); api-also; vaidehī-the daughter of the King of Videha; saumaṅgalyā-with only the nose ring; avaśeṣitā-remained.





After thus giving everything in charity to the brāhmaṇas, Lord Rāmacandra retained only His personal garments and ornaments, and similarly the Queen, mother Sītā, was left with only her nose ring, and nothing else.





TEXT 5



te tu brāhmaṇa-devasya

vātsalyaṁ vīkṣya saṁstutam

prītāḥ klinna-dhiyas tasmai

pratyarpyedaṁ babhāṣire

SYNONYMS



te-the hotā, brahmā and other priests; tu-but; brāhmaṇa-devasya-of Lord Rāmacandra, who loved the brāhmaṇas so much; vātsalyam-the paternal affection; vīkṣya-after seeing; saṁstutam-worshiped with prayers; prītāḥ-being very pleased; klinna-dhiyaḥ-with melted hearts; tasmai-unto Him (Lord Rāmacandra); pratyarpya-returning; idam-this (all the land given to them); babhāṣire-spoke.





All the brāhmaṇas who were engaged in the various activities of the sacrifice were very pleased with Lord Rāmacandra, who was greatly affectionate and favorable to the brāhmaṇas. Thus with melted hearts they returned all the property received from Him and spoke as follows.





In the previous chapter it was said that the prajās, the citizens, strictly followed the system of varṇāśrama-dharma. The brāhmaṇas acted exactly like brāhmaṇas, the kṣatriyas exactly like kṣatriyas, and so on. Therefore, when Lord Rāmacandra gave everything in charity to the brāhmaṇas, the brāhmaṇas, being qualified, wisely considered that brāhmaṇas are not meant to possess property to make a profit from it. The qualifications of a brāhmaṇa are given in Bhagavad-gītā (18.42):.



śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ

kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca

jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ

brahma-karma svabhāvajam





"Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, wisdom, knowledge, and religiousness-these are the qualities by which the brāhmaṇas work." The brahminical character offers no scope for possessing land and ruling citizens; these are the duties of a kṣatriya. Therefore, although the brāhmaṇas did not refuse Lord Rāmacandra's gift, after accepting it they returned it to the King. The brāhmaṇas were so pleased with Lord Rāmacandra's affection toward them that their hearts melted. They saw that Lord Rāmacandra, aside from being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was fully qualified as a kṣatriya and was exemplary in character. One of the qualifications of a kṣatriya is to be charitable. A kṣatriya, or ruler, levies taxes upon the citizens not for his personal sense gratification but to give charity in suitable cases. Dānam īśvara-bhāvaḥ. On one hand, kṣatriyas have the propensity to rule, but on the other they are very liberal with charity. When Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira gave charity, he engaged Karṇa to take charge of distributing it. Karṇa was very famous as Dātā Karṇa. The word dātā refers to one who gives charity very liberally. The kings always kept a large quantity of food grains in stock, and whenever there was any scarcity of grains, they would distribute grains in charity. A kṣatriya's duty is to give charity, and a brāhmaṇa's duty is to accept charity, but not more than needed to maintain body and soul together. Therefore, when the brāhmaṇas were given so much land by Lord Rāmacandra, they returned it to Him and were not greedy.





TEXT 6



aprattaṁ nas tvayā kiṁ nu

bhagavan bhuvaneśvara

yan no 'ntar-hṛdayaṁ viśya

tamo haṁsi sva-rociṣā

SYNONYMS



aprattam-not given; naḥ-unto us; tvayā-by Your Lordship; kim-what; nu-indeed; bhagavan-O Supreme Lord; bhuvana-īśvara-O master of the whole universe; yat-because; naḥ-our; antaḥ-hṛdayam-within the core of the heart; viśya-entering; tamaḥ-the darkness of ignorance; haṁsi-You annihilate; sva-rociṣā-by Your own effulgence.





O Lord, You are the master of the entire universe. What have You not given to us? You have entered the core of our hearts and dissipated the darkness of our ignorance by Your effulgence. This is the supreme gift. We do not need a material donation.





When Dhruva Mahārāja was offered a benediction by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he replied, "O my Lord, I am fully satisfied. I do not need any material benediction." Similarly, when Prahlāda Mahārāja was offered a benediction by Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, he also refused to accept it and instead declared that a devotee should not be like a vaṇik, a mercantile man who gives something in exchange for some profit. One who becomes a devotee for some material profit is not a pure devotee. Brāhmaṇas are always enlightened by the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the heart (sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca [Bg. 15.15]). And because the brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas are always directed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are not greedy for material wealth. What is absolutely necessary they possess, but they do not want an expanded kingdom. An example of this was given by Vāmanadeva. Acting as a brahmacārī, Lord Vāmanadeva wanted only three paces of land. Aspiring to possess more and more for personal sense gratification is simply ignorance, and this ignorance is conspicuous by its absence from the heart of a brāhmaṇa or Vaiṣṇava.





TEXT 7



namo brahmaṇya-devāya

rāmāyākuṇṭha-medhase

uttamaśloka-dhuryāya

nyasta-daṇḍārpitāṅghraye

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-we offer our respectful obeisances; brahmaṇya-devāya-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who accepts the brāhmaṇas as His worshipable deity; rāmāya-unto Lord Rāmacandra; akuṇṭha-medhase-whose memory and knowledge are never disturbed by anxiety; uttamaśloka-dhuryāya-the best of very famous persons; nyasta-daṇḍa-arpita-aṅghraye-whose lotus feet are worshiped by sages beyond the jurisdiction of punishment.





O Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have accepted the brāhmaṇas as Your worshipable deity. Your knowledge and memory are never disturbed by anxiety. You are the chief of all famous persons within this world, and Your lotus feet are worshiped by sages who are beyond the jurisdiction of punishment. O Lord Rāmacandra, let us offer our respectful obeisances unto You.





TEXT 8



kadācil loka-jijñāsur

gūḍho rātryām alakṣitaḥ

caran vāco 'śṛṇod rāmo

bhāryām uddiśya kasyacit

SYNONYMS



kadācit-once upon a time; loka-jijñāsuḥ-desiring to know about the public; gūḍhaḥ-hiding Himself by a disguise; rātryām-at night; alakṣitaḥ-without being identified by anyone else; caran-walking; vācaḥ-speaking; aśṛṇot-heard; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; bhāryām-unto His wife; uddiśya-indicating; kasyacit-of someone.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Once while Lord Rāmacandra was walking at night incognito, hiding Himself by a disguise to find out the people's opinion of Himself, He heard a man speaking unfavorably about His wife, Sītādevī.





TEXT 9



nāhaṁ bibharmi tvāṁ duṣṭām

asatīṁ para-veśma-gām

straiṇo hi bibhṛyāt sītāṁ

rāmo nāhaṁ bhaje punaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; aham-I; bibharmi-can maintain; tvām-you; duṣṭām-because you are polluted; asatīm-unchaste; para-veśma-gām-one who has gone to another man's house and committed adultery; straiṇaḥ-a person who is henpecked; hi-indeed; bibhṛyāt-can accept; sītām-even Sītā; rāmaḥ-like Lord Rāmacandra; na-not; aham-I; bhaje-shall accept; punaḥ-again.





[Speaking to his unchaste wife, the man said] You go to another man's house, and therefore you are unchaste and polluted. I shall not maintain you any more. A henpecked husband like Lord Rāma may accept a wife like Sītā, who went to another man's house, but I am not henpecked like Him, and therefore I shall not accept you again.





TEXT 10



iti lokād bahu-mukhād

durārādhyād asaṁvidaḥ

patyā bhītena sā tyaktā

prāptā prācetasāśramam

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; lokāt-from persons; bahu-mukhāt-who can talk nonsensically in various ways; durārādhyāt-whom it is very difficult to stop; asaṁvidaḥ-who are without full knowledge; patyā-by the husband; bhītena-being afraid; sā-mother Sītā; tyaktā-was abandoned; prāptā-went; prācetasa-āśramam-to the hermitage of Prācetasa (Vālmīki Muni).





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Men with a poor fund of knowledge and a heinous character speak nonsensically. Fearing such rascals, Lord Rāmacandra abandoned His wife, Sītādevī, although she was pregnant. Thus Sītādevī went to the āśrama of Vālmīki Muni.





TEXT 11



antarvatny āgate kāle

yamau sā suṣuve sutau

kuśo lava iti khyātau

tayoś cakre kriyā muniḥ

SYNONYMS



antarvatnī-the pregnant wife; āgate-arrived; kāle-in due course of time; yamau-twins; sā-Sītādevī; suṣuve-gave birth to; sutau-two sons; kuśaḥ-Kuśa; lavaḥ-Lava; iti-thus; khyātau-celebrated; tayoḥ-of them; cakre-performed; kriyāḥ-the ritualistic ceremonies of birth; muniḥ-the great sage Vālmīki.





When the time came, the pregnant mother Sītādevī gave birth to twin sons, later celebrated as Lava and Kuśa. The ritualistic ceremonies for their birth were performed by Vālmīki Muni.





TEXT 12



aṅgadaś citraketuś ca

lakṣmaṇasyātmajau smṛtau

takṣaḥ puṣkala ity āstāṁ

bharatasya mahīpate

SYNONYMS



aṅgadaḥ-Aṅgada; citraketuḥ-Citraketu; ca-also; lakṣmaṇasya-of Lord Lakṣmaṇa; ātmajau-two sons; smṛtau-were said to be; takṣaḥ-Takṣa; puṣkalaḥ-Puṣkala; iti-thus; āstām-were; bharatasya-of Lord Bharata; mahīpate-O King Parīkṣit.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Lord Lakṣmaṇa had two sons, named Aṅgada and Citraketu, and Lord Bharata also had two sons, named Takṣa and Puṣkala.





TEXTS 13–14



subāhuḥ śrutasenaś ca

śatrughnasya babhūvatuḥ

gandharvān koṭiśo jaghne

bharato vijaye diśām

tadīyaṁ dhanam ānīya



sarvaṁ rājñe nyavedayat

śatrughnaś ca madhoḥ putraṁ

lavaṇaṁ nāma rākṣasam

hatvā madhuvane cakre

mathurāṁ nāma vai purīm

SYNONYMS



subāhuḥ-Subāhu; śrutasenaḥ-Śrutasena; ca-also; śatrughnasya-of Lord Śatrughna; babhūvatuḥ-were born; gandharvān-persons related with the Gandharvas, who are mostly pretenders; koṭiśaḥ-by the tens of millions; jaghne-killed; bharataḥ-Lord Bharata; vijaye-while conquering; diśām-all directions; tadīyam-of the Gandharvas; dhanam-riches; ānīya-bringing; sarvam-everything; rājñe-unto the King (Lord Rāmacandra); nyavedayat-offered; śatrughnaḥ-Śatrughna; ca-and; madhoḥ-of Madhu; putram-the son; lavaṇam-Lavaṇa; nāma-by the name; rākṣasam-a man-eater; hatvā-by killing; madhuvane-in the great forest known as Madhuvana; cakre-constructed; mathurām-Mathurā; nāma-by the name; vai-indeed; purīm-a great town.





Śatrughna had two sons, named Subāhu and Śrutasena. When Lord Bharata went to conquer all directions, He had to kill many millions of Gandharvas, who are generally pretenders. Taking all their wealth, He offered it to Lord Rāmacandra. Śatrughna also killed a Rākṣasa named Lavaṇa, who was the son of Madhu Rākṣasa. Thus He established in the great forest known as Madhuvana the town known as Mathurā.





TEXT 15



munau nikṣipya tanayau

sītā bhartrā vivāsitā

dhyāyantī rāma-caraṇau

vivaraṁ praviveśa ha

SYNONYMS



munau-unto the great sage Vālmīki; nikṣipya-giving in charge; tanayau-the two sons Lava and Kuśa; sītā-mother Sītādevī; bhartrā-by her husband; vivāsitā-banished; dhyāyantī-meditating upon; rāma-caraṇau-the lotus feet of Lord Rāmacandra; vivaram-within the earth; praviveśa-she entered; ha-indeed.





Being forsaken by her husband, Sītādevī entrusted her two sons to the care of Vālmīki Muni. Then, meditating upon the lotus feet of Lord Rāmacandra, she entered into the earth.





It was impossible for Sītādevī to live in separation from Lord Rāmacandra. Therefore, after entrusting her two sons to the care of Vālmīki Muni, she entered into the earth.





TEXT 16



tac chrutvā bhagavān rāmo

rundhann api dhiyā śucaḥ

smaraṁs tasyā guṇāṁs tāṁs tān

nāśaknod roddhum īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-this (the news of Sītādevī's entering the earth); śrutvā-hearing; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; rundhan-trying to reject; api-although; dhiyā-by intelligence; śucaḥ-grief; smaran-remembering; tasyāḥ-of her; guṇān-qualities; tān tān-under different circumstances; na-not; aśaknot-was able; roddhum-to check; īśvaraḥ-although the supreme controller.





After hearing the news of mother Sītā's entering the earth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead was certainly aggrieved. Although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, upon remembering the exalted qualities of mother Sītā, He could not check His grief in transcendental love.





Lord Rāmacandra's grief at the news of Sītādevī's entering the earth is not to be considered material. In the spiritual world also there are feelings of separation, but such feelings are considered spiritual bliss. Grief in separation exists even in the Absolute, but such feelings of separation in the spiritual world are transcendentally blissful. Such feelings are a sign of tasya prema-vaśyatva-svabhāva, being under the influence of hlādinī-śakti and being controlled by love. In the material world such feelings of separation are only a perverted reflection.





TEXT 17



strī-puṁ-prasaṅga etādṛk

sarvatra trāsam-āvahaḥ

apīśvarāṇāṁ kim uta

grāmyasya gṛha-cetasaḥ

SYNONYMS



strī-pum-prasaṅgaḥ-attraction between husband and wife, or man and woman; etādṛk-like this; sarvatra-everywhere; trāsam-āvahaḥ-the cause of fear; api-even; īśvarāṇām-of controllers; kim uta-and what to speak of; grāmyasya-of ordinary men of this material world; gṛha-cetasaḥ-who are attached to materialistic household life.





The attraction between man and woman, or male and female, always exists everywhere, making everyone always fearful. Such feelings are present even among the controllers like Brahmā and Lord Śiva and is the cause of fear for them, what to speak of others who are attached to household life in this material world.





As explained above, when the feelings of love and transcendental bliss from the spiritual world are pervertedly reflected in this material world, they are certainly the cause of bondage. As long as men feel attracted to women in this material world and women feel attracted to men, the bondage of repeated birth and death will continue. But in the spiritual world, where there is no fear of birth and death, such feelings of separation are the cause of transcendental bliss. In the absolute reality there are varieties of feeling, but all of them are of the same quality of transcendental bliss.





TEXT 18



tata ūrdhvaṁ brahmacaryaṁ

dhāryann ajuhot prabhuḥ

trayodaśābda-sāhasram

agnihotram akhaṇḍitam

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; ūrdhvam-after mother Sītā's going into the earth; brahmacaryam-complete celibacy; dhārayan-observing; ajuhot-performed a ritualistic ceremony and sacrifice; prabhuḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; trayodaśa-abda-sāhasram-for thirteen thousand years; agnihotram-the sacrifice known as Agnihotra-yajña; akhaṇḍitam-without ceasing.





After mother Sītā entered the earth, Lord Rāmacandra observed complete celibacy and performed an uninterrupted Agnihotra-yajña for thirteen thousand years.





TEXT 19



smaratāṁ hṛdi vinyasya

viddhaṁ daṇḍaka-kaṇṭakaiḥ

sva-pāda-pallavaṁ rāma

ātma-jyotir agāt tataḥ

SYNONYMS



smaratām-of persons who always think of Him; hṛdi-in the core of the heart; vinyasya-placing; viddham-pierced; daṇḍaka-kaṇṭakaiḥ-by thorns in the forest of Daṇḍakāraṇya (while Lord Rāmacandra was living there); sva-pāda-pallavam-the petals of Mis lotus feet; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; ātma-jyotiḥ-the rays of His bodily luster, known as the brahmajyoti; agāt-entered; tataḥ-beyond the brahmajyoti, or in His own Vaikuṇṭha planet.





After completing the sacrifice, Lord Rāmacandra, whose lotus feet were sometimes pierced by thorns when He lived in Daṇḍakāraṇya, placed those lotus feet in the hearts of those who always think of Him. Then He entered His own abode, the Vaikuṇṭha planet beyond the brahmajyoti.





The lotus feet of the Lord are always a subject matter for meditation for devotees. Sometimes when Lord Rāmacandra wandered in the forest of Daṇḍakāraṇya, thorns pricked His lotus feet. The devotees, upon thinking of this, would faint. The Lord does not feel pain or pleasure from any action or reaction of this material world, but the devotees cannot tolerate even the pricking of the Lord's lotus feet by a thorn. This was the attitude of the gopīs when they thought of Kṛṣṇa wandering in the forest, with pebbles and grains of sand pricking His lotus feet. This tribulation in the heart of a devotee cannot be understood by karmīs, jñānīs or yogīs. The devotees, who could not tolerate even thinking of the Lord's lotus feet being pricked by a thorn, were again put into tribulation by thinking of the Lord's disappearance, for the Lord had to return to His abode after finishing His pastimes in this material world.



The word ātma-jyotiḥ is significant. The brahmajyoti, which is greatly appreciated by jñānīs, or monistic philosophers who desire to enter it for liberation, is nothing but the rays of the Lord's body.



yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is endowed with great power. The glowing effulgence of His transcendental form is the impersonal Brahman, which is absolute, complete and unlimited and which displays the varieties of countless planets, with their different opulences, in millions and millions of universes." (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.40) The brahmajyoti is the beginning of the spiritual world, and beyond the brahmajyoti are the Vaikuṇṭha planets. In other words, the brahmajyoti stays outside the Vaikuṇṭha planets, just as the sunshine stays outside the sun. To enter the sun planet, one must go through the sunshine. Similarly, when the Lord or His devotees enter the Vaikuṇṭha planets, they go through the brahmajyoti. The jñānīs, or monistic philosophers, because of their impersonal conception of the Lord, cannot enter the Vaikuṇṭha planets, but they also cannot stay eternally in the brahmajyoti. Thus after some time they fall again to this material world. Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adho 'nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ (Bhāg. 10.2.32). The Vaikuṇṭha planets are covered by the brahmajyoti, and therefore one cannot properly understand what those Vaikuṇṭha planets are unless one is a pure devotee.





TEXT 20



nedaṁ yaśo raghupateḥ sura-yācñayātta-

līlā-tanor adhika-sāmya-vimukta-dhāmnaḥ

rakṣo-vadho jaladhi-bandhanam astra-pūgaiḥ

kiṁ tasya śatru-hanane kapayaḥ sahāyāḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; idam-all these; yaśaḥ-fame; raghu-pateḥ-of Lord Rāmacandra; sura-yācñayā-by the prayers of the demigods; ātta-līlā-tanoḥ-whose spiritual body is always engaged in various pastimes; adhika-sāmya-vimukta-dhāmnaḥ-no one is greater than or equal to Him; rakṣaḥ-vadhaḥ-killing the Rākṣasa (Rāvaṇa); jaladhi-bandhanam-bridging the ocean; astra-pūgaiḥ-with bow and arrows; kim-whether; tasya-His; śatru-hanane-in killing the enemies; kapayaḥ-the monkeys; sahāyāḥ-assistants.





Lord Rāmacandra's reputation for having killed Rāvaṇa with showers of arrows at the request of the demigods and for having built a bridge over the ocean does not constitute the factual glory of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Rāmacandra, whose spiritual body is always engaged in various pastimes. Lord Rāmacandra has no equal or superior, and therefore He had no need to take help from the monkeys to gain victory over Rāvaṇa.





As stated in the Vedas (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8):



na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca





"The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, and no one is found to be equal to or greater than Him, for everything is done naturally and systematically by His multifarious energies." The Lord has nothing to do (na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate); whatever He does is His pastime. The Lord has no duty to perform to oblige anyone. Nonetheless, He appears to act to protect His devotees or kill His enemies. Of course, no one can be the Lord's enemy, since who could be more powerful than the Lord? There is actually no question of anyone's being His enemy, but when the Lord wants to take pleasure in pastimes, He comes down to this material world and acts like a human being, thus showing His wonderful, glorious activities to please the devotees. His devotees always want to see the Lord victorious in varied activities, and therefore, to please Himself and them, the Lord sometimes agrees to act as a human being and perform wonderful, uncommon pastimes for the satisfaction of the devotees.





TEXT 21



yasyāmalaṁ nṛpa-sadaḥsu yaśo 'dhunāpi

gāyanty agha-ghnam ṛṣayo dig-ibhendra-paṭṭam

taṁ nākapāla-vasupāla-kirīṭa-juṣṭa-

pādāmbujaṁ raghupatiṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye

SYNONYMS



yasya-whose (Lord Rāmacandra's); amalam-spotless, free from material qualities; nṛpa-sadaḥsu-in the assembly of great emperors like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; yaśaḥ-famous glories; adhunā api-even today; gāyanti-glorify; agha-ghnam-which vanquish all sinful reactions; ṛṣayaḥ-great saintly persons like Mārkaṇḍeya; dik-ibha-indra-paṭṭam-as the ornamental cloth covering the elephant that conquers the directions; tam-that; nāka-pāla-of heavenly demigods; vasu-pāla-of earthly kings; kirīṭa-by the helmets; juṣṭa-are worshiped; pāda-ambujam-whose lotus feet; raghu-patim-unto Lord Rāmacandra; śaraṇam-surrender; prapadye-I offer.





Lord Rāmacandra's spotless name and fame, which vanquish all sinful reactions, are celebrated in all directions, like the ornamental cloth of the victorious elephant that conquers all directions. Great saintly persons like Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi still glorify His characteristics in the assemblies of great emperors like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. Similarly, all the saintly kings and all the demigods, including Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā, worship the Lord by bowing down with their helmets. Let me offer my obeisances unto His lotus feet.





TEXT 22



sa yaiḥ spṛṣṭo 'bhidṛṣṭo vā

saṁviṣṭo 'nugato 'pi vā

kosalās te yayuḥ sthānaṁ

yatra gacchanti yoginaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-He, Lord Rāmacandra; yaiḥ-by which persons; spṛṣṭaḥ-touched; abhidṛṣṭaḥ-seen; vā-either; saṁviṣṭaḥ-eating together, lying together; anugataḥ-followed as servants; api vā-even; kosalāḥ-all those inhabitants of Kosala; te-they; yayuḥ-departed; sthānam-to the place; yatra-wherein; gacchanti-they go; yoginaḥ-all the bhakti-yogis.





Lord Rāmacandra returned to His abode, to which bhakti-yogīs are promoted. This is the place to which all the inhabitants of Ayodhyā went after they served the Lord in His manifest pastimes by offering Him obeisances, touching His lotus feet, fully observing Him as a fatherlike King, sitting or lying down with Him like equals, or even just accompanying Him.





The Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." Here this is confirmed. All the inhabitants of Ayodhyā who saw Lord Rāmacandra as citizens, served Him as servants, sat and talked with Him as friends or were somehow or other present during His reign went back home, back to Godhead. After giving up the body, the devotee who becomes perfect in devotional service enters that particular universe where Lord Rāmacandra or Lord Kṛṣṇa is engaged in His pastimes. Then, after being trained to serve the Lord in various capacities in that prakaṭa-līlā, the devotee is finally promoted to sanātana-dhāma, the supreme abode in the spiritual world. This sanātana-dhāma is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā (paras tasmāt tu bhāvo 'nyo'vyakto'vyaktāt sanātanaḥ [Bg. 8.20]). One who enters the transcendental pastimes of the Lord is called nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa. To understand clearly why Lord Rāmacandra returned, it is mentioned herewith that the Lord went to that particular place where the bhakti-yogīs go. The impersonalists misunderstand the statements of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to mean that the Lord entered His own effulgence and therefore become impersonal. But the Lord is a person, and His devotees are persons. Indeed, the living entities, like the Lord, were persons in the past, they are persons in the present, and they will continue to be persons even after giving up the body. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā.





TEXT 23



puruṣo rāma-caritaṁ

śravaṇair upadhārayan

ānṛśaṁsya-paro rājan

karma-bandhair vimucyate

SYNONYMS



puruṣaḥ-any person; rāma-caritam-the narration concerning the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Rāmacandra; śravaṇaiḥ-by aural reception; upadhārayan-simply by this process of hearing; ānṛśaṁsya-paraḥ-becomes completely free from envy; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; karma-bandhaiḥ-by the bondage of fruitive activities; vimucyate-one becomes liberated.





O King Parīkṣit, anyone who aurally receives the narrations concerning the characteristics of Lord Rāmacandra's pastimes will ultimately be freed from the disease of envy and thus be liberated from the bondage of fruitive activities.





Here in this material world, everyone is envious of someone else. Even in religious life, it is sometimes found that if one devotee has advanced in spiritual activities, other devotees are envious of him. Such envious devotees are not completely freed from the bondage of birth and death. As long as one is not completely free from the cause of birth and death, one cannot enter the sanātana-dhāma or the eternal pastimes of the Lord. One becomes envious because of being influenced by the designations of the body, but the liberated devotee has nothing to do with the body, and therefore he is completely on the transcendental platform. A devotee is never envious of anyone, even his enemy. Because the devotee knows that the Lord is his supreme protector, he thinks, "What harm can the so-called enemy do?" Thus a devotee is confident about his protection. The Lord says, ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham: [Bg. 4.11] "According to the proportion of one's surrender unto Me, I respond accordingly." A devotee must therefore be completely free from envy, especially of other devotees. To envy other devotees is a great offense, a vaiṣṇava-aparādha. A devotee who constantly engages in hearing and chanting (śravaṇa-kīrtana) is certainly freed from the disease of envy, and thus he becomes eligible to go back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 24



śrī-rājovāca

kathaṁ sa bhagavān rāmo

bhrātṝn vā svayam ātmanaḥ

tasmin vā te 'nvavartanta

prajāḥ paurāś ca īśvare

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired; katham-how; saḥ-He, the Lord; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; bhrātṝn-unto the brothers (Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna); vā-either; svayam-personally; ātmanaḥ-expansions of His person; tasmin-unto the Lord; vā-either; te-they (all the inhabitants and the brothers); anvavartanta-behaved; prajāḥ-all the inhabitants; paurāḥ-the citizens; ca-and; īśvare-unto the Supreme Lord.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: How did the Lord conduct Himself, and how did He behave in relationship with His brothers, who were expansions of His own self? And how did His brothers and the inhabitants of Ayodhyā treat Him?





TEXT 25



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

athādiśad dig-vijaye

bhrātṝṁs tri-bhuvaneśvaraḥ

ātmānaṁ darśayan svānāṁ

purīm aikṣata sānugaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha-hereafter (when the Lord accepted the throne on the request of Bharata); ādiśat-ordered; dik-vijaye-to conquer all the world; bhrātṝn-His younger brothers; tri-bhuvana-īśvaraḥ-the Lord of the universe; ātmānam-personally, Himself; darśayan-giving audience; svānām-to the family members and the citizens; purīm-the city; aikṣata-supervised; sa-anugaḥ-with other assistants.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied: After accepting the throne of the government by the fervent request of His younger brother Bharata, Lord Rāmacandra ordered His younger brothers to go out and conquer the entire world, while He personally remained in the capital to give audience to all the citizens and residents of the palace and supervise the governmental affairs with His other assistants.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not allow any of His devotees or assistants to be engaged in sense gratification. The younger brothers of Lord Rāmacandra were at home enjoying the personal presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the Lord ordered Them to go out and achieve victory all over the world. It was the custom (and this custom, in some places, is still current) that all other kings would have to accept the supremacy of the emperor. If the king of a small state did not accept the emperor's supremacy, there would be a fight, and the king of the small state would be obliged to accept the emperor as supreme; otherwise, it would not be possible for the emperor to rule the country.



Lord Rāmacandra showed His favor to His brothers by ordering Them to go out. Many of the Lord's devotees residing in Vṛndāvana have taken the vow not to leave Vṛndāvana to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. But the Lord says that Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be spread all over the world, in every village and every town. This is the open order of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma





A pure devotee, therefore, must execute the order of the Lord and must not gratify his senses by remaining stagnant in one place, falsely proud, thinking that because he does not leave Vṛndāvana but chants in a solitary place he has become a great devotee. A devotee must carry out the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa [Cc. Madhya 7.128]. Every devotee, therefore, should spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness by preaching, asking whomever he meets to accept the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord says, sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja: [Bg. 18.66] "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me." This is the order of the Lord, who speaks as the supreme emperor. Everyone should be induced to accept this order, for this is victory (dig-vijaya). And it is the duty of the soldier, the devotee, to impress upon everyone this philosophy of life.



Of course, those who are kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs do not preach, but the Lord shows mercy to them also, as He did by staying personally in Ayodhyā to give audience to the people in general. One should not mistakenly think that the Lord asked His younger brothers to leave Ayodhyā because He especially favored the citizens. The Lord is merciful to everyone, and He knows how to show His favor to each individual person according to his capacity. One who abides by the order of the Lord is a pure devotee.





TEXT 26



āsikta-mārgāṁ gandhodaiḥ

kariṇāṁ mada-śīkaraiḥ

svāminaṁ prāptam ālokya

mattāṁ vā sutarām iva

SYNONYMS



āsikta-mārgām-the streets were sprinkled; gandha-udaiḥ-with perfumed water; kariṇām-of elephants; mada-śīkaraiḥ-with particles of perfumed liquor; svāminam-the master or proprietor; prāptam-present; ālokya-seeing personally; mattām-very opulent; vā-either; sutarām-highly; iva-as if.





During the reign of Lord Rāmacandra, the streets of the capital, Ayodhyā, were sprinkled with perfumed water and drops of perfumed liquor, thrown about by elephants from their trunks. When the citizens saw the Lord personally supervising the affairs of the city in such opulence, they appreciated this opulence very much.





We have simply heard about the opulence of Rāma-rājya during the reign of Lord Rāmacandra. Now, here is one example of the opulence of the Lord's kingdom. The streets of Ayodhyā were not only cleaned but also sprinkled with perfumed water and drops of perfumed liquor, which were distributed by elephants through their trunks. There was no need of sprinkling machines, for the elephant has a natural ability to suck water through its trunk and again throw it out in a shower. We can understand the opulence of the city from this one example: it was actually sprinkled with perfumed water. Moreover, the citizens had the opportunity to see the Lord personally supervising the affairs of the state. He was not a sleeping monarch, as we can understand from His activities in sending His brothers to see to affairs outside the capital and punish anyone who did not obey the emperor's orders. This is called dig-vijaya. The citizens were all given facilities for peaceful life, and they were also qualified with appropriate attributes according to varṇāśrama. As we have seen from the previous chapter, varṇāśrama-guṇānvitāḥ: the citizens were trained according to the varṇāśrama system. A class of men were brāhmaṇas, a class of men were kṣatriyas, a class were vaiśyas, and a class were śūdras. Without this scientific division, there can be no question of good citizenship. The King, being magnanimous and perfect in His duty, performed many sacrifices and treated the citizens as His sons, and the citizens, being trained in the varṇāśrama system, were obedient and perfectly ordered. The entire monarchy was so opulent and peaceful that the government was even able to sprinkle the street with perfumed water, what to speak of other management. Since the city was sprinkled with perfumed water, we can simply imagine how opulent it was in other respects. Why should the citizens not have felt happy during the reign of Lord Rāmacandra.





TEXT 27



prāsāda-gopura-sabhā-

caitya-deva-gṛhādiṣu

vinyasta-hema-kalaśaiḥ

patākābhiś ca maṇḍitām

SYNONYMS



prāsāda-in palaces; gopura-palace gates; sabhā-assembly houses; caitya-raised platforms; deva-gṛha-temples wherein deities are worshiped; ādiṣu-and so on; vinyasta-placed; hema-kalaśaiḥ-with golden waterpots; patākābhiḥ-by flags; ca-also; maṇḍitām-bedecked.





The palaces, the palace gates, the assembly houses, the platforms for meeting places, the temples and all such places were decorated with golden waterpots and bedecked with various types of flags.





TEXT 28



pūgaiḥ savṛntai rambhābhiḥ

paṭṭikābhiḥ suvāsasām

ādarśair aṁśukaiḥ sragbhiḥ

kṛta-kautuka-toraṇām

SYNONYMS



pūgaiḥ-by trees of betel nut; sa-vṛntaiḥ-with bunches of flowers and fruits; rambhābhiḥ-with banana trees; paṭṭikābhiḥ-with flags; su-vāsasām-decorated with colorful cloth; ādarśaiḥ-with mirrors; aṁśukaiḥ-with cloths; sragbhiḥ-with garlands; kṛta-kautuka-made auspicious; toraṇām-possessing reception gates.





Wherever Lord Rāmacandra visited, auspicious welcome gates were constructed, with banana trees and betel nut trees, full of flowers and fruits. The gates were decorated with various flags made of colorful cloth and with tapestries, mirrors and garlands.





TEXT 29



tam upeyus tatra tatra

paurā arhaṇa-pāṇayaḥ

āśiṣo yuyujur deva

pāhīmāṁ prāk tvayoddhṛtām

SYNONYMS



tam-unto Him, Lord Rāmacandra; upeyuḥ-approached; tatra tatra-wherever He visited; paurāḥ-the inhabitants of the neighborhood; arhaṇa-pāṇayaḥ-carrying paraphernalia to worship the Lord; āśiṣaḥ-blessings from the Lord; yuyujuḥ-came down; deva-O my Lord; pāhi-just maintain; imām-this land; prāk-as before; tvayā-by You; uddhṛtām-rescued (from the bottom of the sea in Your incarnation as Varāha).





Wherever Lord Rāmacandra visited, the people approached Him with paraphernalia of worship and begged the Lord's blessings. "O Lord," they said, "as You rescued the earth from the bottom of the sea in Your incarnation as a boar, may You now maintain it. Thus we beg Your blessings."





TEXT 30



tataḥ prajā vīkṣya patiṁ cirāgataṁ

didṛkṣayotsṛṣṭa-gṛhāḥ striyo narāḥ

āruhya harmyāṇy aravinda-locanam

atṛpta-netrāḥ kusumair avākiran

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; prajāḥ-the citizens; vīkṣya-by seeing; patim-the King; cira-āgatam-returned after a long time; didṛkṣayā-desiring to see; utsṛṣṭa-gṛhāḥ-vacating their respective residences; striyaḥ-the women; narāḥ-the men; āruhya-getting on top of; harmyāṇi-great palaces; aravinda-locanam-Lord Rāmacandra, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus; atṛpta-netrāḥ-whose eyes were not fully satisfied; kusumaiḥ-by flowers; avākiran-showered the Lord.





Thereafter, not having seen the Lord for a long time, the citizens, both men and women, being very eager to see Him, left their homes and got up on the roofs of the palaces. Being incompletely satiated with seeing the face of the lotus-eyed Lord Rāmacandra, they showered flowers upon Him.





TEXTS 31–34



atha praviṣṭaḥ sva-gṛhaṁ

juṣṭaṁ svaiḥ pūrva-rājabhiḥ

anantākhila-koṣāḍhyam

anarghyoruparicchadam

vidrumodumbara-dvārair



vaidūrya-stambha-paṅktibhiḥ

sthalair mārakataiḥ svacchair

bhrājat-sphaṭika-bhittibhiḥ

citra-sragbhiḥ paṭṭikābhir



vāso-maṇi-gaṇāṁśukaiḥ

muktā-phalaiś cid-ullāsaiḥ

kānta-kāmopapattibhiḥ

dhūpa-dīpaiḥ surabhibhir



maṇḍitaṁ puṣpa-maṇḍanaiḥ

strī-pumbhiḥ sura-saṅkāśair

juṣṭaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇaiḥ

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; praviṣṭaḥ-He entered; sva-gṛham-His own palace; juṣṭam-occupied; svaiḥ-by His own family members; pūrva-rājabhiḥ-by the previous members of the royal family; ananta-unlimited; akhila-everywhere; koṣa-treasury; āḍhyam-prosperous; anarghya-priceless; uru-high; paricchadam-paraphernalia; vidruma-of coral; udumbara-dvāraiḥ-with the two sides of the doors; vaidūrya-stambha-with pillars of vaidūrya-maṇi; paṅktibhiḥ-in a line; sthalaiḥ-with floors; mārakataiḥ-made of marakata stone; svacchaiḥ-very cleanly polished; bhrājat-dazzling; sphaṭika-marble; bhittibhiḥ-foundations; citra-sragbhiḥ-with varieties of flower garlands; paṭṭikābhiḥ-with flags; vāsaḥ-clothing; maṇi-gaṇa-aṁśukaiḥ-by various effulgent and valuable stones; muktā-phalaiḥ-with pearls; cit-ullāsaiḥ-increasing celestial pleasure; kānta-kāma-fulfilling one's desires; upapattibhiḥ-by such paraphernalia; dhūpa-dīpaiḥ-with incense and lamps; surabhibhiḥ-very fragrant; maṇḍitam-decorated; puṣpa-maṇḍanaiḥ-by bunches of various flowers; strī-pumbhiḥ-by men and women; sura-saṅkāśaiḥ-appearing like the demigods; juṣṭam-full of; bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇaiḥ-whose bodies beautified their ornaments.





Thereafter, Lord Rāmacandra entered the palace of His forefathers. Within the palace were various treasures and valuable wardrobes. The sitting places on the two sides of the entrance door were made of coral, the yards were surrounded by pillars of vaidūrya-maṇi, the floor was made of highly polished marakata-maṇi, and the foundation was made of marble. The entire palace was decorated with flags and garlands and bedecked with valuable stones, shining with a celestial effulgence. The palace was fully decorated with pearls and surrounded by lamps and incense. The men and women within the palace all resembled demigods and were decorated with various ornaments, which seemed beautiful because of being placed on their bodies.





TEXT 35



tasmin sa bhagavān rāmaḥ

snigdhayā priyayeṣṭayā

reme svārāma-dhīrāṇām

ṛṣabhaḥ sītayā kila

SYNONYMS



tasmin-in that celestial palace; saḥ-He; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rāmaḥ-Lord Rāmacandra; snigdhayā-always pleased by her behavior; priyayā iṣṭayā-with His dearmost wife; reme-enjoyed; sva-ārāma-personal pleasure; dhīrāṇām-of the greatest learned persons; ṛṣabhaḥ-the chief; sītayā-with mother Sītā; kila-indeed.





Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, chief of the best learned scholars, resided in that palace with His pleasure potency, mother Sītā, and enjoyed complete peace.





TEXT 36



bubhuje ca yathā-kālaṁ

kāmān dharmam apīḍayan

varṣa-pūgān bahūn nṝṇām

abhidhyātāṅghri-pallavaḥ

SYNONYMS



bubhuje-He enjoyed; ca-also; yathā-kālam-as long as required; kāmān-all enjoyment; dharmam-religious principles; apīḍayan-without transgressing; varṣa-pūgān-duration of years; bahūn-many; nṝṇām-of the people in general; abhidhyāta-being meditated upon; aṅghri-pallavaḥ-His lotus feet.





Without transgressing the religious principles, Lord Rāmacandra, whose lotus feet are worshiped by devotees in meditation, enjoyed with all the paraphernalia of transcendental pleasure for as long as needed.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Lord Rāmacandra Rules the World."



Chapter Twelve



The Dynasty of Kuśa, the Son of Lord Rāmacandra





This chapter describes the dynasty of Kuśa, the son of Lord Rāmacandra. The members of this dynasty are descendants of Saśāda, the son of Mahārāja Ikṣvāku.





Following in the genealogical table of Lord Rāmacandra's dynasty, Kuśa, the Lord's son, was followed consecutively by Atithi, Niṣadha, Nabha, Puṇḍarīka, Kṣemadhanvā, Devānīka, Anīha, Pāriyātra, Balasthala, Vajranābha, Sagaṇa and Vidhṛti. These personalities ruled the world. From Vidhṛti came Hiraṇyanābha, who later became the disciple of Jaimini and propounded the system of mystic yoga in which Yājñavalkya was initiated. Following in this dynasty were Puṣpa, Dhruvasandhi, Sudarśana, Agnivarṇa, Śīghra and Maru. Maru attained full perfection in the practice of yoga, and he still lives in the village of Kalāpa. At the end of this age of Kali, he will revive the dynasty of the sun-god. Next in the dynasty were Prasuśruta, Sandhi, Amarṣaṇa, Mahasvān, Viśvabāhu, Prasenajit, Takṣaka and Bṛhadbala, who was later killed by Abhimanyu. Śukadeva Gosvāmī said that these were all kings who had passed away. The future descendants of Bṛhadbala will be Bṛhadraṇa, Ūrukriya, Vatsavṛddha, Prativyoma, Bhānu, Divāka, Sahadeva, Bṛhadaśva, Bhānumān, Pratīkāśva, Supratīka, Marudeva, Sunakṣatra, Puṣkara, Antarikṣa, Sutapā, Amitrajit, Bṛhadrāja, Barhi, Kṛtañjaya, Raṇañjaya, Sañjaya, Śākya, Śuddhoda, Lāṅgala, Prasenajit, Kṣudraka, Raṇaka, Suratha and Sumitra. All of them will become kings one after another. Sumitra, coming in this age of Kali, will be the last king in the Ikṣvāku dynasty; after him, the dynasty will be extinguished.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

kuśasya cātithis tasmān

niṣadhas tat-suto nabhaḥ

puṇḍarīko 'tha tat-putraḥ

kṣemadhanvābhavat tataḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; kuśasya-of Kuśa, the son of Lord Rāmacandra; ca-also; atithiḥ-Atithi; tasmāt-from him; niṣadhaḥ-Niṣadha; tat-sutaḥ-his son; nabhaḥ-Nabha; puṇḍarīkaḥ-Puṇḍarīka; atha-thereafter; tat-putraḥ-his son; kṣemadhanvā-Kṣemadhanvā; abhavat-became; tataḥ-thereafter.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The son of Rāmacandra was Kuśa, the son of Kuśa was Atithi, the son of Atithi was Niṣadha, and the son of Niṣadha was Nabha. The son of Nabha was Puṇḍarīka, and from Puṇḍarīka came a son named Kṣemadhanvā.





TEXT 2



devānīkas tato 'nīhaḥ

pāriyātro 'tha tat-sutaḥ

tato balasthalas tasmād

vajranābho 'rka-sambhavaḥ

SYNONYMS



devānīkaḥ-Devānīka; tataḥ-from Kṣemadhanvā; anīhaḥ-from Devānīka came the son named Anīha; pāriyātraḥ-Pāriyātra; atha-thereafter; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Anīha; tataḥ-from Pāriyātra; balasthalaḥ-Balasthala; tasmāt-from Balasthala; vajranābhaḥ-Vajranābha; arka-sambhavaḥ-derived from the sun-god.





The son of Kṣemadhanvā was Devānīka, Devānīka's son was Anīha, Anīha's son was Pāriyātra, and Pāriyātra's son was Balasthala. The son of Balasthala was Vajranābha, who was said to have been born from the effulgence of the sun-god.





TEXTS 3–4



sagaṇas tat-sutas tasmād

vidhṛtiś cābhavat sutaḥ

tato hiraṇyanābho 'bhūd

yogācāryas tu jaimineḥ

śiṣyaḥ kauśalya ādhyātmaṁ



yājñavalkyo 'dhyagād yataḥ

yogaṁ mahodayam ṛṣir

hṛdaya-granthi-bhedakam

SYNONYMS



sagaṇaḥ-Sagaṇa; tat-this (Vajranābha's); sutaḥ-son; tasmāt-from him; vidhṛtiḥ-Vidhṛti; ca-also; abhavat-was born; sutaḥ-his son; tataḥ-from him; hiraṇyanābhaḥ-Hiraṇyanābha; abhūt-became; yoga-ācāryaḥ-the propounder of the philosophy of yoga; tu-but; jaimineḥ-because of accepting Jaimini as his spiritual master; śiṣyaḥ-disciple; kauśalyaḥ-Kauśalya; ādhyātmam-spiritual; yājñavalkyaḥ-Yājñavalkya; adhyagāt-studied; yataḥ-from him (Hiraṇyanābha); yogam-the mystic performances; mahā-udayam-highly elevated; ṛṣiḥ-Yājñavalkya Ṛṣi; hṛdaya-granthi-bhedakam-mystic yoga, which can loosen the knots of material attachment in the heart.





The son of Vajranābha was Sagaṇa, and his son was Vidhṛti. The son of Vidhṛti was Hiraṇyanābha, who became a disciple of Jaimini and became a great ācārya of mystic yoga. It is from Hiraṇyanābha that the great saint Yājñavalkya learned the highly elevated system of mystic yoga known as ādhyātma-yoga, which can loosen the knots of material attachment in the heart.





TEXT 5



puṣpo hiraṇyanābhasya

dhruvasandhis tato 'bhavat

sudarśano 'thāgnivarṇaḥ

śīghras tasya maruḥ sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



puṣpaḥ-Puṣpa; hiraṇyanābhasya-the son of Hiraṇyanābha; dhruvasandhiḥ-Dhruvasandhi; tataḥ-from him; abhavat-was born; sudarśanaḥ-from Dhruvasandhi, Sudarśana was born; atha-thereafter; agnivarṇaḥ-Agnivarṇa, the son of Sudarśana; śīghraḥ-Śīghra; tasya-his (Agnivarṇa's); maruḥ-Maru; sutaḥ-son.





The son of Hiraṇyanābha was Puṣpa, and the son of Puṣpa was Dhruvasandhi. The son of Dhruvasandhi was Sudarśana, whose son was Agnivarṇa. The son of Agnivarṇa was named Śīghra, and his son was Maru.





TEXT 6



so 'sāv āste yoga-siddhaḥ

kalāpa-grāmam āsthitaḥ

kaler ante sūrya-vaṁśaṁ

naṣṭaṁ bhāvayitā punaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he; asau-the personality known as Maru; āste-still existing; yoga-siddhaḥ-perfection in the power of mystic yoga; kalāpa-grāmam-the place named Kalāpa-grāma; āsthitaḥ-he is still living there; kaleḥ-of this Kali-yuga; ante-at the end; sūrya-vaṁśam-the descendants of the sun-god; naṣṭam-after being lost; bhāvayitā-Maru will begin by begetting a son; punaḥ-again.





Having achieved perfection in the power of mystic yoga, Maru still lives in a place known as Kalāpa-grāma. At the end of Kali-yuga, he will revive the lost Sūrya dynasty by begetting a son.





At least five thousand years ago, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī ascertained the existence of Maru in Kalāpa-grāma and said that Maru, having achieved a yoga-siddha body, would continue to exist until the end of Kali-yuga, which is calculated to continue for 432,000 years. Such is the perfection of mystic power. By controlling the breath, the perfect yogī can continue his life for as long as he likes. Sometimes we hear from the Vedic literature that some personalities from the Vedic age, such as Vyāsadeva and Aśvatthāmā, are still living. Here we understand that Maru is also still living. We are sometimes surprised that a mortal body can live for such a long time. The explanation of this longevity is given here by the word yoga-siddha. If one becomes perfect in the practice of yoga, he can live as long as he likes. The demonstration of some trifling yoga-siddha does not constitute perfection. Here is a factual example of perfection: a yoga-siddha can live as long as he likes.





TEXT 7



tasmāt prasuśrutas tasya

sandhis tasyāpy amarṣaṇaḥ

mahasvāṁs tat-sutas tasmād

viśvabāhur ajāyata

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from Maru; prasuśrutaḥ-Prasuśruta, his son; tasya-of Prasuśruta; sandhiḥ-a son named Sandhi; tasya-his (Sandhi's); api-also; amarṣaṇaḥ-a son named Amarṣaṇa; mahasvān-the son of Amarṣaṇa; tat-his; sutaḥ-son; tasmāt-from him (Mahasvān); viśvabāhuḥ-Viśvabāhu; ajāyata-took birth.





From Maru was born a son named Prasuśruta, from Prasuśruta came Sandhi, from Sandhi came Amarṣaṇa, and from Amarṣaṇa a son named Mahasvān. From Mahasvān, Viśvabāhu took his birth.





TEXT 8



tataḥ prasenajit tasmāt

takṣako bhavitā punaḥ

tato bṛhadbalo yas tu

pitrā te samare hataḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Viśvabāhu; prasenajit-a son named Prasenajit was born; tasmāt-from him; takṣakaḥ-Takṣaka; bhavitā-would take birth; punaḥ-again; tataḥ-from him; bṛhadbalaḥ-a son named Bṛhadbala; yaḥ-he who; tu-but; pitrā-by father; te-your; samare-in the fight; hataḥ-killed.





From Viśvabāhu came a son named Prasenajit, from Prasenajit came Takṣaka, and from Takṣaka came Bṛhadbala, who was killed in a fight by your father.





TEXT 9



ete hīkṣvāku-bhūpālā

atītāḥ śṛṇv anāgatān

bṛhadbalasya bhavitā

putro nāmnā bṛhadraṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



ete-all of them; hi-indeed; ikṣvāku-bhūpālāḥ-kings in the dynasty of Ikṣvāku; atītāḥ-all of them are dead and gone; śṛṇu-just hear; anāgatān-those who will come in the future; bṛhadbalasya-of Bṛhadbala; bhavitā-there will be; putraḥ-a son; nāmnā-by the name; bṛhadraṇaḥ-Bṛhadraṇa.





All these kings in the dynasty of Ikṣvāku have passed away. Now please listen as I describe the kings who will be born in the future. From Bṛhadbala will come Bṛhadraṇa.





TEXT 10



ūrukriyaḥ sutas tasya

vatsavṛddho bhaviṣyati

prativyomas tato bhānur

divāko vāhinī-patiḥ

SYNONYMS



ūrukriyaḥ-Ūrukriya; sutaḥ-son; tasya-of Ūrukriya; vatsavṛddhaḥ-Vatsavṛddha; bhaviṣyati-will take birth; prativyomaḥ-Prativyoma; tataḥ-from Vatsavṛddha; bhānuḥ-(from Prativyoma) a son named Bhānu; divākaḥ-from Bhānu a son named Divāka; vāhinī-patiḥ-a great commander of soldiers.





The son of Bṛhadraṇa will be Ūrukriya, who will have a son named Vatsavṛddha. Vatsavṛddha will have a son named Prativyoma, and Prativyoma will have a son named Bhānu, from whom Divāka, a great commander of soldiers, will take birth.





TEXT 11



sahadevas tato vīro

bṛhadaśvo 'tha bhānumān

pratīkāśvo bhānumataḥ

supratīko 'tha tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



sahadevaḥ-Sahadeva; tataḥ-from Divāka; vīraḥ-a great hero; bṛhadaśvaḥ-Bṛhadaśva; atha-from him; bhānumān-Bhānumān; pratīkāśvaḥ-Pratīkāśva; bhānumataḥ-from Bhānumān; supratīkaḥ-Supratīka; atha-thereafter; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Pratīkāśva.





Thereafter, from Divāka will come a son named Sahadeva, and from Sahadeva a great hero named Bṛhadaśva. From Bṛhadaśva will come Bhānumān, and from Bhānumān will come Pratīkāśva. The son of Pratīkāśva will be Supratīka.





TEXT 12



bhavitā marudevo 'tha

sunakṣatro 'tha puṣkaraḥ

tasyāntarikṣas tat-putraḥ

sutapās tad amitrajit

SYNONYMS



bhavitā-will be born; marudevaḥ-Marudeva; atha-thereafter; sunakṣatraḥ-Sunakṣatra; atha-thereafter; puṣkaraḥ-Puṣkara, a son of Sunakṣatra; tasya-of Puṣkara; antarikṣaḥ-Antarikṣa; tat-putraḥ-his son; sutapāḥ-Sutapā; tat-from him; amitrajit-a son named Amitrajit.





Thereafter, from Supratīka will come Marudeva; from Marudeva, Sunakṣatra; from Sunakṣatra, Puṣkara; and from Puṣkara, Antarikṣa. The son of Antarikṣa will be Sutapā, and his son will be Amitrajit.





TEXT 13



bṛhadrājas tu tasyāpi

barhis tasmāt kṛtañjayaḥ

raṇañjayas tasya sutaḥ

sañjayo bhavitā tataḥ

SYNONYMS



bṛhadrājaḥ-Bṛhadrāja; tu-but; tasya api-of Amitrajit; barhiḥ-Barhi; tasmāt-from Barhi; kṛtañjayaḥ-Kṛtañjaya; raṇañjayaḥ-Raṇañjaya; tasya-of Kṛtañjaya; sutaḥ-son; sañjayaḥ-Sañjaya; bhavitā-will take birth; tataḥ-from Raṇañjaya.





From Amitrajit will come a son named Bṛhadrāja, from Bṛhadrāja will come Barhi, and from Barhi will come Kṛtañjaya. The son of Kṛtañjaya will be known as Raṇañjaya, and from him will come a son named Sañjaya.





TEXT 14



tasmāc chākyo 'tha śuddhodo

lāṅgalas tat-sutaḥ smṛtaḥ

tataḥ prasenajit tasmāt

kṣudrako bhavitā tataḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from Sañjaya; śākyaḥ-Śākya; atha-thereafter; śuddhodaḥ-Śuddhoda; lāṅgalaḥ-Lāṅgala; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Śuddhoda; smṛtaḥ-is well known; tataḥ-from him; prasenajit-Prasenajit; tasmāt-from Prasenajit; kṣudrakaḥ-Kṣudraka; bhavitā-will take birth; tataḥ-thereafter.





From Sañjaya will come Śākya, from Śākya will come Śuddhoda, and from Śuddhoda will come Lāṅgala. From Lāṅgala will come Prasenajit, and from Prasenajit, Kṣudraka.





TEXT 15



raṇako bhavitā tasmāt

surathas tanayas tataḥ

sumitro nāma niṣṭhānta

ete bārhadbalānvayāḥ

SYNONYMS



raṇakaḥ-Raṇaka; bhavitā-will take birth; tasmāt-from Kṣudraka; surathaḥ-Suratha; tanayaḥ-the son; tataḥ-thereafter; sumitraḥ-Sumitra, the son of Suratha; nāma-by the name; niṣṭha-antaḥ-the end of the dynasty; ete-all the above-mentioned kings; bārhadbala-anvayāḥ-in the dynasty of King Bṛhadbala.





From Kṣudraka will come Raṇaka, from Raṇaka will come Suratha, and from Suratha will come Sumitra, ending the dynasty. This is a description of the dynasty of Bṛhadbala.





TEXT 16



ikṣvākūṇām ayaṁ vaṁśaḥ

sumitrānto bhaviṣyati

yatas taṁ prāpya rājānaṁ

saṁsthāṁ prāpsyati vai kalau

SYNONYMS



ikṣvākūṇām-of the dynasty of King Ikṣvāku; ayam-this (what has been described); vaṁśaḥ-descendants; sumitra-antaḥ-Sumitra being the last king of this dynasty; bhaviṣyati-will appear in the future, while the Kali-yuga still continues; yataḥ-because; tam-him, Mahārāja Sumitra; prāpya-getting; rājānam-as a king in that dynasty; saṁsthām-culmination; prāpsyati-gets; vai-indeed; kalau-at the end of Kali-yuga.





The last king in the dynasty of Ikṣvāku will be Sumitra; after Sumitra there will be no more sons in the dynasty of the sun-god, and thus the dynasty will end.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasty of Kuśa, the Son of Lord Rāmacandra."



Chapter Thirteen



The Dynasty of Mahārāja Nimi





This chapter describes the dynasty in which the great and learned scholar Janaka was born. This is the dynasty of Mahārāja Nimi, who is said to have been the son of Ikṣvāku.





When Mahārāja Nimi began performing great sacrifices, he appointed Vasiṣṭha to be chief priest, but Vasiṣṭha refused, for he had already agreed to be priest in performing a yajña for Lord Indra. Vasiṣṭha therefore requested Mahārāja Nimi to wait until Lord Indra's sacrifice was finished, but Mahārāja Nimi did not wait. He thought, "Life is very short, so there is no need to wait." He therefore appointed another priest to perform the yajña. Vasiṣṭha was very angry at King Nimi and cursed him, saying, "May your body fall down." Cursed in that way, Mahārāja Nimi also became very angry, and he retaliated by saying, "May your body also fall down." As a result of this cursing and countercursing, both of them died. After this incident, Vasiṣṭha took birth again, begotten by Mitra and Varuṇa, who were agitated by Urvaśī.





The priests who were engaged in the sacrifice for King Nimi preserved Nimi's body in fragrant chemicals. When the sacrifice was over, the priests prayed for Nimi's life to all the demigods who had come to the arena of yajña, but Mahārāja Nimi refused to take birth again in a material body because he considered the material body obnoxious. The great sages then churned Nimi's body, and as a result of this churning, Janaka was born.





The son of Janaka was Udāvasu, and the son of Udāvasu was Nandivardhana. The son of Nandivardhana was Suketu, and his descendants continued as follows: Devarāta, Bṛhadratha, Mahāvīrya, Sudhṛti, Dhṛṣṭaketu, Haryaśva, Maru, Pratīpaka, Kṛtaratha, Devamīḍha, Viśruta, Mahādhṛti, Kṛtirāta, Mahāromā, Svarṇaromā, Hrasvaromā and Śīradhvaja. All these sons appeared in the dynasty one after another. From Śīradhvaja, mother Sītādevī was born. Śīradhvaja's son was Kuśadhvaja, and the son of Kuśadhvaja was Dharmadhvaja. The sons of Dharmadhvaja were Kṛtadhvaja and Mitadhvaja. The son of Kṛtadhvaja was Keśidhvaja, and the son of Mitadhvaja was Khāṇḍikya. Keśidhvaja was a self-realized soul, and his son was Bhānumān, whose descendants were as follows: Śatadyumna, Śuci, Sanadvāja, Ūrjaketu, Aja, Purujit, Ariṣṭanemi, Śrutāyu, Supārśvaka, Citraratha, Kṣemādhi, Samaratha, Satyaratha, Upaguru, Upagupta, Vasvananta, Yuyudha, Subhāṣaṇa, Śruta, Jaya, Vijaya, Ṛta, Śunaka, Vītahavya, Dhṛti, Bahulāśva, Kṛti and Mahāvaśī. All of these sons were great self-controlled personalities. This completes the list of the entire dynasty.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

nimir ikṣvāku-tanayo

vasiṣṭham avṛtartvijam

ārabhya satraṁ so 'py āha

śakreṇa prāg vṛto 'smi bhoḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; nimiḥ-King Nimi; ikṣvāku-tanayaḥ-the son of Mahārāja Ikṣvāku; vasiṣṭham-the great sage Vasiṣṭha; avṛta-appointed; ṛtvijam-the chief priest of the sacrifice; ārabhya-beginning; satram-the sacrifice; saḥ-he, Vasiṣṭha; api-also; āha-said; śakreṇa-by Lord Indra; prāk-before; vṛtaḥ asmi-I was appointed; bhoḥ-O Mahārāja Nimi.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After beginning sacrifices, Mahārāja Nimi, the son of Ikṣvāku, requested the great sage Vasiṣṭha to take the post of chief priest. At that time, Vasiṣṭha replied, "My dear Mahārāja Nimi, I have already accepted the same post in a sacrifice begun by Lord Indra.





TEXT 2



taṁ nirvartyāgamiṣyāmi

tāvan māṁ pratipālaya

tūṣṇīm āsīd gṛha-patiḥ

so 'pīndrasyākaron makham

SYNONYMS



tam-that sacrifice; nirvartya-after finishing; āgamiṣyāmi-I shall come back; tāvat-until that time; mām-me (Vasiṣṭha); pratipālaya-wait for; tūṣṇīm-silent; āsīt-remained; gṛha-patiḥ-Mahārāja Nimi; saḥ-he, Vasiṣṭha; api-also; indrasya-of Lord Indra; akarot-executed; makham-the sacrifice.





"I shall return here after finishing the yajña for Indra. Kindly wait for me until then." Mahārāja Nimi remained silent, and Vasiṣṭha began to perform the sacrifice for Lord Indra.





TEXT 3



nimiś calam idaṁ vidvān

satram ārabhatātmavān

ṛtvigbhir aparais tāvan

nāgamad yāvatā guruḥ

SYNONYMS



nimiḥ-Mahārāja Nimi; calam-flickering, subject to end at any moment; idam-this (life); vidvān-being completely aware of this fact; satram-the sacrifice; ārabhata-inaugurated; ātmavān-self-realized person; ṛtvigbhiḥ-by priests; aparaiḥ-other than Vasiṣṭha; tāvat-for the time being; na-not; āgamat-returned; yāvatā-so long; guruḥ-his spiritual master (Vasiṣṭha).





Mahārāja Nimi, being a self-realized soul, considered that this life is flickering. Therefore, instead of waiting long for Vasiṣṭha, he began performing the sacrifice with other priests.





Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says, śarīraṁ kṣaṇa-vidhvāṁsi kalpānta-sthāyino guṇāḥ: "The duration of one's life in the material world may end at any moment, but if within this life one does something worthy, that qualification is depicted in history eternally." Here is a great personality, Mahārāja Nimi, who knew this fact. In the human form of life one should perform activities in such a way that at the end he goes back home, back to Godhead. This is self-realization.





TEXT 4



śiṣya-vyatikramaṁ vīkṣya

taṁ nirvartyāgato guruḥ

aśapat patatād deho

nimeḥ paṇḍita-māninaḥ

SYNONYMS



śiṣya-vyatikramam-the disciple's deviation from the order of the guru; vīkṣya-observing; tam-the performance of yajña by Indra; nirvartya-after finishing; āgataḥ-when he returned; guruḥ-Vasiṣṭha Muni; aśapat-he cursed Nimi Mahārāja; patatāt-may it fall down; dehaḥ-the material body; nimeḥ-of Mahārāja Nimi; paṇḍita-māninaḥ-who considers himself so learned (as to disobey the order of his spiritual master).





After completing the sacrificial performance for King Indra, the spiritual master Vasiṣṭha returned and found that his disciple Mahārāja Nimi had disobeyed his instructions. Thus Vasiṣṭha cursed him, saying, "May the material body of Nimi, who considers himself learned, immediately fall."





TEXT 5



nimiḥ pratidadau śāpaṁ

gurave 'dharma-vartine

tavāpi patatād deho

lobhād dharmam ajānataḥ

SYNONYMS



nimiḥ-Mahārāja Nimi; pratidadau śāpam-countercursed; gurave-unto his spiritual master, Vasiṣṭha; adharma-vartine-who was induced to irreligious principles (because he cursed his offenseless disciple); tava-of you; api-also; patatāt-let it fall; dehaḥ-the body; lobhāt-because of greed; dharmam-religious principles; ajānataḥ-not knowing.





For unnecessarily cursing him when he had committed no offense, Mahārāja Nimi countercursed his spiritual master. "For the sake of getting contributions from the King of heaven," he said, "you have lost your religious intelligence. Therefore I pronounce this curse: your body also will fall."





The religious principle for a brāhmaṇa is that he should not be greedy at all. In this case, however, for the sake of more lucrative remunerations from the King of heaven, Vasiṣṭha neglected Mahārāja Nimi's request on this planet, and when Nimi performed the sacrifices with other priests, Vasiṣṭha unnecessarily cursed him. When one is infected by contaminated activities, his power, material or spiritual, reduces. Although Vasiṣṭha was the spiritual master of Mahārāja Nimi, because of his greed he became fallen.





TEXT 6



ity utsasarja svaṁ dehaṁ

nimir adhyātma-kovidaḥ

mitrā-varuṇayor jajñe

urvaśyāṁ prapitāmahaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; utsasarja-gave up; svam-his own; deham-body; nimiḥ-Mahārāja Nimi; adhyātma-kovidaḥ-fully conversant with spiritual knowledge; mitrā-varuṇayoḥ-from the semen of Mitra and Varuṇa (discharged from seeing the beauty of Urvaśī); jajñe-was born; urvaśyām-through Urvaśī, a prostitute of the heavenly kingdom; prapitāmahaḥ-Vasiṣṭha, who was known as the great-grandfather.





After saying this, Mahārāja Nimi, who was expert in the science of spiritual knowledge, gave up his body. Vasiṣṭha, the great-grandfather, gave up his body also, but through the semen discharged by Mitra and Varuṇa when they saw Urvaśī, he was born again.





Mitra and Varuṇa chanced to meet Urvaśī, the most beautiful prostitute of the heavenly kingdom, and they became lusty. Because they were great saints, they tried to control their lust, but they could not do so, and thus they discharged semen. This semen was kept carefully in a waterpot, and Vasiṣṭha was born from it.





TEXT 7



gandha-vastuṣu tad-dehaṁ

nidhāya muni-sattamāḥ

samāpte satra-yāge ca

devān ūcuḥ samāgatān

SYNONYMS



gandha-vastuṣu-in things very fragrant; tat-deham-the body of Mahārāja Nimi; nidhāya-having preserved; muni-sattamāḥ-all the great sages gathered there; samāpte satra-yāge-at the end of the sacrifice known by the name Satra; ca-also; devān-to all the demigods; ūcuḥ-requested or spoke; samāgatān-who were assembled there.





During the performance of the yajña, the body relinquished by Mahārāja Nimi was preserved in fragrant substances, and at the end of the Satra-yāga the great saints and brāhmaṇas made the following request to all the demigods assembled there.





TEXT 8



rājño jīvatu deho 'yaṁ

prasannāḥ prabhavo yadi

tathety ukte nimiḥ prāha

mā bhūn me deha-bandhanam

SYNONYMS



rājñaḥ-of the King; jīvatu-may again be enlivened; dehaḥ ayam-this body (now preserved); prasannāḥ-very much pleased; prabhavaḥ-all able to do it; yadi-if; tathā-let it be so; iti-thus; ukte-when it was replied (by the demigods); nimiḥ-Mahārāja Nimi; prāha-said; mā bhūt-do not do it; me-my; deha-bandhanam-imprisonment again in a material body.





"If you are satisfied with this sacrifice and if you are actually able to do so, kindly bring Mahārāja Nimi back to life in this body." The demigods said yes to this request by the sages, but Mahārāja Nimi said, "Please do not imprison me again in a material body."





The demigods are in a position many times higher than that of human beings. Therefore, although the great saints and sages were also powerful brāhmaṇas, they requested the demigods to revive Mahārāja Nimi's body, which had been preserved in various perfumed balms. One should not think that the demigods are powerful only in enjoying the senses; they are also powerful in such deeds as bringing life back to a dead body. There are many similar instances in the Vedic literature. For example, according to the history of Sāvitrī and Satyavān, Satyavān died and was being taken away by Yamarāja, but on the request of his wife, Sāvitrī, Satyavān was revived in the same body. This is an important fact about the power of the demigods.





TEXT 9



yasya yogaṁ na vāñchanti

viyoga-bhaya-kātarāḥ

bhajanti caraṇāmbhojaṁ

munayo hari-medhasaḥ

SYNONYMS



yasya-with the body; yogam-contact; na-do not; vāñchanti-jñānīs desire; viyoga-bhaya-kātarāḥ-being afraid of giving up the body again; bhajanti-offer transcendental loving service; caraṇa-ambhojam-to the lotus feet of the Lord; munayaḥ-great saintly persons; hari-medhasaḥ-whose intelligence is always absorbed in thoughts of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Mahārāja Nimi continued: Māyāvādīs generally want freedom from accepting a material body because they fear having to give it up again. But devotees whose intelligence is always filled with the service of the Lord are unafraid. Indeed, they take advantage of the body to render transcendental loving service.





Mahārāja Nimi did not want to accept a material body, which would be a cause of bondage; because he was a devotee, he wanted a body by which he could render devotional service to the Lord. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings:



janmāobi more icchā yadi tora

bhakta-gṛhe jani janma ha-u mora

kīṭa-janma ha-u yathā tuyā dāsa





"My Lord, if You want me to take birth and accept a material body again, kindly do me this favor: allow me to take birth in the home of Your servant, Your devotee. I do not mind being born there even as an insignificant creature like an insect." Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu also said:



na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukyī tvayi





"O Lord of the universe, I do not desire material wealth, materialistic followers, a beautiful wife or fruitive activities described in flowery language. All I want, life after life, is unmotivated devotional service to You." (Śikṣāṣṭaka 4) By saying "life after life" (janmani janmani), the Lord referred not to an ordinary birth but a birth in which to remember the lotus feet of the Lord. Such a body is desirable. A devotee does not think like yogīs and jñānīs, who want to refuse a material body and become one with the impersonal Brahman effulgence. A devotee does not like this idea. On the contrary, he will accept any body, material or spiritual, for he wants to serve the Lord. This is real liberation.



If one has a strong desire to serve the Lord, even if he accepts a material body, there is no cause of anxiety, since a devotee, even in a material body, is a liberated soul. This is confirmed by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:



īhā yasya harer dāsye

karmaṇā manasā girā

nikhilāsv apy avasthāsu

jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate





"A person acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness (or, in other words, in the service of Kṛṣṇa) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person even within the material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called material activities." The desire to serve the Lord establishes one as liberated in any condition of life, whether in a spiritual body or a material body. In a spiritual body the devotee becomes a direct associate of the Lord, but even though a devotee may superficially appear to be in a material body, he is always liberated and is engaged in the same duties of service to the Lord as a devotee in Vaikuṇṭhaloka. There is no distinction. It is said, sādhur jīvo vā maro vā. Whether a devotee is alive or dead, his only concern is to serve the Lord. Tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]. When he gives up his body, he goes directly to become an associate of the Lord and serve Him, although he does the same thing even in a material body in the material world.



For a devotee there is no pain, pleasure or material perfection. One may argue that at the time of death a devotee also suffers because of giving up his material body. But in this connection the example may be given that a cat carries a mouse in its mouth and also carries a kitten in its mouth. Both the mouse and the kitten are carried in the same mouth, but the perception of the mouse is different from that of the kitten. When a devotee gives up his body (tyaktvā deham), he is ready to go back home, back to Godhead. Thus his perception is certainly different from that of a person being taken away by Yamarāja for punishment. A person whose intelligence is always concentrated upon the service of the Lord is unafraid of accepting a material body, whereas a nondevotee, having no engagement in the service of the Lord, is very much afraid of accepting a material body or giving up his present one. Therefore, we should follow the instruction of Caitanya Mahāprabhu: mama janmani janmanīśvare bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi. It doesn't matter whether we accept a material body or a spiritual body; our only ambition should be to serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 10



dehaṁ nāvarurutse 'haṁ

duḥkha-śoka-bhayāvaham

sarvatrāsya yato mṛtyur

matsyānām udake yathā

SYNONYMS



deham-a material body; na-not; avarurutse-desire to accept; aham-I; duḥkha-śoka-bhaya-āvaham-which is the cause of all kinds of distress, lamentation and fear; sarvatra-always and everywhere within this universe; asya-of the living entities who have accepted material bodies; yataḥ-because; mṛtyuḥ-death; matsyānām-of the fish; udake-living within the water; yathā-like.





I do not wish to accept a material body, for such a body is the source of all distress, lamentation and fear, everywhere in the universe, just as it is for a fish in the water, which lives always in anxiety because of fear of death.





The material body, whether in the higher or lower planetary system, is destined to die. In the lower planetary system or lower species of life one may die soon, and in the higher planets or higher species one may live for a long, long time, but death is inevitable. This fact should be understood. In the human form of life one should take the opportunity to put an end to birth, death, old age and disease by performing tapasya. This is the aim of human civilization: to stop the repetition of birth and death, which is called mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani. This can be done only when one is Kṛṣṇa conscious, or has achieved the service of the lotus feet of the Lord. Otherwise one must rot in this material world and accept a material body subject to birth, death, old age and disease.



The example given here is that water is a very nice place for a fish, but the fish is never free from anxiety about death, since big fish are always eager to eat the small fish. phalgūni tatra mahatām: all living entities are eaten by bigger living entities. This is the way of material nature.



ahastāni sahastānām

apadāni catuṣ-padām

phalgūni tatra mahatāṁ

jīvo jīvasya jīvanam





"Those who are devoid of hands are prey for those who have hands; those devoid of legs are prey for the four-legged. The weak are the subsistence of the strong, and the general rule holds that one living being is food for another." (Bhāg. 1.13.47) The Supreme Personality of Godhead has created the material world in such a way that one living entity is food for another. Thus there is a struggle for existence, but although we speak of survival of the fittest, no one can escape death without becoming a devotee of the Lord. Hariṁ vinā naiva sṛtiṁ taranti: one cannot escape the cycle of birth and death without becoming a devotee. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.3). Aprāpya māṁ nivartante mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani. One who does not attain shelter at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa must certainly wander up and down within the cycle of birth and death.





TEXT 11



devā ūcuḥ

videha uṣyatāṁ kāmaṁ

locaneṣu śarīriṇām

unmeṣaṇa-nimeṣābhyāṁ

lakṣito 'dhyātma-saṁsthitaḥ

SYNONYMS



devāḥ ūcuḥ-the demigods said; videhaḥ-without any material body; uṣyatām-you live; kāmam-as you like; locaneṣu-in the vision; śarīriṇām-of those who have material bodies; unmeṣaṇa-nimeṣābhyām-become manifest and unmanifest as you desire; lakṣitaḥ-being seen; adhyātma-saṁsthitaḥ-situated in a spiritual body.





The demigods said: Let Mahārāja Nimi live without a material body. Let him live in a spiritual body as a personal associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and, according to his desire, let him be manifest or unmanifest to common materially embodied people.





The demigods wanted Mahārāja Nimi to come to life, but Mahārāja Nimi did not want to accept another material body. Under the circumstances, the demigods, having been requested by the saintly persons, gave him the benediction that he would be able to stay in his spiritual body. There are two kinds of spiritual bodies, as generally understood by common men. The term "spiritual body" is sometimes taken to refer to a ghostly body. An impious man who dies after sinful activities is sometimes condemned so that he cannot possess a gross material body of five material elements, but must live in a subtle body of mind, intelligence and ego. However, as explained in Bhagavad-gītā, devotees can give up the material body and attain a spiritual body free from all material tinges, gross and subtle (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]). Thus the demigods gave King Nimi the benediction that he would be able to stay in a purely spiritual body, free from all gross and subtle material contamination.



The Supreme Personality of Godhead can be seen or unseen according to His own transcendental desire; similarly, a devotee, being jīvan-mukta, can be seen or not, as he chooses. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ: [Bg. 7.25] the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is not manifest to everyone and anyone. To the common man He is unseen. Ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ: [BRS. 1.2.234] Kṛṣṇa and His name, fame, qualities and paraphernalia cannot be materially understood. Unless one is advanced in spiritual life (sevonmukhe hi jihvādau), one cannot see Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the ability to see Kṛṣṇa depends on Kṛṣṇa's mercy. The same privilege of being seen or unseen according to one's own desire was given to Mahārāja Nimi. Thus he lived in his original, spiritual body as an associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 12



arājaka-bhayaṁ nṝṇāṁ

manyamānā maharṣayaḥ

dehaṁ mamanthuḥ sma nimeḥ

kumāraḥ samajāyata

SYNONYMS



arājaka-bhayam-due to fear of the danger of an unregulated government; nṝṇām-for the people in general; manyamānāḥ-considering this situation; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ-the great sages; deham-the body; mamanthuḥ-churned; sma-in the past; nimeḥ-of Mahārāja Nimi; kumāraḥ-one son; samajāyata-was thus born.





Thereafter, to save the people from the danger of an unregulated government, the sages churned Mahārāja Nimi's material body, from which, as a result, a son was born.





Arājaka-bhayam. If the government is unsteady and unregulated, there is danger of fear for the people. At the present moment this danger always exists because of government by the people. Here we can see that the great sages got a son from Nimi's material body to guide the citizens properly, for such guidance is the duty of a kṣatriya king. A kṣatriya is one who saves the citizens from being injured. In the so-called people's government there is no trained kṣatriya king; as soon as someone strong accumulates votes, he becomes the minister or president, without training from the learned brāhmaṇas expert in the śāstras. Indeed, we see that in some countries the government changes from party to party, and therefore the men in charge of the government are more eager to protect their position than to see that the citizens are happy. The Vedic civilization prefers monarchy. People liked the government of Lord Rāmacandra, the government of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and the governments of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and Mahārāja Prahlāda. There are many instances of excellent government under a monarch. Gradually the democratic government is becoming unfit for the needs of the people, and therefore some parties are trying to elect a dictator. A dictatorship is the same as a monarchy, but without a trained leader. Actually people will be happy when a trained leader, whether a monarch or a dictator, takes control of the government and rules the people according to the standard regulations of the authorized scriptures.





TEXT 13



janmanā janakaḥ so 'bhūd

vaidehas tu videhajaḥ

mithilo mathanāj jāto

mithilā yena nirmitā

SYNONYMS



janmanā-by birth; janakaḥ-born uncommonly, not by the usual process; saḥ-he; abhūt-became; vaidehaḥ-also known as Vaideha; tu-but; videha-jaḥ-because of being born from the body of Mahārāja Nimi, who had left his material body; mithilaḥ-he also became known as Mithila; mathanāt-because of being born from the churning of his father's body; jātaḥ-thus born; mithilā-the kingdom called Mithilā; yena-by whom (Janaka); nirmitā-was constructed.





Because he was born in an unusual way, the son was called Janaka, and because he was born from the dead body of his father, he was known as Vaideha. Because he was born from the churning of his father's material body, he was known as Mithila, and because he constructed a city as King Mithila, the city was called Mithilā.





TEXT 14



tasmād udāvasus tasya

putro 'bhūn nandivardhanaḥ

tataḥ suketus tasyāpi

devarāto mahīpate

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from Mithila; udāvasuḥ-a son named Udāvasu; tasya-of him (Udāvasu); putraḥ-son; abhūt-was born; nandivardhanaḥ-Nandivardhana; tataḥ-from him (Nandivardhana); suketuḥ-a son named Suketu; tasya-of him (Suketu); api-also; devarātaḥ-a son named Devarāta; mahīpate-O King Parīkṣit.





O King Parīkṣit, from Mithila came a son named Udāvasu; from Udāvasu, Nandivardhana; from Nandivardhana, Suketu; and from Suketu, Devarāta.





TEXT 15



tasmād bṛhadrathas tasya

mahāvīryaḥ sudhṛt-pitā

sudhṛter dhṛṣṭaketur vai

haryaśvo 'tha marus tataḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from Devarāta; bṛhadrathaḥ-a son named Bṛhadratha; tasya-of him (Bṛhadratha); mahāvīryaḥ-a son named Mahāvīrya; sudhṛt-pitā-he became the father of King Sudhṛti; sudhṛteḥ-from Sudhṛti; dhṛṣṭaketuḥ-a son named Dhṛṣṭaketu; vai-indeed; haryaśvaḥ-his son was Haryaśva; atha-thereafter; maruḥ-Maru; tataḥ-thereafter.





From Devarāta came a son named Bṛhadratha and from Bṛhadratha a son named Mahāvīrya, who became the father of Sudhṛti. The son of Sudhṛti was known as Dhṛṣṭaketu, and from Dhṛṣṭaketu came Haryaśva. From Haryaśva came a son named Maru.





TEXT 16



maroḥ pratīpakas tasmāj

jātaḥ kṛtaratho yataḥ

devamīḍhas tasya putro

viśruto 'tha mahādhṛtiḥ

SYNONYMS



maroḥ-of Maru; pratīpakaḥ-a son named Pratīpaka; tasmāt-from Pratīpaka; jātaḥ-was born; kṛtarathaḥ-a son named Kṛtaratha; yataḥ-and from Kṛtaratha; devamīḍhaḥ-Devamīḍha; tasya-of Devamīḍha; putraḥ-a son; viśrutaḥ-Viśruta; atha-from him; mahādhṛtiḥ-a son named Mahādhṛti.





The son of Maru was Pratīpaka, and the son of Pratīpaka was Kṛtaratha. From Kṛtaratha came Devamīḍha; from Devamīḍha, Viśruta; and from Viśruta, Mahādhṛti.





TEXT 17



kṛtirātas tatas tasmān

mahāromā ca tat-sutaḥ

svarṇaromā sutas tasya

hrasvaromā vyajāyata

SYNONYMS



kṛtirātaḥ-Kṛtirāta; tataḥ-from Mahādhṛti; tasmāt-from Kṛtirāta; mahāromā-a son named Mahāromā; ca-also; tat-sutaḥ-his son; svarṇaromā-Svarṇaromā; sutaḥ tasya-his son; hrasvaromā-Hrasvaromā; vyajāyata-were all born.





From Mahādhṛti was born a son named Kṛtirāta, from Kṛtirāta was born Mahāromā, from Mahāromā came a son named Svarṇaromā, and from Svarṇaromā came Hrasvaromā.





TEXT 18



tataḥ śīradhvajo jajñe

yajñārthaṁ karṣato mahīm

sītā śīrāgrato jātā

tasmāt śīradhvajaḥ smṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Hrasvaromā; śīradhvajaḥ-a son named Śīradhvaja; jajñe-was born; yajña-artham-for performing sacrifices; karṣataḥ-while plowing the field; mahīm-the earth; sītā-mother Sītā, the wife of Lord Rāmacandra; śīra-agrataḥ-from the front portion of the plow; jātā-was born; tasmāt-therefore; śīradhvajaḥ-was known as Śīradhvaja; smṛtaḥ-celebrated.





From Hrasvaromā came a son named Śīradhvaja [also called Janaka]. When Śīradhvaja was plowing a field, from the front of his plow [śīra] appeared a daughter named Sītādevī, who later became the wife of Lord Rāmacandra. Thus he was known as Śīradhvaja.





TEXT 19



kuśadhvajas tasya putras

tato dharmadhvajo nṛpaḥ

dharmadhvajasya dvau putrau

kṛtadhvaja-mitadhvajau

SYNONYMS



kuśadhvajaḥ-Kuśadhvaja; tasya-of Śīradhvaja; putraḥ-son; tataḥ-from him; dharmadhvajaḥ-Dharmadhvaja; nṛpaḥ-the king; dharmadhvajasya-from this Dharmadhvaja; dvau-two; putrau-sons; kṛtadhvaja-mitadhvajau-Kṛtadhvaja and Mitadhvaja.





The son of Śīradhvaja was Kuśadhvaja, and the son of Kuśadhvaja was King Dharmadhvaja, who had two sons, namely Kṛtadhvaja and Mitadhvaja.





TEXTS 20–21



kṛtadhvajāt keśidhvajaḥ

khāṇḍikyas tu mitadhvajāt

kṛtadhvaja-suto rājann

ātma-vidyā-viśāradaḥ

khāṇḍikyaḥ karma-tattva-jño



bhītaḥ keśidhvajād drutaḥ

bhānumāṁs tasya putro 'bhūc

chatadyumnas tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



kṛtadhvajāt-from Kṛtadhvaja; keśidhvajaḥ-a son named Keśidhvaja; khāṇḍikyaḥ tu-also a son named Khāṇḍikya; mitadhvajāt-from Mitadhvaja; kṛtadhvaja-sutaḥ-the son of Kṛtadhvaja; rājan-O King; ātma-vidyā-viśāradaḥ-expert in transcendental science; khāṇḍikyaḥ-King Khāṇḍikya; karma-tattva-jñaḥ-expert in Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; bhītaḥ-fearing; keśidhvajāt-because of Keśidhvaja; drutaḥ-he fled; bhānumān-Bhānumān; tasya-of Keśidhvaja; putraḥ-son; abhūt-there was; śatadyumnaḥ-Śatadyumna; tu-but; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Bhānumān.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the son of Kṛtadhvaja was Keśidhvaja, and the son of Mitadhvaja was Khāṇḍikya. The son of Kṛtadhvaja was expert in spiritual knowledge, and the son of Mitadhvaja was expert in Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. Khāṇḍikya fled in fear of Keśidhvaja. The son of Keśidhvaja was Bhānumān, and the son of Bhānumān was Śatadyumna.





TEXT 22



śucis tu tanayas tasmāt

sanadvājaḥ suto 'bhavat

ūrjaketuḥ sanadvājād

ajo 'tha purujit sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



śuciḥ-Śuci; tu-but; tanayaḥ-a son; tasmāt-from him; sanadvājaḥ-Sanadvāja; sutaḥ-a son; abhavat-was born; ūrjaketuḥ-Ūrjaketu; sanadvājāt-from Sanadvāja; ajaḥ-Aja; atha-thereafter; purujit-Purujit; sutaḥ-a son.





The son of Śatadyumna was named Śuci. From Śuci, Sanadvāja was born, and from Sanadvāja came a son named Ūrjaketu. The son of Ūrjaketu was Aja, and the son of Aja was Purujit.





TEXT 23



ariṣṭanemis tasyāpi

śrutāyus tat supārśvakaḥ

tataś citraratho yasya

kṣemādhir mithilādhipaḥ

SYNONYMS



ariṣṭanemiḥ-Ariṣṭanemi; tasya api-of Purujit also; śrutāyuḥ-a son named Śrutāyu; tat-and from him; supārśvakaḥ-Supārśvaka; tataḥ-from Supārśvaka; citrarathaḥ-Citraratha; yasya-of whom (Citraratha); kṣemādhiḥ-Kṣemādhi; mithilā-adhipaḥ-became the king of Mithilā.





The son of Purujit was Ariṣṭanemi, and his son was Śrutāyu. Śrutāyu begot a son named Supārśvaka, and Supārśvaka begot Citraratha. The son of Citraratha was Kṣemādhi, who became the king of Mithilā.





TEXT 24



tasmāt samarathas tasya

sutaḥ satyarathas tataḥ

āsīd upagurus tasmād

upagupto 'gni-sambhavaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from Kṣemādhi; samarathaḥ-a son named Samaratha; tasya-from Samaratha; sutaḥ-son; satyarathaḥ-Satyaratha; tataḥ-from him (Satyaratha); āsīt-was born; upaguruḥ-Upaguru; tasmāt-from him; upaguptaḥ-Upagupta; agni-sambhavaḥ-a partial expansion of the demigod Agni.





The son of Kṣemādhi was Samaratha, and his son was Satyaratha. The son of Satyaratha was Upaguru, and the son of Upaguru was Upagupta, a partial expansion of the fire-god.





TEXT 25



vasvananto 'tha tat-putro

yuyudho yat subhāṣaṇaḥ

śrutas tato jayas tasmād

vijayo 'smād ṛtaḥ sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



vasvanantaḥ-Vasvananta; atha-thereafter (the son of Upagupta); tat-putraḥ-his son; yuyudhaḥ-by the name Yuyudha; yat-from Yuyudha; subhāṣaṇaḥ-a son named Subhāṣaṇa; śrutaḥ tataḥ-and the son of Subhāṣaṇa was Śruta; jayaḥ tasmāt-the son of Śruta was Jaya; vijayaḥ-a son named Vijaya; asmāt-from Jaya; ṛtaḥ-Ṛta; sutaḥ-a son.





The son of Upagupta was Vasvananta, the son of Vasvananta was Yuyudha, the son of Yuyudha was Subhāṣaṇa, and the son of Subhāṣaṇa was Śruta. The son of Śruta was Jaya, from whom there came Vijaya. The son of Vijaya was Ṛta.





TEXT 26



śunakas tat-suto jajñe

vītahavyo dhṛtis tataḥ

bahulāśvo dhṛtes tasya

kṛtir asya mahāvaśī

SYNONYMS



śunakaḥ-Śunaka; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Ṛta; jajñe-was born; vītahavyaḥ-Vītahavya; dhṛtiḥ-Dhṛti; tataḥ-the son of Vītahavya; bahulāśvaḥ-Bahulāśva; dhṛteḥ-from Dhṛti; tasya-his son; kṛtiḥ-Kṛti; asya-of Kṛti; mahāvaśī-there was a son named Mahāvaśī.





The son of Ṛta was Śunaka, the son of Śunaka was Vītahavya, the son of Vītahavya was Dhṛti, and the son of Dhṛti was Bahulāśva. The son of Bahulāśva was Kṛti, and his son was Mahāvaśī.





TEXT 27



ete vai maithilā rājann

ātma-vidyā-viśāradāḥ

yogeśvara-prasādena

dvandvair muktā gṛheṣv api

SYNONYMS



ete-all of them; vai-indeed; maithilāḥ-the descendants of Mithila; rājan-O King; ātma-vidyā-viśāradāḥ-expert in spiritual knowledge; yogeśvara-prasādena-by the grace of Yogeśvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; dvandvaiḥ muktāḥ-they were all freed from the duality of the material world; gṛheṣu api-even though staying at home.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King Parīkṣit, all the kings of the dynasty of Mithila were completely in knowledge of their spiritual identity. Therefore, even though staying at home, they were liberated from the duality of material existence.





This material world is called dvaita, or duality. The Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya 4.176) says:



'dvaite 'bhadrābhadra-jñāna, saba--'manodharma'

'ei bhāla, ei manda,'--ei saba 'bhrama'





In the world of duality-that is to say, in the material world-so-called goodness and badness are both the same. Therefore, in this world, to distinguish between good and bad, happiness and distress, is meaningless because they are both mental concoctions (manodharma). Because everything here is miserable and troublesome, to create an artificial situation and pretend it to be full of happiness is simply illusion. The liberated person, being above the influence of the three modes of material nature, is unaffected by such dualities in all circumstances. He remains Kṛṣṇa conscious by tolerating so-called happiness and distress. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (2.14):



mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkhadāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata





"O son of Kuntī, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." Those who are liberated, being on the transcendental platform of rendering service to the Lord, do not care about so-called happiness and distress. They know that these are like changing seasons, which are perceivable by contact with the material body. Happiness and distress come and go. Therefore a paṇḍita, a learned man, is not concerned with them. As it is said, gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ. The body is dead from the very beginning because it is a lump of matter. It has no feelings of happiness and distress. Because the soul within the body is in the bodily concept of life, he suffers happiness and distress, but these come and go. It is understood herewith that the kings born in the dynasty of Mithila were all liberated persons, unaffected by the so-called happiness and distress of this world.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasty of Mahārāja Nimi."



Chapter Fourteen



King Purūravā Enchanted by Urvaśī





The summary of this Fourteenth Chapter is given as follows. This chapter describes Soma and how he kidnapped the wife of Bṛhaspati and begot in her womb a son named Budha. Budha begot Purūravā, who begot six sons, headed by Āyu, in the womb of Urvaśī.





Lord Brahmā was born from the lotus that sprouted from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Brahmā had a son named Atri, and Atri's son was Soma, the king of all drugs and stars. Soma became the conqueror of the entire universe, and, being inflated with pride, he kidnapped Tārā, who was the wife of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods. A great fight ensued between the demigods and the asuras, but Brahmā rescued Bṛhaspati's wife from the clutches of Soma and returned her to her husband, thus stopping the fighting. In the womb of Tārā, Soma begot a son named Budha, who later begot in the womb of Ilā a son named Aila, or Purūravā. Urvaśī was captivated by Purūravā's beauty, and therefore she lived with him for some time, but when she left his company he became almost like a madman. While traveling all over the world, he met Urvaśī again at Kurukṣetra, but she agreed to join with him for only one night in a year.





One year later, Purūravā saw Urvaśī at Kurukṣetra and was glad to be with her for one night, but when he thought of her leaving him again, he was overwhelmed by grief. Urvaśī then advised Purūravā to worship the Gandharvas. Being satisfied with Purūravā, the Gandharvas gave him a woman known as Agnisthālī. Purūravā mistook Agnisthālī for Urvaśī, but while he was wandering in the forest his misunderstanding was cleared, and he immediately gave up her company. After returning home and meditating upon Urvaśī all night, he wanted to perform a Vedic ritualistic ceremony to satisfy his desire. Thereafter he went to the same place where he had left Agnisthālī, and there he saw that from the womb of a śamī tree had come an aśvattha tree. Purūravā made two sticks from this tree and thus produced a fire. By such a fire one can satisfy all lusty desires. The fire was considered the son of Purūravā. In Satya-yuga there was only one social division, called haṁsa; there were no divisions of varṇa like brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. The Veda was the oṁkāra. The various demigods were not worshiped, for only the Supreme Personality of Godhead was the worshipable Deity.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

athātaḥ śrūyatāṁ rājan

vaṁśaḥ somasya pāvanaḥ

yasminn ailādayo bhūpāḥ

kīrtyante puṇya-kīrtayaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha-now (after hearing the history of the dynasty of the sun); ataḥ-therefore; śrūyatām-just hear from me; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty; somasya-of the moon-god; pāvanaḥ-which is purifying to hear about; yasmin-in which (dynasty); aila-ādayaḥ-headed by Aila (Purūravā); bhūpāḥ-kings; kīrtyante-are described; puṇya-kīrtayaḥ-persons of whom it is glorious to hear.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: O King, thus far you have heard the description of the dynasty of the sun-god. Now hear the most glorious and purifying description of the dynasty of the moon-god. This description mentions kings like Aila [Purūravā] of whom it is glorious to hear.





TEXT 2



sahasra-śirasaḥ puṁso

nābhi-hrada-saroruhāt

jātasyāsīt suto dhātur

atriḥ pitṛ-samo guṇaiḥ

SYNONYMS



sahasra-śirasaḥ-who has thousands of heads; puṁsaḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu (Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu); nābhi-hrada-saroruhāt-from the lotus produced from the lake of the navel; jātasya-who appeared; āsīt-there was; sutaḥ-a son; dhātuḥ-of Lord Brahmā; atriḥ-by the name Atri; pitṛ-samaḥ-like his father; guṇaiḥ-qualified.





Lord Viṣṇu [Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu] is also known as Sahasra-śīrṣā Puruṣa. From the lake of His navel sprang a lotus, on which Lord Brahmā was generated. Atri, the son of Lord Brahmā, was as qualified as his father.





TEXT 3



tasya dṛgbhyo 'bhavat putraḥ

somo 'mṛtamayaḥ kila

viprauṣadhy-uḍu-gaṇānāṁ

brahmaṇā kalpitaḥ patiḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him, Atri, the son of Brahmā; dṛgbhyaḥ-from the tears of jubilation from the eyes; abhavat-was born; putraḥ-a son; somaḥ-the moon-god; amṛta-mayaḥ-full of soothing rays; kila-indeed; vipra-of the brāhmaṇas; oṣadhi-of the drugs; uḍu-gaṇānām-and of the luminaries; brahmaṇā-by Lord Brahmā; kalpitaḥ-was appointed or designated; patiḥ-the supreme director.





From Atri's tears of jubilation was born a son named Soma, the moon, who was full of soothing rays. Lord Brahmā appointed him the director of the brāhmaṇas, drugs and luminaries.





According to the Vedic description, Soma, the moon-god, was born from the mind of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (candramā manaso jātaḥ). But here we find that Soma was born from the tears in the eyes of Atri. This appears contradictory to the Vedic information, but actually it is not, for this birth of the moon is understood to have taken place in another millennium. When tears appear in the eyes because of jubilation, the tears are soothing. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, dṛgbhya ānandāśrubhya ata evāmṛtamayaḥ: "Here the word dṛgbhyaḥ means 'from tears of jubilation.' Therefore the moon-god is called amṛtamayaḥ, 'full of soothing rays.' " In the Fourth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.1.15) we find this verse:



atreḥ patny anasūyā trīñ

jajñe suyaśasaḥ sutān

dattaṁ durvāsasaṁ somam

ātmeśa-brahma-sambhavān





This verse describes that Anasūyā, the wife of Atri Ṛṣi, bore three sons-Soma, Durvāsā and Dattātreya. It is said that at the time of conception Anasūyā was impregnated by the tears of Atri.





TEXT 4



so 'yajad rājasūyena

vijitya bhuvana-trayam

patnīṁ bṛhaspater darpāt

tārāṁ nāmāharad balāt

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Soma; ayajat-performed; rājasūyena-the sacrifice known as Rājasūya; vijitya-after conquering; bhuvana-trayam-the three worlds (Svarga, Martya and Pātāla); patnīm-the wife; bṛhaspateḥ-of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods; darpāt-out of pride; tārām-Tārā; nāma-by name; aharat-took away; balāt-by force.





After conquering the three worlds [the upper, middle and lower planetary systems], Soma, the moon-god, performed a great sacrifice known as the Rājasūya-yajña. Because he was very much puffed up, he forcibly kidnapped Bṛhaspati's wife, whose name was Tārā.





TEXT 5



yadā sa deva-guruṇā

yācito 'bhīkṣṇaśo madāt

nātyajat tat-kṛte jajñe

sura-dānava-vigrahaḥ

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; saḥ-he (Soma, the moon-god); deva-guruṇā-by the spiritual master of the demigods, Bṛhaspati; yācitaḥ-was begged; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ-again and again; madāt-because of false pride; na-not; atyajat-did deliver; tat-kṛte-because of this; jajñe-there was; sura-dānava-between the demigods and the demons; vigrahaḥ-a fight.





Although requested again and again by Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, Soma did not return Tārā. This was due to his false pride. Consequently, a fight ensued between the demigods and the demons.





TEXT 6



śukro bṛhaspater dveṣād

agrahīt sāsuroḍupam

haro guru-sutaṁ snehāt

sarva-bhūta-gaṇāvṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



śukraḥ-the demigod named Śukra; bṛhaspateḥ-unto Bṛhaspati; dveṣāt-because of enmity; agrahīt-took; sa-asura-with the demons; uḍupam-the side of the moon-god; haraḥ-Lord Śiva; guru-sutam-the side of his spiritual master's son; snehāt-because of affection; sarva-bhūta-gaṇa-āvṛtaḥ-accompanied by all kinds of ghosts and hobgoblins.





Because of enmity between Bṛhaspati and Śukra, Śukra took the side of the moon-god and was joined by the demons. But Lord Śiva, because of affection for the son of his spiritual master, joined the side of Bṛhaspati and was accompanied by all the ghosts and hobgoblins.





The moon-god is one of the demigods, but to fight against the other demigods he took the assistance of the demons. Śukra, being an enemy of Bṛhaspati, also joined the moon-god to retaliate in wrath against Bṛhaspati. To counteract this situation, Lord Śiva, who was affectionate toward Bṛhaspati, joined Bṛhaspati. The father of Bṛhaspati was Aṅgirā, from whom Lord Śiva had received knowledge. Therefore Lord Śiva had some affection for Bṛhaspati and joined his side in this fight. Śrīdhara Svāmī remarks, aṅgirasaḥ sakāśāt prāpta-vidyo hara iti prasiddhaḥ: "Lord Śiva is well known to have received knowledge from Aṅgirā."





TEXT 7



sarva-deva-gaṇopeto

mahendro gurum anvayāt

surāsura-vināśo 'bhūt

samaras tārakāmayaḥ

SYNONYMS



sarva-deva-gaṇa-by all the different demigods; upetaḥ-joined; mahendraḥ-Mahendra, the King of heaven, Indra; gurum-his spiritual master; anvayāt-followed; sura-of the demigods; asura-and of the demons; vināśaḥ-causing destruction; abhūt-there was; samaraḥ-a fight; tārakā-mayaḥ-simply because of Tārā, a woman, the wife of Bṛhaspati.





King Indra, accompanied by all kinds of demigods, joined the side of Bṛhaspati. Thus there was a great fight, destroying both demons and demigods, only for the sake of Tārā, Bṛhaspati's wife.





TEXT 8



nivedito 'thāṅgirasā

somaṁ nirbhartsya viśva-kṛt

tārāṁ sva-bhartre prāyacchad

antarvatnīm avait patiḥ

SYNONYMS



niveditaḥ-being fully informed; atha-thus; aṅgirasā-by Aṅgirā Muni; somam-the moon-god; nirbhartsya-chastising severely; viśva-kṛt-Lord Brahmā; tārām-Tārā, the wife of Bṛhaspati; sva-bhartre-unto her husband; prāyacchat-delivered; antarvatnīm-pregnant; avait-could understand; patiḥ-the husband (Bṛhaspati).





When Lord Brahmā was fully informed by Aṅgirā about the entire incident, he severely chastised the moon-god, Soma. Thus Lord Brahmā delivered Tārā to her husband, who could then understand that she was pregnant.





TEXT 9



tyaja tyajāśu duṣprajñe

mat-kṣetrād āhitaṁ paraiḥ

nāhaṁ tvāṁ bhasmasāt kuryāṁ

striyaṁ sāntānike 'sati

SYNONYMS



tyaja-deliver; tyaja-deliver; āśu-immediately; duṣprajñe-you foolish woman; mat-kṣetrāt-from the womb meant for me to impregnate; āhitam-begotten; paraiḥ-by others; na-not; aham-I; tvām-you; bhasmasāt-burnt to ashes; kuryām-shall make; striyam-because you are a woman; sāntānike-wanting a child; asati-although you are unchaste.





Bṛhaspati said: You foolish woman, your womb, which was meant for me to impregnate, has been impregnated by someone other than me. Immediately deliver your child! Immediately deliver it! Be assured that after the child is delivered, I shall not burn you to ashes. I know that although you are unchaste, you wanted a son. Therefore I shall not punish you.





Tārā was married to Bṛhaspati, and therefore as a chaste woman she should have been impregnated by him. But instead she preferred to be impregnated by Soma, the moon-god, and therefore she was unchaste. Although Bṛhaspati accepted Tārā from Brahmā, when he saw that she was pregnant he wanted her to deliver a son immediately. Tārā certainly very much feared her husband, and she thought she might be punished after giving birth. Thus Bṛhaspati assured her that he would not punish her, for although she was unchaste and had become pregnant illicitly, she wanted a son.





TEXT 10



tatyāja vrīḍitā tārā

kumāraṁ kanaka-prabham

spṛhām āṅgirasaś cakre

kumāre soma eva ca

SYNONYMS



tatyāja-gave delivery; vrīḍitā-being very much ashamed; tārā-Tārā, the wife of Bṛhaspati; kumāram-to a child; kanaka-prabham-having a bodily effulgence like gold; spṛhām-aspiration; āṅgirasaḥ-Bṛhaspati; cakre-made; kumāre-unto the child; somaḥ-the moon-god; eva-indeed; ca-also.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: By Bṛhaspati's order, Tārā, who was very much ashamed, immediately gave birth to the child, who was very beautiful, with a golden bodily hue. Both Bṛhaspati and the moon-god, Soma, desired the beautiful child.





TEXT 11



mamāyaṁ na tavety uccais

tasmin vivadamānayoḥ

papracchur ṛṣayo devā

naivoce vrīḍitā tu sā

SYNONYMS



mama-mine; ayam-this (child); na-not; tava-yours; iti-thus; uccaiḥ-very loudly; tasmin-for the child; vivadamānayoḥ-when the two parties were fighting; papracchuḥ-inquired (from Tārā); ṛṣayaḥ-all the saintly persons; devāḥ-all the demigods; na-not; eva-indeed; uce-said anything; vrīḍitā-being ashamed; tu-indeed; sā-Tārā.





Fighting again broke out between Bṛhaspati and the moon-god, both of whom claimed, "This is my child, not yours!" All the saints and demigods present asked Tārā whose child the newborn baby actually was, but because she was ashamed she could not immediately answer.





TEXT 12



kumāro mātaraṁ prāha

kupito 'līka-lajjayā

kiṁ na vacasy asad-vṛtte

ātmāvadyaṁ vadāśu me

SYNONYMS



kumāraḥ-the child; mātaram-unto his mother; prāha-said; kupitaḥ-being very angry; alīka-unnecessary; lajjayā-with shame; kim-why; na-not; vacasi-you say; asat-vṛtte-O unchaste woman; ātma-avadyam-the fault you have committed; vada-say; āśu-immediately; me-unto me.





The child then became very angry and demanded that his mother immediately tell the truth. "You unchaste woman," he said, "what is the use of your unnecessary shame? Why do you not admit your fault? Immediately tell me about your faulty behavior."





TEXT 13



brahmā tāṁ raha āhūya

samaprākṣīc ca sāntvayan

somasyety āha śanakaiḥ

somas taṁ tāvad agrahīt

SYNONYMS



brahmā-Lord Brahmā; tām-unto her, Tārā; rahaḥ-in a secluded place; āhūya-putting her; samaprākṣīt-inquired in detail; ca-and; sāntvayan-pacifying; somasya-this son belongs to Soma, the moon-god; iti-thus; āha-she replied; śanakaiḥ-very slowly; somaḥ-Soma; tam-the child; tāvat-immediately; agrahīt-took charge of.





Lord Brahmā then brought Tārā to a secluded place, and after pacifying her he asked to whom the child actually belonged. She replied very slowly, "This is the son of Soma, the moon-god." Then the moon-god immediately took charge of the child.





TEXT 14



tasyātma-yonir akṛta

budha ity abhidhāṁ nṛpa

buddhyā gambhīrayā yena

putreṇāpoḍurāṇ mudam

SYNONYMS



tasya-of the child; ātma-yoniḥ-Lord Brahmā; akṛta-made; budhaḥ-Budha; iti-thus; abhidhām-the name; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; buddhyā-by intelligence; gambhīrayā-very deeply situated; yena-by whom; putreṇa-by such a son; āpa-he got; uḍurāṭ-the moon-god; mudam-jubilation.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, when Lord Brahmā saw that the child was deeply intelligent, he gave the child the name Budha. The moon-god, the ruler of the stars, enjoyed great jubilation because of this son.





TEXTS 15–16



tataḥ purūravā jajñe

ilāyāṁ ya udāhṛtaḥ

tasya rūpa-guṇaudārya-

śīla-draviṇa-vikramān

śrutvorvaśīndra-bhavane



gīyamānān surarṣiṇā

tad-antikam upeyāya

devī smara-śarārditā

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from him (Budha); purūravāḥ-the son named Purūravā; jajñe-was born; ilāyām-in the womb of Ilā; yaḥ-one who; udāhṛtaḥ-has already been described (in the beginning of the Ninth Canto); tasya-his (Purūravā's); rūpa-beauty; guṇa-qualities; audārya-magnanimity; śīla-behavior; draviṇa-wealth; vikramān-power; śrutvā-by hearing; urvaśī-the celestial woman named Urvaśī; indra-bhavane-in the court of King Indra; gīyamānān-when they were being described; sura-ṛṣiṇā-by Nārada; tat-antikam-near him; upeyāya-approached; devī-Urvaśī; smara-śara-by the arrows of Cupid; arditā-being stricken.





Thereafter, from Budha, through the womb of Ilā, a son was born named Purūravā, who was described in the beginning of the Ninth Canto. When his beauty, personal qualities, magnanimity, behavior, wealth and power were described by Nārada in the court of Lord Indra, the celestial woman Urvaśī was attracted to him. Pierced by the arrow of Cupid, she thus approached him.





TEXTS 17–18



mitrā-varuṇayoḥ śāpād

āpannā nara-lokatām

niśamya puruṣa-śreṣṭhaṁ

kandarpam iva rūpiṇam

dhṛtiṁ viṣṭabhya lalanā



upatasthe tad-antike

sa tāṁ vilokya nṛpatir

harṣeṇotphulla-locanaḥ

uvāca ślakṣṇayā vācā

devīṁ hṛṣṭa-tanūruhaḥ

SYNONYMS



mitrā-varuṇayoḥ-of Mitra and Varuṇa; śāpāt-by the curse; āpannā-having obtained; nara-lokatām-the habits of a human being; niśamya-thus seeing; puruṣa-śreṣṭham-the best of males; kandarpam iva-like Cupid; rūpiṇam-having beauty; dhṛtim-patience, forbearance; viṣṭabhya-accepting; lalanā-that woman; upatasthe-approached; tat-antike-near to him; saḥ-he, Purūravā; tām-her; vilokya-by seeing; nṛpatiḥ-the King; harṣeṇa-with great jubilation; utphulla-locanaḥ-whose eyes became very bright; uvāca-said; ślakṣṇayā-very mild; vācā-by words; devīm-unto the demigoddess; hṛṣṭa-tanūruhaḥ-the hairs on whose body were standing in jubilation.





Having been cursed by Mitra and Varuṇa, the celestial woman Urvaśī had acquired the habits of a human being. Therefore, upon seeing Purūravā, the best of males, whose beauty resembled that of Cupid, she controlled herself and then approached him. When King Purūravā saw Urvaśī, his eyes became jubilant in the ecstasy of joy, and the hairs on his body stood on end. With mild, pleasing words, he spoke to her as follows.





TEXT 19



śrī-rājovāca

svāgataṁ te varārohe

āsyatāṁ karavāma kim

saṁramasva mayā sākaṁ

ratir nau śāśvatīḥ samāḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-the King (Purūravā) said; svāgatam-welcome; te-unto you; varārohe-O best of beautiful women; āsyatām-kindly take your seat; karavāma kim-what can I do for you; saṁramasva-just become my companion; mayā sākam-with me; ratiḥ-a sexual relationship; nau-between us; śāśvatīḥ samāḥ-for many years.





King Purūravā said: O most beautiful woman, you are welcome. Please sit here and tell me what I can do for you. You may enjoy with me as long as you desire. Let us pass our life happily in a sexual relationship.





TEXT 20



urvaśy uvāca

kasyās tvayi na sajjeta

mano dṛṣṭiś ca sundara

yad-aṅgāntaram āsādya

cyavate ha riraṁsayā

SYNONYMS



urvaśī uvāca-Urvaśī replied; kasyāḥ-of which woman; tvayi-unto you; na-not; sajjeta-would become attracted; manaḥ-the mind; dṛṣṭiḥ ca-and sight; sundara-O most beautiful man; yat-aṅgāntaram-whose chest; āsādya-enjoying; cyavate-gives up; ha-indeed; riraṁsayā-for sexual enjoyment.





Urvaśī replied: O most handsome man, who is the woman whose mind and sight would not be attracted by you? If a woman takes shelter of your chest, she cannot refuse to enjoy with you in a sexual relationship.





When a beautiful man and a beautiful woman unite together and embrace one another, how within these three worlds can they check their sexual relationship? Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.45) says, yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham.





TEXT 21



etāv uraṇakau rājan

nyāsau rakṣasva mānada

saṁraṁsye bhavatā sākaṁ

ślāghyaḥ strīṇāṁ varaḥ smṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



etau-to these two; uraṇakau-lambs; rājan-O King Purūravā; nyāsau-who have fallen down; rakṣasva-please give protection; māna-da-O one who gives all honor to a guest or visitor; saṁraṁsye-I shall enjoy sexual union; bhavatā sākam-in your company; ślāghyaḥ-superior; strīṇām-of a woman; varaḥ-husband; smṛtaḥ-it is said.





My dear King Purūravā, please give protection to these two lambs, who have fallen down with me. Although I belong to the heavenly planets and you belong to earth, I shall certainly enjoy sexual union with you. I have no objection to accepting you as my husband, for you are superior in every respect.





As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.40), yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam. There are various planets and various atmospheres within this universe. The atmosphere of the heavenly planet from which Urvaśī descended after being cursed by Mitra and Varuṇa was different from the atmosphere of this earth. Indeed, the inhabitants of the heavenly planets are certainly far superior to the inhabitants of earth. Nonetheless, Urvaśī agreed to remain the consort of Purūravā, although she belonged to a superior community. A woman who finds a man with superior qualities may accept such a man as her husband. Similarly, if a man finds a woman who is from an inferior family but who has good qualities, he can accept such a brilliant wife, as advised by Śrī Cāṇakya Paṇḍita (strī-ratnaṁ duṣkulād api). The combination of male and female is worthwhile if the qualities of both are on an equal level.





TEXT 22



ghṛtaṁ me vīra bhakṣyaṁ syān

nekṣe tvānyatra maithunāt

vivāsasaṁ tat tatheti

pratipede mahāmanāḥ

SYNONYMS



ghṛtam-clarified butter or nectar; me-my; vīra-O hero; bhakṣyam-eatable; syāt-shall be; na-not; īkṣe-I shall see; tvā-you; anyatra-any other time; maithunāt-except at the time of sexual intercourse; vivāsasam-without any dress (naked); tat-that; tathā iti-shall be like that; pratipede-promised; mahāmanāḥ-King Purūravā.





Urvaśī said: "My dear hero, only preparations made in ghee [clarified butter] will be my eatables, and I shall not want to see you naked at any time, except at the time of sexual intercourse." The great-minded King Purūravā accepted these proposals.





TEXT 23



aho rūpam aho bhāvo

nara-loka-vimohanam

ko na seveta manujo

devīṁ tvāṁ svayam āgatām

SYNONYMS



aho-wonderful; rūpam-beauty; aho-wonderful; bhāvaḥ-postures; nara-loka-in human society or on the planet earth; vimohanam-so attractive; kaḥ-who; na-not; seveta-can accept; manujaḥ-among human beings; devīm-a demigoddess; tvām-like you; svayam āgatām-who has personally arrived.





Purūravā replied: O beautiful one, your beauty is wonderful and your gestures are also wonderful. Indeed, you are attractive to all human society. Therefore, since you have come of your own accord from the heavenly planets, who on earth would not agree to serve a demigoddess such as you.





It appears from the words of Urvaśī that the standard of living, eating, behavior and speech are all different on the heavenly planets from the standards on this planet earth. The inhabitants of the heavenly planets do not eat such abominable things as meat and eggs; everything they eat is prepared in clarified butter. Nor do they like to see either men or women naked, except at the time of sexual intercourse. To live naked or almost naked is uncivilized, but on this planet earth it has now become fashionable to dress half naked, and sometimes those like hippies live completely naked. Indeed, there are many clubs and societies for this purpose. Such conduct is not allowed, however, on the heavenly planets. The inhabitants of the heavenly planets, aside from being very beautiful, both in complexion and bodily features, are well behaved and long-living, and they eat first-class food in goodness. These are some of the distinctions between the inhabitants of the heavenly planets and the inhabitants of earth.





TEXT 24



tayā sa puruṣa-śreṣṭho

ramayantyā yathārhataḥ

reme sura-vihāreṣu

kāmaṁ caitrarathādiṣu

SYNONYMS



tayā-with her; saḥ-he; puruṣa-śreṣṭhaḥ-the best of human beings (Purūravā); ramayantyā-enjoying; yathā-arhataḥ-as far as possible; reme-enjoyed; sura-vihāreṣu-in places resembling the heavenly parks; kāmam-according to his desire; caitraratha-ādiṣu-in the best gardens, like Caitraratha.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The best of human beings, Purūravā, began freely enjoying the company of Urvaśī, who engaged in sexual activities with him in many celestial places, such as Caitraratha and Nandana-kānana, where the demigods enjoy.





TEXT 25



ramamāṇas tayā devyā

padma-kiñjalka-gandhayā

tan-mukhāmoda-muṣito

mumude 'har-gaṇān bahūn

SYNONYMS



ramamāṇaḥ-enjoying sex; tayā-with her; devyā-the heavenly goddess; padma-of a lotus; kiñjalka-like the saffron; gandhayā-the fragrance of whom; tat-mukha-her beautiful face; āmoda-by the fragrance; muṣitaḥ-being enlivened more and more; mumude-enjoyed life; ahaḥ-gaṇān-days after days; bahūn-many.





Urvaśī's body was as fragrant as the saffron of a lotus. Being enlivened by the fragrance of her face and body, Purūravā enjoyed her company for many days with great jubilation.





TEXT 26



apaśyann urvaśīm indro

gandharvān samacodayat

urvaśī-rahitaṁ mahyam

āsthānaṁ nātiśobhate

SYNONYMS



apaśyan-without seeing; urvaśīm-Urvaśī; indraḥ-the King of the heavenly planet; gandharvān-unto the Gandharvas; samacodayat-instructed; urvaśī-rahitam-without Urvaśī; mahyam-my; āsthānam-place; na-not; atiśobhate-appears beautiful.





Not seeing Urvaśī in his assembly, the King of heaven, Lord Indra, said, "Without Urvaśī my assembly is no longer beautiful." Considering this, he requested the Gandharvas to bring her back to his heavenly planet.





TEXT 27



te upetya mahā-rātre

tamasi pratyupasthite

urvaśyā uraṇau jahrur

nyastau rājani jāyayā

SYNONYMS



te-they, the Gandharvas; upetya-coming there; mahā-rātre-in the dead of night; tamasi-when the darkness; pratyupasthite-appeared; urvaśyā-by Urvaśī; uraṇau-two lambs; jahruḥ-stole; nyastau-given in charge; rājani-unto the King; jāyayā-by his wife, Urvaśī.





Thus the Gandharvas came to earth, and at midnight, when everything was dark, they appeared in the house of Purūravā and stole the two lambs entrusted to the King by his wife, Urvaśī.





"The dead of night" refers to midnight. The mahā-niśā is described in this smṛti-mantra: mahā-niśā dve ghaṭike rātrer madhyama-yāmayoḥ, "Twelve o'clock midnight is called the dead of night."





TEXT 28



niśamyākranditaṁ devī

putrayor nīyamānayoḥ

hatāsmy ahaṁ kunāthena

napuṁsā vīra-māninā

SYNONYMS



niśamya-by hearing; ākranditam-crying (because of being stolen); devī-Urvaśī; putrayoḥ-of those two lambs, which she treated as sons; nīyamānayoḥ-as they were being taken away; hatā-killed; asmi-am; aham-I; ku-nāthena-under the protection of a bad husband; na-puṁsā-by the eunuch; vīra-māninā-although considering himself a hero.





Urvaśī treated the two lambs like her own sons. Therefore, when they were being taken by the Gandharvas and began crying, Urvaśī heard them and rebuked her husband. "Now I am being killed," she said, "under the protection of an unworthy husband, who is a coward and a eunuch although he thinks himself a great hero.





TEXT 29



yad-viśrambhād ahaṁ naṣṭā

hṛtāpatyā ca dasyubhiḥ

yaḥ śete niśi santrasto

yathā nārī divā pumān

SYNONYMS



yat-viśrambhāt-because of depending upon whom; aham-I (am); naṣṭā-lost; hṛta-apatyā-bereft of my two sons, the lambs; ca-also; dasyubhiḥ-by the plunderers; yaḥ-he who (my so-called husband); śete-lies down; niśi-at night; santrastaḥ-being afraid; yathā-as; nārī-a woman; divā-during the daytime; pumān-male.





"Because I depended on him, the plunderers have deprived me of my two sons the lambs, and therefore I am now lost. My husband lies down at night in fear, exactly like a woman, although he appears to be a man during the day."





TEXT 30



iti vāk-sāyakair biddhaḥ

pratottrair iva kuñjaraḥ

niśi nistriṁśam ādāya

vivastro 'bhyadravad ruṣā

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; vāk-sāyakaiḥ-by the arrows of strong words; biddhaḥ-being pierced; pratottraiḥ-by the goads; iva-like; kuñjaraḥ-an elephant; niśi-in the night; nistriṁśam-a sword; ādāya-taking in hand; vivastraḥ-naked; abhyadravat-went out; ruṣā-in anger.





Purūravā, stricken by the sharp words of Urvaśī like an elephant struck by its driver's pointed rod, became very angry. Not even dressing himself properly, he took a sword in hand and went out naked into the night to follow the Gandharvas who had stolen the lambs.





TEXT 31



te visṛjyoraṇau tatra

vyadyotanta sma vidyutaḥ

ādāya meṣāv āyāntaṁ

nagnam aikṣata sā patim

SYNONYMS



te-they, the Gandharvas; visṛjya-after giving up; uraṇau-the two lambs; tatra-on the spot; vyadyotanta sma-illuminated; vidyutaḥ-shining like lightning; ādāya-taking in hand; meṣau-the two lambs; āyāntam-returning; nagnam-naked; aikṣata-saw; sā-Urvaśī; patim-her husband.





After giving up the two lambs, the Gandharvas shone brightly like lightning, thus illuminating the house of Purūravā. Urvaśī then saw her husband returning with the lambs in hand, but he was naked, and therefore she left.





TEXT 32



ailo 'pi śayane jāyām

apaśyan vimanā iva

tac-citto vihvalaḥ śocan

babhrāmonmattavan mahīm

SYNONYMS



ailaḥ-Purūravā; api-also; śayane-on the bedstead; jāyām-his wife; apaśyan-not seeing; vimanāḥ-morose; iva-like that; tat-cittaḥ-being too much attached to her; vihvalaḥ-disturbed in mind; śocan-lamenting; babhrāma-traveled; unmatta-vat-like a madman; mahīm-on the earth.





No longer seeing Urvaśī on his bed, Purūravā was most aggrieved. Because of his great attraction for her, he was very much disturbed. Thus, lamenting, he began traveling about the earth like a madman.





TEXT 33



sa tāṁ vīkṣya kurukṣetre

sarasvatyāṁ ca tat-sakhīḥ

pañca prahṛṣṭa-vadanaḥ

prāha sūktaṁ purūravāḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Purūravā; tām-Urvaśī; vīkṣya-observing; kurukṣetre-at the place known as Kurukṣetra; sarasvatyām-on the bank of the Sarasvatī; ca-also; tat-sakhīḥ-her companions; pañca-five; prahṛṣṭa-vadanaḥ-being very happy and smiling; prāha-said; sūktam-sweet words; purūravāḥ-King Purūravā.





Once during his travels all over the world, Purūravā saw Urvaśī, accompanied by five companions, on the bank of the Sarasvatī at Kurukṣetra. With jubilation in his face, he then spoke to her in sweet words as follows.





TEXT 34



aho jāye tiṣṭha tiṣṭha

ghore na tyaktum arhasi

māṁ tvam adyāpy anirvṛtya

vacāṁsi kṛṇavāvahai

SYNONYMS



aho-hello; jāye-O my dear wife; tiṣṭha tiṣṭha-kindly stay, stay; ghore-O most cruel one; na-not; tyaktum-to give up; arhasi-you ought; mām-me; tvam-you; adya api-until now; anirvṛtya-having not gotten any happiness from me; vacāṁsi-some words; kṛṇavāvahai-let us talk for some time.





O my dear wife, O most cruel one, kindly stay, kindly stay. I know that I have never made you happy until now, but you should not give me up for that reason. This is not proper for you. Even if you have decided to give up my company, let us nonetheless talk for some time.





TEXT 35



sudeho 'yaṁ pataty atra

devi dūraṁ hṛtas tvayā

khādanty enaṁ vṛkā gṛdhrās

tvat-prasādasya nāspadam

SYNONYMS



su-dehaḥ-very beautiful body; ayam-this; patati-will now fall down; atra-on the spot; devi-O Urvaśī; dūram-far, far away from home; hṛtaḥ-taken away; tvayā-by you; khādanti-they will eat; enam-this (body); vṛkāḥ-foxes; gṛdhrāḥ-vultures; tvat-your; prasādasya-in mercy; na-not; āspadam-suitable.





O goddess, now that you have refused me, my beautiful body will fall down here, and because it is unsuitable for your pleasure, it will be eaten by foxes and vultures.





TEXT 36



urvaśy uvāca

mā mṛthāḥ puruṣo 'si tvaṁ

mā sma tvādyur vṛkā ime

kvāpi sakhyaṁ na vai strīṇāṁ

vṛkāṇāṁ hṛdayaṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



urvaśī uvāca-Urvaśī said; mā-do not; mṛthāḥ-give up your life; puruṣaḥ-male; asi-are; tvam-you; mā sma-do not allow it; tvā-unto you; adyuḥ-may eat; vṛkāḥ-the foxes; ime-these senses (do not be under the control of your senses); kva api-anywhere; sakhyam-friendship; na-not; vai-indeed; strīṇām-of women; vṛkāṇām-of the foxes; hṛdayam-the heart; yathā-as.





Urvaśī said: My dear King, you are a man, a hero. Don't be impatient and give up your life. Be sober and don't allow the senses to overcome you like foxes. Don't let the foxes eat you. In other words, you should not be controlled by your senses. Rather, you should know that the heart of a woman is like that of a fox. There is no use making friendship with women.





Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has advised, viśvāso naiva kartavyaḥ strīṣu rāja-kuleṣu ca: "Never place your faith in a woman or a politician." Unless elevated to spiritual consciousness, everyone is conditioned and fallen, what to speak of women, who are less intelligent than men. Women have been compared to śūdras and vaiśyas (striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrāḥ). On the spiritual platform, however, when one is elevated to the platform of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whether one is a man, woman, śūdra or whatever, everyone is equal. Otherwise, Urvaśī, who was a woman herself and who knew the nature of women, said that a woman's heart is like that of a sly fox. If a man cannot control his senses, he becomes a victim of such sly foxes. But if one can control the senses, there is no chance of his being victimized by sly, foxlike women. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has also advised that if one has a wife like a sly fox, he must immediately give up his life at home and go to the forest.



mātā yasya gṛhe nāsti

bhāryā cāpriya-vādinī

araṇyaṁ tena gantavyaṁ

yathāraṇyaṁ tathā gṛham





(Cāṇakya-śloka 57)



Kṛṣṇa conscious gṛhasthas must be very careful of the sly fox woman. If the wife at home is obedient and follows her husband in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the home is welcome. Otherwise one should give up one's home and go to the forest.



hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpaṁ

vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta





(Bhāg. 7.5.5)



One should go to the forest and take shelter of the lotus feet of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





TEXT 37



striyo hy akaruṇāḥ krūrā

durmarṣāḥ priya-sāhasāḥ

ghnanty alpārthe 'pi viśrabdhaṁ

patiṁ bhrātaram apy uta

SYNONYMS



striyaḥ-women; hi-indeed; akaruṇāḥ-merciless; krūrāḥ-cunning; durmarṣāḥ-intolerant; priya-sāhasāḥ-for their own pleasure they can do anything; ghnanti-they kill; alpa-arthe-for a slight reason; api-indeed; viśrabdham-faithful; patim-husband; bhrātaram-brother; api-also; uta-it is said.





Women as a class are merciless and cunning. They cannot tolerate even a slight offense. For their own pleasure they can do anything irreligious, and therefore they do not fear killing even a faithful husband or brother.





King Purūravā was greatly attached to Urvaśī. Yet despite his faithfulness to her, she had left him. Now, considering that the King was wasting his rarely achieved human form of life, Urvaśī frankly explained the nature of a woman. Because of her nature, a woman can respond to even a slight offense from her husband by not only leaving him but even killing him if required. To say nothing of her husband, she can even kill her brother. That is a woman's nature. Therefore, in the material world, unless women are trained to be chaste and faithful to their husbands, there cannot be peace or prosperity in society.





TEXT 38



vidhāyālīka-viśrambham

ajñeṣu tyakta-sauhṛdāḥ

navaṁ navam abhīpsantyaḥ

puṁścalyaḥ svaira-vṛttayaḥ

SYNONYMS



vidhāya-by establishing; alīka-false; viśrambham-faithfulness; ajñeṣu-unto the foolish men; tyakta-sauhṛdāḥ-who have given up the company of well-wishers; navam-new; navam-new; abhīpsantyaḥ-desiring; puṁścalyaḥ-women very easily allured by other men; svaira-independently; vṛttayaḥ-professional.





Women are very easily seduced by men. Therefore, polluted women give up the friendship of a man who is their well-wisher and establish false friendship among fools. Indeed, they seek newer and newer friends, one after another.





Because women are easily seduced, the Manu-saṁhitā enjoins that they should not be given freedom. A woman must always be protected, either by her father, by her husband, or by her elderly son. If women are given freedom to mingle with men like equals, which they now claim to be, they cannot keep their propriety. The nature of a woman, as personally described by Urvaśī, is to establish false friendship with someone and then seek new male companions, one after another, even if this means giving up the company of a sincere well-wisher.





TEXT 39



saṁvatsarānte hi bhavān

eka-rātraṁ mayeśvaraḥ

raṁsyaty apatyāni ca te

bhaviṣyanty aparāṇi bhoḥ

SYNONYMS



saṁvatsara-ante-at the end of every year; hi-indeed; bhavān-your good self; eka-rātram-one night only; mayā-with me; īśvaraḥ-my husband; raṁsyati-will enjoy sex life; apatyāni-children; ca-also; te-your; bhaviṣyanti-will generate; aparāṇi-others, one after another; bhoḥ-O my dear King.





O my dear King, you will be able to enjoy with me as my husband at the end of every year, for one night only. In this way you will have other children, one after another.





Although Urvaśī had adversely explained the nature of woman, Mahārāja Purūravā was very much attached to her, and therefore she wanted to give the King some concession by agreeing to be his wife for one night at the end of each year.





TEXT 40



antarvatnīm upālakṣya

devīṁ sa prayayau purīm

punas tatra gato 'bdānte

urvaśīṁ vīra-mātaram

SYNONYMS



antarvatnīm-pregnant; upālakṣya-by observing; devīm-Urvaśī; saḥ-he, King Purūravā; prayayau-returned; purīm-to his palace; punaḥ-again; tatra-at that very spot; gataḥ-went; abda-ante-at the end of the year; urvaśīm-Urvaśī; vīra-mātaram-the mother of one kṣatriya son.





Understanding that Urvaśī was pregnant, Purūravā returned to his palace. At the end of the year, there at Kurukṣetra, he again obtained the association of Urvaśī, who was then the mother of a heroic son.





TEXT 41



upalabhya mudā yuktaḥ

samuvāsa tayā niśām

athainam urvaśī prāha

kṛpaṇaṁ virahāturam

SYNONYMS



upalabhya-getting the association; mudā-in great jubilation; yuktaḥ-being united; samuvāsa-enjoyed her company in sex; tayā-with her; niśām-that night; atha-thereafter; enam-unto King Purūravā; urvaśī-the woman named Urvaśī; prāha-said; kṛpaṇam-to he who was poor-hearted; viraha-āturam-afflicted by the thought of separation.





Having regained Urvaśī at the end of the year, King Purūravā was most jubilant, and he enjoyed her company in sex for one night. But then he was very sorry at the thought of separation from her, so Urvaśī spoke to him as follows.





TEXT 42



gandharvān upadhāvemāṁs

tubhyaṁ dāsyanti mām iti

tasya saṁstuvatas tuṣṭā

agni-sthālīṁ dadur nṛpa

urvaśīṁ manyamānas tāṁ

so 'budhyata caran vane

SYNONYMS



gandharvān-unto the Gandharvas; upadhāva-go take shelter; imān-these; tubhyam-unto you; dāsyanti-will deliver; mām iti-exactly like me, or me factually; tasya-by him; saṁstuvataḥ-offering prayers; tuṣṭāḥ-being satisfied; agni-sthālīm-a girl produced from fire; daduḥ-delivered; nṛpa-O King; urvaśīm-Urvaśī; manya-mānaḥ-thinking; tām-her; saḥ-he (Purūravā); abudhyata-understood factually; caran-while walking; vane-in the forest.





Urvaśī said: "My dear King, seek shelter of the Gandharvas, for they will be able to deliver me to you again." In accordance with these words, the King satisfied the Gandharvas by prayers, and the Gandharvas, being pleased with him, gave him an Agnisthālī girl who looked exactly like Urvaśī. Thinking that the girl was Urvaśī, the King began walking with her in the forest, but later he could understand that she was not Urvaśī but Agnisthālī.





Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that Purūravā was very lusty. Immediately after getting the Agnisthālī girl, he wanted to have sex with her, but during sexual intercourse he could understand that the girl was Agnisthālī, not Urvaśī. This indicates that every man attached to a particular woman knows the particular characteristics of that woman during sex life. Thus Purūravā understood during sexual intercourse that the Agnisthālī girl was not Urvaśī.





TEXT 43



sthālīṁ nyasya vane gatvā

gṛhān ādhyāyato niśi

tretāyāṁ sampravṛttāyāṁ

manasi trayy avartata

SYNONYMS



sthālīm-the woman Agnisthālī; nyasya-immediately giving up; vane-in the forest; gatvā-on returning; gṛhān-at home; ādhyāyataḥ-began to meditate; niśi-the whole night; tretāyām-when the Tretā millennium; sampravṛttāyām-was just on the point of beginning; manasi-in his mind; trayī-the principles of the three Vedas; avartata-became revealed.





King Purūravā then left Agnisthālī in the forest and returned home, where he meditated all night upon Urvaśī. In the course of his meditation, the Tretā millennium began, and therefore the principles of the three Vedas, including the process of performing yajña to fulfill fruitive activities, appeared within his heart.





It is said, tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ: in Tretā-yuga, if one performed yajñas, he would get the results of those yajñas. By performing viṣṇu-yajña specifically, one could even achieve the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Of course, yajña is intended to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. While Purūravā was meditating upon Urvaśī, the Tretā-yuga began, and therefore the Vedic yajñas were revealed in his heart. But Purūravā was a materialistic man, especially interested in enjoying the senses. Yajñas for enjoyment of the senses are called karma-kāṇḍīya-yajñas. Therefore, he decided to perform karma-kāṇḍīya-yajñas to fulfill his lusty desires. In other words, karma-kāṇḍīya-yajñas are meant for sensuous persons, whereas yajña should actually be performed to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To please the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Kali-yuga, the saṅkīrtana-yajña is recommended. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ [SB 11.5.32]. Only those who are very intelligent take to saṅkīrtana-yajña to fulfill all their desires, material and spiritual, whereas those who are lusty for sense enjoyment perform karma-kāṇḍīya-yajñas.





TEXTS 44–45



sthālī-sthānaṁ gato 'śvatthaṁ

śamī-garbhaṁ vilakṣya saḥ

tena dve araṇī kṛtvā

urvaśī-loka-kāmyayā

urvaśīṁ mantrato dhyāyann



adharāraṇim uttarām

ātmānam ubhayor madhye

yat tat prajananaṁ prabhuḥ

SYNONYMS



sthālī-sthānam-the place where Agnisthālī was left; gataḥ-going there; aśvattham-an aśvattha tree; śamī-garbham-produced from the womb of the śamī tree; vilakṣya-seeing; saḥ-he, Purūravā; tena-from that; dve-two; araṇī-pieces of wood required for igniting a fire for sacrifice; kṛtvā-making; urvaśī-loka-kāmyayā-desiring to go to the planet where Urvaśī was present; urvaśīm-Urvaśī; mantrataḥ-by chanting the required mantra; dhyāyan-meditating upon; adhara-lower; araṇim-araṇi wood; uttarām-and the upper one; ātmānam-himself; ubhayoḥ madhye-in between the two; yat tat-that which (he meditated upon); prajananam-as a son; prabhuḥ-the King.





When the process of fruitive yajña became manifest within his heart, King Purūravā went to the same spot where he had left Agnisthālī. There he saw that from the womb of a śamī tree, an aśvattha tree had grown. He then took a piece of wood from that tree and made it into two araṇis. Desiring to go to the planet where Urvaśī resided, he chanted mantras, meditating upon the lower araṇi as Urvaśī, the upper one as himself, and the piece of wood between them as his son. In this way he began to ignite a fire.





The Vedic fire for performing yajña was not ignited with ordinary matches or similar devices. Rather, the Vedic sacrificial fire was ignited by the araṇis, or two sacred pieces of wood, which produced fire by friction with a third. Such a fire is necessary for the performance of yajña. If successful, a yajña will fulfill the desire of its performer. Thus Purūravā took advantage of the process of yajña to fulfill his lusty desires. He thought of the lower araṇi as Urvaśī, the upper one as himself, and the middle one as his son. A relevant Vedic mantra quoted herein by Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is śamī-garbhād agniṁ mantha. A similar mantra is urvaśyām urasi purūravāḥ. Purūravā wanted to have children continuously by the womb of Urvaśī. His only ambition was to have sex life with Urvaśī and thereby get a son. In other words, he had so much lust in his heart that even while performing yajña he thought of Urvaśī, instead of thinking of the master of yajña, Yajñeśvara, Lord Viṣṇu.





TEXT 46



tasya nirmanthanāj jāto

jāta-vedā vibhāvasuḥ

trayyā sa vidyayā rājñā

putratve kalpitas tri-vṛt

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Purūravā; nirmanthanāt-because of interaction; jātaḥ-was born; jāta-vedāḥ-meant for material enjoyment according to the Vedic principles; vibhāvasuḥ-a fire; trayyā-following the Vedic principles; saḥ-the fire; vidyayā-by such a process; rājñā-by the King; putratve-a son's being born; kalpitaḥ-it so became; tri-vṛt-the three letters a-u-m combined together as oṁ.





From Purūravā's rubbing of the araṇis came a fire. By such a fire one can achieve all success in material enjoyment and be purified in seminal birth, initiation and in the performance of sacrifice, which are invoked with the combined letters a-u-m. Thus the fire was considered the son of King Purūravā.





According to the Vedic process, one can get a son through semen (śukra), one can get a bona fide disciple through initiation (sāvitra), or one can get a son or disciple through the fire of sacrifice (yajña). Thus when Mahārāja Purūravā generated the fire by rubbing the araṇis, the fire became his son. Either by semen, by initiation or by yajña one may get a son. The Vedic mantra oṁkāra, or praṇava, consisting of the letters a-u-m, can call each of these three methods into existence. Therefore the words nirmanthanāj jātaḥ indicate that by the rubbing of the araṇis a son was born.





TEXT 47



tenāyajata yajñeśaṁ

bhagavantam adhokṣajam

urvaśī-lokam anvicchan

sarva-devamayaṁ harim

SYNONYMS



tena-by generating such a fire; ayajata-he worshiped; yajña-īśam-the master or enjoyer of the yajña; bhagavantam-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhokṣajam-beyond the perception of the senses; urvaśī-lokam-to the planet where Urvaśī was staying; anvicchan-although desiring to go; sarva-deva-mayam-the reservoir of all demigods; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





By means of that fire, Purūravā, who desired to go to the planet where Urvaśī resided, performed a sacrifice, by which he satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the enjoyer of the results of sacrifice. Thus he worshiped the Lord, who is beyond the perception of the senses and is the reservoir of all the demigods.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśvaram: [Bg. 5.29] any loka, or planet, to which one wants to go is the property of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the enjoyer of the performance of sacrifice. The purpose of yajña is to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age, as we have explained many times, the yajña of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is the only sacrifice that can satisfy the Supreme Lord. When the Lord is satisfied, one can fulfill any desire, material or spiritual. Bhagavad-gītā (3.14) also says, yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ: by offering sacrifices to Lord Viṣṇu, one can have sufficient rainfall. When there is sufficient rainfall, the earth becomes fit to produce everything (sama-kāma-dughā mahī). If one can utilize the land properly, one can get all the necessities of life from the land, including food grains, fruits, flowers and vegetables. Everything one gets for material wealth is produced from the earth, and therefore it is said, sarva-kāma-dughā mahī (Bhāg. 1.10.4). Everything is possible by performing yajña. Therefore although Purūravā desired something material, he factually performed yajña to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is adhokṣaja, beyond the perception of Purūravā and everyone else. Consequently, some kind of yajña must be performed to fulfill the desires of the living entity. Yajñas can be performed in human society only when society is divided by varṇāśrama-dharma into four varṇas and four āśramas. Without such a regulative process, no one can perform yajñas, and without the performance of yajñas, no material plans can make human society happy at any time. Everyone should therefore be induced to perform yajñas. In this age of Kali, the yajña recommended is saṅkīrtana, the individual or collective chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. This will bring the fulfillment of all necessities for human society.





TEXT 48



eka eva purā vedaḥ

praṇavaḥ sarva-vāṅmayaḥ

devo nārāyaṇo nānya

eko 'gnir varṇa eva ca

SYNONYMS



ekaḥ-only one; eva-indeed; purā-formerly; vedaḥ-book of transcendental knowledge; praṇavaḥ-oṁkāra; sarva-vāk-mayaḥ-consisting of all Vedic mantras; devaḥ-the Lord, God; nārāyaṇaḥ-only Nārāyaṇa (was worshipable in the Satya-yuga); na anyaḥ-no other; ekaḥ agniḥ-one division only for agni; varṇaḥ-order of life; eva ca-and certainly.





In the Satya-yuga, the first millennium, all the Vedic mantras were included in one mantra-praṇava, the root of all Vedic mantras. In other words, the Atharva Veda alone was the source of all Vedic knowledge. The Supreme Personality of Godhead Nārāyaṇa was the only worshipable Deity; there was no recommendation for worship of the demigods. Fire was one only, and the only order of life in human society was known as haṁsa.





In Satya-yuga there was only one Veda, not four. Later, before the beginning of Kali-yuga, this one Veda, the Atharva Veda (or, some say, the Yajur Veda), was divided into four-Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva-for the facility of human society. In Satya-yuga the only mantra was oṁkāra (oṁ tat sat). The same name oṁkāra is manifest in the mantra Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. Unless one is a brāhmaṇa, one cannot utter oṁkāra and get the desired result. But in Kali-yuga almost everyone is a śūdra, unfit for pronouncing the praṇava, oṁkāra. Therefore the śāstras have recommended the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Oṁkāra is a mantra, or mahā-mantra, and Hare Kṛṣṇa is also a mahā-mantra. The purpose of pronouncing oṁkāra is to address the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva (oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya). And the purpose of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is the same. Hare: "O energy of the Lord!" Kṛṣṇa: "O Lord Kṛṣṇa!" Hare: "O energy of the Lord!" Rāma: "O Supreme Lord, O supreme enjoyer!" The only worshipable Lord is Hari, who is the goal of the Vedas (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]). By worshiping the demigods, one worships the different parts of the Lord, just as one might water the branches and twigs of a tree. But worshiping Nārāyaṇa, the all-inclusive Supreme Personality of Godhead, is like pouring water on the root of the tree, thus supplying water to the trunk, branches, twigs, leaves and so on. In Satya-yuga people knew how to fulfill the necessities of life simply by worshiping Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The same purpose can be served in this age of Kali by the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, as recommended in the Bhāgavatam. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet. Simply by chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, one becomes free from the bondage of material existence and thus becomes eligible to return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 49



purūravasa evāsīt

trayī tretā-mukhe nṛpa

agninā prajayā rājā

lokaṁ gāndharvam eyivān

SYNONYMS



purūravasaḥ-from King Purūravā; eva-thus; āsīt-there was; trayī-the Vedic principles of karma, jñāna and upāsanā; tretā-mukhe-in the beginning of the Tretā-yuga; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; agninā-simply by generating the fire of sacrifice; prajayā-by his son; rājā-King Purūravā; lokam-to the planet; gāndharvam-of the Gandharvas; eyivān-achieved.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, at the beginning of Tretā-yuga, King Purūravā inaugurated a karma-kāṇḍa sacrifice. Thus Purūravā, who considered the yajñic fire his son, was able to go to Gandharvaloka as he desired.





In Satya-yuga, Lord Nārāyaṇa was worshiped by meditation (kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇum). Indeed, everyone always meditated upon Lord Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa, and achieved every success by this process of meditation. In the next yuga, Tretā-yuga, the performance of yajña began (tretāyāṁ yajato mukhaiḥ). Therefore this verse says, trayī tretā-mukhe. Ritualistic ceremonies are generally called fruitive activities. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says that in Tretā-yuga, beginning in the Svāyambhuva-manvantara, ritualistic fruitive activities were similarly manifested from Priyavrata, etc.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Fourteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Purūravā Enchanted by Urvaśī."



Chapter Fifteen



Paraśurāma, the Lord's Warrior Incarnation





This chapter describes the history of Gādhi in the dynasty of Aila.





From the womb of Urvaśī came six sons, named Āyu, Śrutāyu, Satyāyu, Raya, Jaya and Vijaya. The son of Śrutāyu was Vasumān, the son of Satyāyu was Śrutañjaya, the son of Raya was Eka, the son of Jaya was Amita, and the son of Vijaya was Bhīma. Bhīma's son was named Kāñcana, the son of Kāñcana was Hotraka, and the son of Hotraka was Jahnu, who was celebrated for having drunk all the water of the Ganges in one sip. The descendants of Jahnu, one after another, were Puru, Balāka, Ajaka and Kuśa. The sons of Kuśa were Kuśāmbu, Tanaya, Vasu and Kuśanābha. From Kuśāmbu came Gādhi, who had a daughter named Satyavatī. Satyavatī married Ṛcīka Muni after the muni contributed a substantial dowry, and from the womb of Satyavatī by Ṛcīka Muni, Jamadagni was born. The son of Jamadagni was Rāma, or Paraśurāma. When a king named Kārtavīryārjuna stole Jamadagni's desire cow, Paraśurāma, who is ascertained by learned experts to be a saktyāveśa incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, killed Kārtavīryārjuna. Later, he annihilated the kṣatriya dynasty twenty-one times. After Paraśurāma killed Kārtavīryārjuna, Jamadagni told him that killing a king is sinful and that as a brāhmaṇa he should have tolerated the offense. Therefore Jamadagni advised Paraśurāma to atone for his sin by traveling to various holy places.





TEXT 1



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

ailasya corvaśī-garbhāt

ṣaḍ āsann ātmajā nṛpa

āyuḥ śrutāyuḥ satyāyū

rayo 'tha vijayo jayaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ailasya-of Purūravā; ca-also; urvaśī-garbhāt-from the womb of Urvaśī; ṣaṭ-six; āsan-there were; ātmajāḥ-sons; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; āyuḥ-Āyu; śrutāyuḥ-Śrutāyu; satyāyuḥ-Satyāyu; rayaḥ-Raya; atha-as well as; vijayaḥ-Vijaya; jayaḥ-Jaya.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, from the womb of Urvaśī, six sons were generated by Purūravā. Their names were Āyu, Śrutāyu, Satyāyu, Raya, Vijaya and Jaya.





TEXTS 2–3



śrutāyor vasumān putraḥ

satyāyoś ca śrutañjayaḥ

rayasya suta ekaś ca

jayasya tanayo 'mitaḥ

bhīmas tu vijayasyātha



kāñcano hotrakas tataḥ

tasya jahnuḥ suto gaṅgāṁ

gaṇḍūṣī-kṛtya yo 'pibat

SYNONYMS



śrutāyoḥ-of Śrutāyu; vasumān-Vasumān; putraḥ-a son; satyāyoḥ-of Satyāyu; ca-also; śrutañjayaḥ-a son named Śrutañjaya; rayasya-of Raya; sutaḥ-a son; ekaḥ-by the name Eka; ca-and; jayasya-of Jaya; tanayaḥ-the son; amitaḥ-by the name Amita; bhīmaḥ-by the name Bhīma; tu-indeed; vijayasya-of Vijaya; atha-thereafter; kāñcanaḥ-Kāñcana, the son of Bhīma; hotrakaḥ-Hotraka, the son of Kāñcana; tataḥ-then; tasya-of Hotraka; jahnuḥ-by the name Jahnu; sutaḥ-a son; gaṅgām-all the water of the Ganges; gaṇḍūṣī-kṛtya-by one sip; yaḥ-he who (Jahnu); apibat-drank.





The son of Śrutāyu was Vasumān; the son of Satyāyu, Śrutañjaya; the son of Raya, Eka; the son of Jaya, Amita; and the son of Vijaya, Bhīma. The son of Bhīma was Kāñcana; the son of Kāñcana was Hotraka; and the son of Hotraka was Jahnu, who drank all the water of the Ganges in one sip.





TEXT 4



jahnos tu purus tasyātha

balākaś cātmajo 'jakaḥ

tataḥ kuśaḥ kuśasyāpi

kuśāmbus tanayo vasuḥ

kuśanābhaś ca catvāro

gādhir āsīt kuśāmbujaḥ

SYNONYMS



jahnoḥ-of Jahnu; tu-indeed; puruḥ-a son named Puru; tasya-of Puru; atha-thereafter; balākaḥ-a son named Balāka; ca-and; ātmajaḥ-Balāka's son; ajakaḥ-of the name Ajaka; tataḥ-thereafter; kuśaḥ-Kuśa; kuśasya-of Kuśa; api-then; kuśāmbuḥ-Kuśāmbu; tanayaḥ-Tanaya; vasuḥ-Vasu; kuśanābhaḥ-Kuśanābha; ca-and; catvāraḥ-four (sons); gādhiḥ-Gādhi; āsīt-there was; kuśāmbujaḥ-the son of Kuśāmbu.





The son of Jahnu was Puru, the son of Puru was Balāka, the son of Balāka was Ajaka, and the son of Ajaka was Kuśa. Kuśa had four sons, named Kuśāmbu, Tanaya, Vasu and Kuśanābha. The son of Kuśāmbu was Gādhi.





TEXTS 5–6



tasya satyavatīṁ kanyām

ṛcīko 'yācata dvijaḥ

varaṁ visadṛśaṁ matvā

gādhir bhārgavam abravīt

ekataḥ śyāma-karṇānāṁ



hayānāṁ candra-varcasām

sahasraṁ dīyatāṁ śulkaṁ

kanyāyāḥ kuśikā vayam

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Gādhi; satyavatīm-Satyavatī; kanyām-the daughter; ṛcīkaḥ-the great sage Ṛcīka; ayācata-requested; dvijaḥ-the brāhmaṇa; varam-as her husband; visadṛśam-not equal or fit; matvā-thinking like that; gādhiḥ-King Gādhi; bhārgavam-unto Ṛcīka; abravīt-replied; ekataḥ-by one; śyāma-karṇānām-whose ear is black; hayānām-horses; candra-varcasām-as brilliant as the moonshine; sahasram-one thousand; dīyatām-please deliver; śulkam-as a dowry; kanyāyāḥ-to my daughter; kuśikāḥ-in the family of Kuśa; vayam-we (are).





King Gādhi had a daughter named Satyavatī, whom a brāhmaṇa sage named Ṛcīka requested from the King to be his wife. King Gādhi, however, regarded Ṛcīka as an unfit husband for his daughter, and therefore he told the brāhmaṇa, "My dear sir, I belong to the dynasty of Kuśa. Because we are aristocratic kṣatriyas, you have to give some dowry for my daughter. Therefore, bring at least one thousand horses, each as brilliant as moonshine and each having one black ear, whether right or left."





The son of King Gādhi was Viśvāmitra, who was said to be a brāhmaṇa and kṣatriya combined. Viśvāmitra attained the status of a brahmarṣi, as explained later. From the marriage of Satyavatī with Ṛcīka Muni would come a son with the spirit of a kṣatriya. King Gādhi demanded that an uncommon request be fulfilled before the brāhmaṇa Ṛcīka could marry his daughter.





TEXT 7



ity uktas tan-mataṁ jñātvā

gataḥ sa varuṇāntikam

ānīya dattvā tān aśvān

upayeme varānanām

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; uktaḥ-having been requested; tat-matam-his mind; jñātvā-(the sage) could understand; gataḥ-went; saḥ-he; varuṇa-antikam-to the place of Varuṇa; ānīya-having brought; dattvā-and after delivering; tān-those; aśvān-horses; upayeme-married; vara-ānanām-the beautiful daughter of King Gādhi.





When King Gādhi made this demand, the great sage Ṛcīka could understand the King's mind. Therefore he went to the demigod Varuṇa and brought from him the one thousand horses that Gādhi had demanded. After delivering these horses, the sage married the King's beautiful daughter.





TEXT 8



sa ṛṣiḥ prārthitaḥ patnyā

śvaśrvā cāpatya-kāmyayā

śrapayitvobhayair mantraiś

caruṁ snātuṁ gato muniḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Ṛcīka); ṛṣiḥ-the great saint; prārthitaḥ-being requested; patnyā-by his wife; śvaśrvā-by his mother-in-law; ca-also; apatya-kāmyayā-desiring a son; śrapayitvā-after cooking; ubhayaiḥ-both; mantraiḥ-by chanting particular mantras; carum-a preparation for offering in a sacrifice; snātum-to bathe; gataḥ-went out; muniḥ-the great sage.





Thereafter, Ṛcīka Muni's wife and mother-in-law, each desiring a son, requested the Muni to prepare an oblation. Thus Ṛcīka Muni prepared one oblation for his wife with a brāhmaṇa mantra and another for his mother-in-law with a kṣatriya mantra. Then he went out to bathe.





TEXT 9



tāvat satyavatī mātrā

sva-caruṁ yācitā satī

śreṣṭhaṁ matvā tayāyacchan

mātre mātur adat svayam

SYNONYMS



tāvat-in the meantime; satyavatī-Satyavatī, the wife of Ṛcīka; mātrā-by her mother; sva-carum-the oblation meant for herself (Satyavatī); yācitā-asked to give; satī-being; śreṣṭham-better; matvā-thinking; tayā-by her; ayacchat-delivered; mātre-to her mother; mātuḥ-of the mother; adat-ate; svayam-personally.





Meanwhile, because Satyavatī's mother thought that the oblation prepared for her daughter, Ṛcīka's wife, must be better, she asked her daughter for that oblation. Satyavatī therefore gave her own oblation to her mother and ate her mother's oblation herself.





A husband naturally has some affection for his wife. Therefore Satyavatī's mother thought that the oblation prepared for Satyavatī by the sage Ṛcīka must have been better than her own oblation. In Ṛcīka's absence, the mother took the better oblation from Satyavatī and ate it.





TEXT 10



tad viditvā muniḥ prāha

patnīṁ kaṣṭam akāraṣīḥ

ghoro daṇḍa-dharaḥ putro

bhrātā te brahma-vittamaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-this fact; viditvā-having learned; muniḥ-the great sage; prāha-said; patnīm-unto his wife; kaṣṭam-very regrettable; akāraṣīḥ-you have done; ghoraḥ-fierce; daṇḍa-dharaḥ-a great personality who can punish others; putraḥ-such a son; bhrātā-brother; te-your; brahma-vittamaḥ-a learned scholar in spiritual science.





When the great sage Ṛcīka returned home after bathing and understood what had happened in his absence, he said to his wife, Satyavatī, "You have done a great wrong. Your son will be a fierce kṣatriya, able to punish everyone, and your brother will be a learned scholar in spiritual science."





A brāhmaṇa is highly qualified when he can control his senses and mind, when he is a learned scholar in spiritual science and when he is tolerant and forgiving. A kṣatriya, however, is highly qualified when he is fierce in giving punishment to wrongdoers. These qualities are stated in Bhagavad-gītā (18.42–43). Because Satyavatī, instead of eating her own oblation, had eaten that which was meant for her mother, she would give birth to a son imbued with the kṣatriya spirit. This was undesirable. The son of a brāhmaṇa is generally expected to become a brāhmaṇa, but if such a son becomes fierce like a kṣatriya, he is designated according to the description of the four varṇas in Bhagavad-gītā (cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]). If the son of a brāhmaṇa does not become like a brāhmaṇa, he may be called a kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra, according to his qualifications. The basic principle for dividing society is not a person's birth but his qualities and actions.





TEXT 11



prasāditaḥ satyavatyā

maivaṁ bhūr iti bhārgavaḥ

atha tarhi bhavet pautro

jamadagnis tato 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



prasāditaḥ-pacified; satyavatyā-by Satyavatī; mā-not; evam-thus; bhūḥ-let it be; iti-thus; bhārgavaḥ-the great sage; atha-if your son should not become like that; tarhi-then; bhavet-should become like that; pautraḥ-the grandson; jamadagniḥ-Jamadagni; tataḥ-thereafter; abhavat-was born.





Satyavatī, however, pacified Ṛcīka Muni with peaceful words and requested that her son not be like a fierce kṣatriya. Ṛcīka Muni replied, "Then your grandson will be of a kṣatriya spirit." Thus Jamadagni was born as the son of Satyavatī.





The great sage Ṛcīka was very angry, but somehow or other Satyavatī pacified him, and at her request he changed his mind. It is indicated here that the son of Jamadagni would be born as Paraśurāma.





TEXTS 12–13



sā cābhūt sumahat-puṇyā

kauśikī loka-pāvanī

reṇoḥ sutāṁ reṇukāṁ vai

jamadagnir uvāha yām

tasyāṁ vai bhārgava-ṛṣeḥ



sutā vasumad-ādayaḥ

yavīyāñ jajña eteṣāṁ

rāma ity abhiviśrutaḥ

SYNONYMS



sā-she (Satyavatī); ca-also; abhūt-became; sumahat-puṇyā-very great and sacred; kauśikī-the river by the name Kauśikī; loka-pāvanī-purifying the whole world; reṇoḥ-of Reṇu; sutām-the daughter; reṇukām-by the name Reṇukā; vai-indeed; jamadagniḥ-Satyavatī's son, Jamadagni; uvāha-married; yām-whom; tasyām-in the womb of Reṇukā; vai-indeed; bhārgava-ṛṣeḥ-by the semen of Jamadagni; sutāḥ-sons; vasumat-ādayaḥ-many, headed by Vasumān; yavīyān-the youngest; jajñe-was born; eteṣām-among them; rāmaḥ-Paraśurāma; iti-thus; abhiviśrutaḥ-was known everywhere.





Satyavatī later became the sacred river Kauśikī to purify the entire world, and her son, Jamadagni, married Reṇukā, the daughter of Reṇu. By the semen of Jamadagni, many sons, headed by Vasumān, were born from the womb of Reṇukā. The youngest of them was named Rāma, or Paraśurāma.





TEXT 14



yam āhur vāsudevāṁśaṁ

haihayānāṁ kulāntakam

triḥ-sapta-kṛtvo ya imāṁ

cakre niḥkṣatriyāṁ mahīm

SYNONYMS



yam-whom (Paraśurāma); āhuḥ-all the learned scholars say; vāsudeva-aṁśam-an incarnation of Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; haihayānām-of the Haihayas; kula-antakam-the annihilator of the dynasty; triḥ-sapta-kṛtvaḥ-twenty-one times; yaḥ-who (Paraśurāma); imām-this; cakre-made; niḥkṣatriyām-devoid of kṣatriyas; mahīm-the earth.





Learned scholars accept this Paraśurāma as the celebrated incarnation of Vāsudeva who annihilated the dynasty of Kārtavīrya. Paraśurāma killed all the kṣatriyas on earth twenty-one times.





TEXT 15



dṛptaṁ kṣatraṁ bhuvo bhāram

abrahmaṇyam anīnaśat

rajas-tamo-vṛtam ahan

phalguny api kṛte 'ṁhasi

SYNONYMS



dṛptam-very proud; kṣatram-the kṣatriyas, the ruling class; bhuvaḥ-of the earth; bhāram-burden; abrahmaṇyam-sinful, not caring for the religious principles enunciated by the brāhmaṇas; anīnaśat-drove away or annihilated; rajaḥ-tamaḥ-by the qualities of passion and ignorance; vṛtam-covered; ahan-he killed; phalguni-not very great; api-although; kṛte-had been committed; aṁhasi-an offense.





When the royal dynasty, being excessively proud because of the material modes of passion and ignorance, became irreligious and ceased to care for the laws enacted by the brāhmaṇas, Paraśurāma killed them. Although their offense was not very severe, he killed them to lessen the burden of the world.





The kṣatriyas, or the ruling class, must govern the world in accordance with the rules and regulations enacted by great brāhmaṇas and saintly persons. As soon as the ruling class becomes irresponsible in regard to the religious principles, it becomes a burden on the earth. As stated here, rajas-tamo-vṛtaṁ, bhāram abrahmaṇyam: when the ruling class is influenced by the lower modes of nature, namely ignorance and passion, it becomes a burden to the world and must then be annihilated by superior power. We actually see from modern history that monarchies have been abolished by various revolutions, but unfortunately the monarchies have been abolished to establish the supremacy of third-class and fourth-class men. Although monarchies overpowered by the modes of passion and ignorance have been abolished in the world, the inhabitants of the world are still unhappy, for although the qualities of the former monarchs were degraded by taints of ignorance, these monarchs have been replaced by men of the mercantile and worker classes whose qualities are even more degraded. When the government is actually guided by brāhmaṇas, or God conscious men, then there can be real happiness for the people. Therefore in previous times, when the ruling class was degraded to the modes of passion and ignorance, the brāhmaṇas, headed by such a kṣatriya-spirited brāhmaṇa as Paraśurāma, killed them twenty-one consecutive times.



In Kali-yuga, as stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.2.13), dasyu-prāyeṣu rājasu: the ruling class (rājanya) will be no better than plunderers (dasyus) because the third-class and fourth-class men will monopolize the affairs of the government. Ignoring the religious principles and brahminical rules and regulations, they will certainly try to plunder the riches of the citizens without consideration. As stated elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.1.40):



asaṁskṛtāḥ kriyā-hīnā

rajasā tamasāvṛtāḥ

prajās te bhakṣayiṣyanti

mlecchā rājanya-rūpiṇaḥ





Being unpurified, neglecting to discharge human duties properly, and being influenced by the modes of passion (rajas) and ignorance (tamas), unclean people (mlecchas), posing as members of the government (rājanya-rūpiṇaḥ), will swallow the citizens (prājas te bhakṣayiṣyanti). And in still another place, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.2.7–8) says:



evaṁ prajābhir duṣṭābhir

ākīrṇe kṣiti-maṇḍale

brahma-viṭ-kṣatra-śūdrāṇāṁ

yo balī bhavitā nṛpaḥ





prajā hi lubdhai rājanyair

nirghṛṇair dasyu-dharmabhiḥ

ācchinna-dāra-draviṇā

yāsyanti giri-kānanam





Human society is naturally grouped into four divisions, as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]). But if this system is neglected and the qualities and divisions of society are not considered, the result will be brahma-viṭ-kṣatra-śūdrāṇāṁ yo balī bhavitā nṛpaḥ: the so-called caste system of brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra will be meaningless. As a result, whoever somehow or other becomes powerful will be the king or president, and thus the prajās, or citizens, will be so harassed that they will give up hearth and home and will go to the forest (yāsyanti giri-kānanam) to escape harassment by government officials who have no mercy and are addicted to the ways of plunderers. Therefore the prajās, or the people in general, must take to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, which is the sound incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra: Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has now appeared as an incarnation by His holy name. Therefore, when the prajās become Kṛṣṇa conscious, they can then expect a good government and good society, a perfect life, and liberation from the bondage of material existence.





TEXT 16



śrī-rājovāca

kiṁ tad aṁho bhagavato

rājanyair ajitātmabhiḥ

kṛtaṁ yena kulaṁ naṣṭaṁ

kṣatriyāṇām abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired; kim-what; tat aṁhaḥ-that offense; bhagavataḥ-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājanyaiḥ-by the royal family; ajita-ātmabhiḥ-who could not control their senses and thus were degraded; kṛtam-which had been done; yena-by which; kulam-the dynasty; naṣṭam-was annihilated; kṣatriyāṇām-of the royal family; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ-again and again.





King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: What was the offense that the kṣatriyas who could not control their senses committed before Lord Paraśurāma, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for which the Lord annihilated the kṣatriya dynasty again and again?





TEXTS 17–19



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

haihayānām adhipatir

arjunaḥ kṣatriyarṣabhaḥ

dattaṁ nārāyaṇāṁśāṁśam

ārādhya parikarmabhiḥ

bāhūn daśa-śataṁ lebhe



durdharṣatvam arātiṣu

avyāhatendriyaujaḥ śrī-

tejo-vīrya-yaśo-balam

yogeśvaratvam aiśvaryaṁ



guṇā yatrāṇimādayaḥ

cacārāvyāhata-gatir

lokeṣu pavano yathā

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied; haihayānām adhipatiḥ-the King of the Haihayas; arjunaḥ-by the name Kārtavīryārjuna; kṣatriya-ṛṣabhaḥ-the best of the kṣatriyas; dattam-unto Dattātreya; nārāyaṇa-aṁśa-aṁśam-the plenary portion of the plenary portion of Nārāyaṇa; ārādhya-after worshiping; parikarmabhiḥ-by worship according to the regulative principles; bāhūn-arms; daśa-śatam-one thousand (ten times one hundred); lebhe-achieved; durdharṣatvam-the quality of being very difficult to conquer; arātiṣu-in the midst of enemies; avyāhata-undefeatable; indriya-ojaḥ-strength of the senses; śrī-beauty; tejaḥ-influence; vīrya-power; yaśaḥ-fame; balam-bodily strength; yoga-īśvaratvam-controlling power gained by the practice of mystic yoga; aiśvaryam-opulence; guṇāḥ-qualities; yatra-wherein; aṇimā-ādayaḥ-eight kinds of yogic perfection (aṇimā, laghimā, etc.); cacāra-he went; avyāhata-gatiḥ-whose progress was indefatigable; lokeṣu-all over the world or universe; pavanaḥ-the wind; yathā-like.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The best of the kṣatriyas, Kārtavīryārjuna, the King of the Haihayas, received one thousand arms by worshiping Dattātreya, the plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. He also became undefeatable by enemies and received unobstructed sensory power, beauty, influence, strength, fame and the mystic power by which to achieve all the perfections of yoga, such as aṇimā and laghimā. Thus having become fully opulent, he roamed all over the universe without opposition, just like the wind.





TEXT 20



strī-ratnair āvṛtaḥ krīḍan

revāmbhasi madotkaṭaḥ

vaijayantīṁ srajaṁ bibhrad

rurodha saritaṁ bhujaiḥ

SYNONYMS



strī-ratnaiḥ-by beautiful women; āvṛtaḥ-surrounded; krīḍan-enjoying; revā-ambhasi-in the water of the River Revā, or Narmadā; mada-utkaṭaḥ-too puffed up because of opulence; vaijayantīm srajam-the garland of victory; bibhrat-being decorated with; rurodha-stopped the flow; saritam-of the river; bhujaiḥ-with his arms.





Once while enjoying in the water of the River Narmadā, the puffed-up Kārtavīryārjuna, surrounded by beautiful women and garlanded with a garland of victory, stopped the flow of the water with his arms.





TEXT 21



viplāvitaṁ sva-śibiraṁ

pratisrotaḥ-sarij-jalaiḥ

nāmṛṣyat tasya tad vīryaṁ

vīramānī daśānanaḥ

SYNONYMS



viplāvitam-having been inundated; sva-śibiram-his own camp; pratisrotaḥ-which was flowing in the opposite direction; sarit-jalaiḥ-by the water of the river; na-not; amṛṣyat-could tolerate; tasya-of Kārtavīryārjuna; tat vīryam-that influence; vīramānī-considering himself very heroic; daśa-ānanaḥ-the ten-headed Rāvaṇa.





Because Kārtavīryārjuna made the water flow in the opposite direction, the camp of Rāvaṇa, which was set up on the bank of the Narmadā near the city of Māhiṣmatī, was inundated. This was unbearable to the ten-headed Rāvaṇa, who considered himself a great hero and could not tolerate Kārtavīryārjuna's power.





Rāvaṇa was out touring to gain victory over all other countries (dig-vijaya), and he had camped on the bank of the Narmadā River near the city of Māhiṣmatī.





TEXT 22



gṛhīto līlayā strīṇāṁ

samakṣaṁ kṛta-kilbiṣaḥ

māhiṣmatyāṁ sanniruddho

mukto yena kapir yathā

SYNONYMS



gṛhītaḥ-was arrested by force; līlayā-very easily; strīṇām-of the women; samakṣam-in the presence; kṛta-kilbiṣaḥ-thus becoming an offender; māhiṣmatyām-in the city known as Māhiṣmatī; sanniruddhaḥ-was arrested; muktaḥ-released; yena-by whom (Kārtavīryārjuna); kapiḥ yathā-exactly as done to a monkey.





When Rāvaṇa attempted to insult Kārtavīryārjuna in the presence of the women and thus offended him, Kārtavīryārjuna easily arrested Rāvaṇa and put him in custody in the city of Māhiṣmatī, just as one captures a monkey, and then released him neglectfully.





TEXT 23



sa ekadā tu mṛgayāṁ

vicaran vijane vane

yadṛcchayāśrama-padaṁ

jamadagner upāviśat

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he, Kārtavīryārjuna; ekadā-once upon a time; tu-but; mṛgayām-while hunting; vicaran-wandering; vijane-solitary; vane-in a forest; yadṛcchayā-without any program; āśrama-padam-the residential place; jamadagneḥ-of Jamadagni Muni; upāviśat-he entered.





Once while Kārtavīryārjuna was wandering unengaged in a solitary forest and hunting, he approached the residence of Jamadagni.





Kārtavīryārjuna had no business going to the residence of Jamadagni, but because he was puffed-up by his extraordinary power, he went there and offended Paraśurāma. This was the prelude to his being killed by Paraśurāma for his offensive act.





TEXT 24



tasmai sa naradevāya

munir arhaṇam āharat

sasainyāmātya-vāhāya

haviṣmatyā tapo-dhanaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto him; saḥ-he (Jamadagni); naradevāya-unto King Kārtavīryārjuna; muniḥ-the great sage; arhaṇam-paraphernalia for worship; āharat-offered; sa-sainya-with his soldiers; amātya-his ministers; vāhāya-and the chariots, the elephants, the horses or the men who carried the palanquins; haviṣmatyā-because of possessing a kāmadhenu, a cow that could supply everything; tapaḥ-dhanaḥ-the great sage, whose only power was his austerity, or who was engaged in austerity.





The sage Jamadagni, who was engaged in great austerities in the forest, received the King very well, along with the King's soldiers, ministers and carriers. He supplied all the necessities to worship these guests, for he possessed a kāmadhenu cow that was able to supply everything.





The Brahma-saṁhitā informs us that the spiritual world, and especially the planet Goloka Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa lives, is full of surabhi cows (surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]). The surabhi cow is also called kāmadhenu. Although Jamadagni possessed only one kāmadhenu, he was able to get from it everything desirable. Thus he was able to receive the King, along with the King's great number of followers, ministers, soldiers, animals and palanquin carriers. When we speak of a king, we understand that he is accompanied by many followers. Jamadagni was able to receive all the King's followers properly and feed them sumptuously with food prepared in ghee. The King was astonished at how opulent Jamadagni was because of possessing only one cow, and therefore he became envious of the great sage. This was the beginning of his offense. Paraśurāma, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, killed Kārtavīryārjuna because Kārtavīryārjuna was too proud. One may possess unusual opulence in this material world, but if one becomes puffed up and acts whimsically he will be punished by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the lesson to learn from this history, in which Paraśurāma became angry at Kārtavīryārjuna and killed him and rid the entire world of kṣatriyas twenty-one times.





TEXT 25



sa vai ratnaṁ tu tad dṛṣṭvā

ātmaiśvaryātiśāyanam

tan nādriyatāgnihotryāṁ

sābhilāṣaḥ sahaihayaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Kārtavīryārjuna); vai-indeed; ratnam-a great source of wealth; tu-indeed; tat-the kāmadhenu in the possession of Jamadagni; dṛṣṭvā-by observing; ātma-aiśvarya-his own personal opulence; ati-śāyanam-which was exceeding; tat-that; na-not; ādriyata-appreciated very much; agnihotryām-in that cow, which was useful for executing the agnihotra sacrifice; sa-abhilāṣaḥ-became desirous; sa-haihayaḥ-with his own men, the Haihayas.





Kārtavīryārjuna thought that Jamadagni was more powerful and wealthy than himself because of possessing a jewel in the form of the kāmadhenu. Therefore he and his own men, the Haihayas, were not very much appreciative of Jamadagni's reception. On the contrary, they wanted to possess that kāmadhenu, which was useful for the execution of the agnihotra sacrifice.





Jamadagni was more powerful than Kārtavīryārjuna because of performing the agnihotra-yajña with clarified butter received from the kāmadhenu. Not everyone can be expected to possess such a cow. Nonetheless, an ordinary man may possess an ordinary cow, give protection to this animal, take sufficient milk from it, and engage the milk to produce butter and clarified ghee, especially for performing the agnihotra-yajña. This is possible for everyone. Thus we find that in Bhagavad-gītā Lord Kṛṣṇa advises go-rakṣya, the protection of cows. This is essential because if cows are cared for properly they will surely supply sufficient milk. We have practical experience in America that in our various ISKCON farms we are giving proper protection to the cows and receiving more than enough milk. In other farms the cows do not deliver as much milk as in our farms; because our cows know very well that we are not going to kill them, they are happy, and they give ample milk. Therefore this instruction given by Lord Kṛṣṇa-go-rakṣya-is extremely meaningful. The whole world must learn from Kṛṣṇa how to live happily without scarcity simply by producing food grains (annād bhavanti bhūtāni) and giving protection to the cows (go-rakṣya). Kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāvajam [Bg. 18.44]. Those who belong to the third level of human society, namely the mercantile people, must keep land for producing food grains and giving protection to cows. This is the injunction of Bhagavad-gītā. In the matter of protecting the cows, the meat-eaters will protest, but in answer to them we may say that since Kṛṣṇa gives stress to cow protection, those who are inclined to eat meat may eat the flesh of unimportant animals like hogs, dogs, goats and sheep, but they should not touch the life of the cows, for this is destructive to the spiritual advancement of human society.





TEXT 26



havirdhānīm ṛṣer darpān

narān hartum acodayat

te ca māhiṣmatīṁ ninyuḥ

sa-vatsāṁ krandatīṁ balāt

SYNONYMS



haviḥ-dhānīm-the kāmadhenu; ṛṣeḥ-of the great sage Jamadagni; darpāt-because of his being puffed up with material power; narān-all his men (soldiers); hartum-to steal or take away; acodayat-encouraged; te-the men of Kārtavīryārjuna; ca-also; māhiṣmatīm-to the capital of Kārtavīryārjuna; ninyuḥ-brought; sa-vatsām-with the calf; krandatīm-crying; balāt-because of being taken away by force.





Being puffed up by material power, Kārtavīryārjuna encouraged his men to steal Jamadagni's kāmadhenu. Thus the men forcibly took away the crying kāmadhenu, along with her calf, to Māhiṣmatī, Kārtavīryārjuna's capital.





The word havirdhānīm is significant in this verse. Havirdhānīm refers to a cow required for supplying havis, or ghee, for the performance of ritualistic ceremonies in sacrifices. In human life, one should be trained to perform yajñas. As we are informed in Bhagavad-gītā (3.9), yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ: if we do not perform yajña, we shall simply work very hard for sense gratification like dogs and hogs. This is not civilization. A human being should be trained to perform yajña. Yajñād bhavati parjanyaḥ [Bg. 3.14]. If yajñas are regularly performed, there will be proper rain from the sky, and when there is regular rainfall, the land will be fertile and suitable for producing all the necessities of life. Yajña, therefore, is essential. For performing yajña, clarified butter is essential, and for clarified butter, cow protection is essential. Therefore, if we neglect the Vedic way of civilization, we shall certainly suffer. So-called scholars and philosophers do not know the secret of success in life, and therefore they suffer in the hands of prakṛti, nature (prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]). Nonetheless, although they are forced to suffer, they think they are advancing in civilization (ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate). The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore meant to revive a mode of civilization in which everyone will be happy. This is the motive of our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Yajñe sukhena bhavantu.





TEXT 27



atha rājani niryāte

rāma āśrama āgataḥ

śrutvā tat tasya daurātmyaṁ

cukrodhāhir ivāhataḥ

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; rājani-when the King; niryāte-had gone away; rāmaḥ-Paraśurāma, the youngest son of Jamadagni; āśrame-in the cottage; āgataḥ-returned; śrutvā-when he heard; tat-that; tasya-of Kārtavīryārjuna; daurātmyam-nefarious act; cukrodha-became extremely angry; ahiḥ-a snake; iva-like; āhataḥ-trampled or injured.





Thereafter, Kārtavīryārjuna having left with the kāmadhenu, Paraśurāma returned to the āśrama. When Paraśurāma, the youngest son of Jamadagni, heard about Kārtavīryārjuna's nefarious deed, he became as angry as a trampled snake.





TEXT 28



ghoram ādāya paraśuṁ

satūṇaṁ varma kārmukam

anvadhāvata durmarṣo

mṛgendra iva yūthapam

SYNONYMS



ghoram-extremely fierce; ādāya-taking in hand; paraśum-a chopper; sa-tūṇam-along with a quiver; varma-a shield; kārmukam-a bow; anvadhāvata-followed; durmarṣaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma, being exceedingly angry; mṛgendraḥ-a lion; iva-like; yūthapam-(goes to attack) an elephant.





Taking up his fierce chopper, his shield, his bow and a quiver of arrows, Lord Paraśurāma, exceedingly angry, chased Kārtavīryārjuna just as a lion chases an elephant.





TEXT 29



tam āpatantaṁ bhṛgu-varyam ojasā

dhanur-dharaṁ bāṇa-paraśvadhāyudham

aiṇeya-carmāmbaram arka-dhāmabhir

yutaṁ jaṭābhir dadṛśe purīṁ viśan

SYNONYMS



tam-that Lord Paraśurāma; āpatantam-coming after him; bhṛgu-varyam-the best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, Lord Paraśurāma; ojasā-very fiercely; dhanuḥ-dharam-carrying a bow; bāṇa-arrows; paraśvadha-chopper; āyudham-having all these weapons; aiṇeya-carma-blackish deerskin; ambaram-the covering of his body; arka-dhāmabhiḥ-appearing like the sunshine; yutam jaṭābhiḥ-with locks of hair; dadṛśe-he saw; purīm-into the capital; viśan-entering.





As King Kārtavīryārjuna entered his capital, Māhiṣmatī Purī, he saw Lord Paraśurāma, the best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, coming after him, holding a chopper, shield, bow and arrows. Lord Paraśurāma was covered with a black deerskin, and his matted locks of hair appeared like the sunshine.





TEXT 30



acodayad dhasti-rathāśva-pattibhir

gadāsi-bāṇarṣṭi-śataghni-śaktibhiḥ

akṣauhiṇīḥ sapta-daśātibhīṣaṇās

tā rāma eko bhagavān asūdayat

SYNONYMS



acodayat-he sent for fighting; hasti-with elephants; ratha-with chariots; aśva-with horses; pattibhiḥ-and with infantry; gadā-with clubs; asi-with swords; bāṇa-with arrows; ṛṣṭi-with the weapons called ṛṣṭis; śataghni-with weapons called śataghnis; śaktibhiḥ-with weapons called śaktis; akṣauhiṇīḥ-whole groups of akṣauhiṇīs; sapta-daśa-seventeen; ati-bhīṣaṇāḥ-very fierce; tāḥ-all of them; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; ekaḥ-alone; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; asūdayat-killed.





Upon seeing Paraśurāma, Kārtavīryārjuna immediately feared him and sent many elephants, chariots, horses and infantry soldiers equipped with clubs, swords, arrows, ṛṣṭis, śataghnis, śaktis, and many similar weapons to fight against him. Kārtavīryārjuna sent seventeen full akṣauhiṇīs of soldiers to check Paraśurāma. But Lord Paraśurāma alone killed all of them.





The word akṣauhiṇī refers to a military phalanx consisting of 21,870 chariots and elephants, 109,350 infantry soldiers and 65,610 horses. An exact description is given in the Mahābhārata, Ādi parva, Second Chapter, as follows:



eko ratho gajaś caikaḥ

narāḥ pañca padātayaḥ

trayaś ca turagās taj-jñaiḥ

pattir ity abhidhīyate





pattiṁ tu triguṇām etāṁ

viduḥ senāmukhaṁ budhāḥ

trīṇi senāmukhāny eko

gulma ity adhidhīyate





trayo gulmā gaṇo nāma

vāhinī tu gaṇās trayaḥ

śrutās tisras tu vāhinyaḥ

pṛtaneti vicakṣaṇaiḥ





camūs tu pṛtanās tisraś

caṁvas tisras tv anīkinī

anīkinīṁ daśa-guṇām

āhur akṣauhiṇīṁ budhāḥ





akṣauhiṇyas tu saṅkhyātā

rathānāṁ dvija-sattamāḥ

saṅkhyā-gaṇita-tattvajñaiḥ

sahasrāṇy eka-viṁśati





śatāny upari cāṣṭau ca

bhūyas tathā ca saptatiḥ

gajānāṁ tu parīmāṇaṁ

tāvad evātra nirdiśet





jñeyaṁ śata-sahasraṁ tu

sahasrāṇi tathā nava

narāṇām adhi pañcāśac

chatāni trīṇi cānaghāḥ





pañca-ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi

tathāśvānāṁ śatāni ca

daśottarāṇi ṣaṭ cāhur

yathāvad abhisaṅkhyayā





etām akṣauhiṇīṁ prāhuḥ

saṅkhyā-tattva-vido janāḥ





"One chariot, one elephant, five infantry soldiers and three horses are called a patti by those who are learned in the science. The wise also know that a senāmukha is three times what a patti is. Three senāmukhas are known as one gulma, three gulmas are called a gaṇa, and three gaṇas are called a vāhinī. Three vāhinīs have been referred to by the learned as a pṛtanā, three pṛtanās equal one camū, and three camūs equal one anīkinī. The wise refer to ten anīkinīs as one akṣauhiṇī. The chariots of an akṣauhiṇī have been calculated at 21,870 by those who know the science of such calculations, O best of the twice-born, and the number of elephants is the same. The number of infantry soldiers is 109,350, and the number of horses is 65,610. This is called an akṣauhiṇī."





TEXT 31



yato yato 'sau praharat-paraśvadho

mano-'nilaujāḥ para-cakra-sūdanaḥ

tatas tataś chinna-bhujoru-kandharā

nipetur urvyāṁ hata-sūta-vāhanāḥ

SYNONYMS



yataḥ-wherever; yataḥ-wherever; asau-Lord Paraśurāma; praharat-slashing; paraśvadhaḥ-being expert in using his weapon, the paraśu, or chopper; manaḥ-like the mind; anila-like the wind; ojāḥ-being forceful; para-cakra-of the enemies' military strength; sūdanaḥ-killer; tataḥ-there; tataḥ-and there; chinna-scattered and cut off; bhuja-arms; ūru-legs; kandharāḥ-shoulders; nipetuḥ-fell down; urvyām-on the ground; hata-killed; sūta-chariot drivers; vāhanāḥ-carrier horses and elephants.





Lord Paraśurāma, being expert in killing the military strength of the enemy, worked with the speed of the mind and the wind, slicing his enemies with his chopper [paraśu]. Wherever he went, the enemies fell, their legs, arms and shoulders being severed, their chariot drivers killed, and their carriers, the elephants and horses all annihilated.





In the beginning, when the army of the enemy was full of fighting soldiers, elephants and horses, Lord Paraśurāma proceeded into their midst at the speed of mind to kill them. When somewhat tired, he slowed down to the speed of wind and continued to kill the enemies vigorously. The speed of mind is greater than the speed of the wind.





TEXT 32



dṛṣṭvā sva-sainyaṁ rudhiraugha-kardame

raṇājire rāma-kuṭhāra-sāyakaiḥ

vivṛkṇa-varma-dhvaja-cāpa-vigrahaṁ

nipātitaṁ haihaya āpatad ruṣā

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭvā-by seeing; sva-sainyam-his own soldiers; rudhira-ogha-kardame-which had become muddy due to the flow of blood; raṇa-ajire-on the battlefield; rāma-kuṭhāra-by the axe of Lord Paraśurāma; sāyakaiḥ-and by the arrows; vivṛkṇa-scattered; varma-the shields; dhvaja-the flags; cāpa-bows; vigraham-the bodies; nipātitam-fallen; haihayaḥ-Kārtavīryārjuna; āpatat-forcefully came there; ruṣā-being very angry.





By manipulating his axe and arrows, Lord Paraśurāma cut to pieces the shields, flags, bows and bodies of Kārtavīryārjuna's soldiers, who fell on the battlefield, muddying the ground with their blood. Seeing these reverses, Kārtavīryārjuna, infuriated, rushed to the battlefield.





TEXT 33



athārjunaḥ pañca-śateṣu bāhubhir

dhanuḥṣu bāṇān yugapat sa sandadhe

rāmāya rāmo 'stra-bhṛtāṁ samagraṇīs

tāny eka-dhanveṣubhir ācchinat samam

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; arjunaḥ-Kārtavīryārjuna; pañca-śateṣu-five hundred; bāhubhiḥ-with his arms; dhanuḥṣu-on the bows; bāṇān-arrows; yugapat-simultaneously; saḥ-he; sandadhe-fixed; rāmāya-just to kill Lord Paraśurāma; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; astra-bhṛtām-of all the soldiers who could use weapons; samagraṇīḥ-the very best; tāni-all the bows of Kārtavīryārjuna; eka-dhanvā-possessing one bow; iṣubhiḥ-the arrows; ācchinat-cut to pieces; samam-with.





Then Kārtavīryārjuna, with his one thousand arms, simultaneously fixed arrows on five hundred bows to kill Lord Paraśurāma. But Lord Paraśurāma, the best of fighters, released enough arrows with only one bow to cut to pieces immediately all the arrows and bows in the hands of Kārtavīryārjuna.





TEXT 34



punaḥ sva-hastair acalān mṛdhe 'ṅghripān

utkṣipya vegād abhidhāvato yudhi

bhujān kuṭhāreṇa kaṭhora-neminā

ciccheda rāmaḥ prasabhaṁ tv aher iva

SYNONYMS



punaḥ-again; sva-hastaiḥ-by his own hands; acalān-hills; mṛdhe-in the battlefield; aṅghripān-trees; utkṣipya-after uprooting; vegāt-with great force; abhidhāvataḥ-of he who was running very forcefully; yudhi-in the battlefield; bhujān-all the arms; kuṭhāreṇa-by his axe; kaṭhora-neminā-which was very sharp; ciccheda-cut to pieces; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; prasabham-with great force; tu-but; aheḥ iva-just like the hoods of a serpent.





When his arrows were cut to pieces, Kārtavīryārjuna uprooted many trees and hills with his own hands and again rushed strongly toward Lord Paraśurāma to kill him. But Paraśurāma then used his axe with great force to cut off Kārtavīryārjuna's arms, just as one might lop off the hoods of a serpent.





TEXTS 35–36



kṛtta-bāhoḥ śiras tasya

gireḥ śṛṅgam ivāharat

hate pitari tat-putrā

ayutaṁ dudruvur bhayāt

agnihotrīm upāvartya



savatsāṁ para-vīra-hā

samupetyāśramaṁ pitre

parikliṣṭāṁ samarpayat

SYNONYMS



kṛtta-bāhoḥ-of Kārtavīryārjuna, whose arms were cut off; śiraḥ-the head; tasya-of him (Kārtavīryārjuna); gireḥ-of a mountain; śṛṅgam-the peak; iva-like; āharat-(Paraśurāma) cut from his body; hate pitari-when their father was killed; tat-putrāḥ-his sons; ayutam-ten thousand; dudruvuḥ-fled; bhayāt-out of fear; agnihotrīm-the kāmadhenu; upāvartya-bringing near; sa-vatsām-with her calf; para-vīra-hā-Paraśurāma, who could kill the heroes of the enemies; samupetya-after returning; āśramam-to the residence of his father; pitre-unto his father; parikliṣṭām-which had undergone extreme suffering; samarpayat-delivered.





Thereafter, Paraśurāma cut off like a mountain peak the head of Kārtavīryārjuna, who had already lost his arms. When Kārtavīryārjuna's ten thousand sons saw their father killed, they all fled in fear. Then Paraśurāma, having killed the enemy, released the kāmadhenu, which had undergone great suffering, and brought it back with its calf to his residence, where he gave it to his father, Jamadagni.





TEXT 37



sva-karma tat kṛtaṁ rāmaḥ

pitre bhrātṛbhya eva ca

varṇayām āsa tac chrutvā

jamadagnir abhāṣata

SYNONYMS



sva-karma-his own activities; tat-all those deeds; kṛtam-which had been performed; rāmaḥ-Paraśurāma; pitre-unto his father; bhrātṛbhyaḥ-unto his brothers; eva ca-as well as; varṇayām āsa-described; tat-that; śrutvā-after hearing; jamadagniḥ-the father of Paraśurāma; abhāṣata-said as follows.





Paraśurāma described to his father and brothers his activities in killing Kārtavīryārjuna. Upon hearing of these deeds, Jamadagni spoke to his son as follows.





TEXT 38



rāma rāma mahābāho

bhavān pāpam akāraṣīt

avadhīn naradevaṁ yat

sarva-devamayaṁ vṛthā

SYNONYMS



rāma rāma-my dear son Paraśurāma; mahābāho-O great hero; bhavān-you; pāpam-sinful activities; akāraṣīt-have executed; avadhīt-have killed; naradevam-the king; yat-who is; sarva-deva-mayam-the embodiment of all the demigods; vṛthā-unnecessarily.





O great hero, my dear son Paraśurāma, you have unnecessarily killed the king, who is supposed to be the embodiment of all the demigods. Thus you have committed a sin.





TEXT 39



vayaṁ hi brāhmaṇās tāta

kṣamayārhaṇatāṁ gatāḥ

yayā loka-gurur devaḥ

pārameṣṭhyam agāt padam

SYNONYMS



vayam-we; hi-indeed; brāhmaṇāḥ-are qualified brāhmaṇas; tāta-O my dear son; kṣamayā-with the quality of forgiveness; arhaṇatām-the position of being worshiped; gatāḥ-we have achieved; yayā-by this qualification; loka-guruḥ-the spiritual master of this universe; devaḥ-Lord Brahmā; pārameṣṭhyam-the supreme person within this universe; agāt-achieved; padam-the position.





My dear son, we are all brāhmaṇas and have become worshipable for the people in general because of our quality of forgiveness. It is because of this quality that Lord Brahmā, the supreme spiritual master of this universe, has achieved his post.





TEXT 40



kṣamayā rocate lakṣmīr

brāhmī saurī yathā prabhā

kṣamiṇām āśu bhagavāṁs

tuṣyate harir īśvaraḥ

SYNONYMS



kṣamayā-simply by forgiving; rocate-becomes pleasing; lakṣmīḥ-the goddess of fortune; brāhmī-in connection with brahminical qualifications; saurī-the sun-god; yathā-as; prabhā-the sunshine; kṣamiṇām-unto the brāhmaṇas, who are so forgiving; āśu-very soon; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tuṣyate-becomes pleased; hariḥ-the Lord; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller.





The duty of a brāhmaṇa is to culture the quality of forgiveness, which is illuminating like the sun. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is pleased with those who are forgiving.





Different personalities become beautiful by possessing different qualities. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita says that the cuckoo bird, although very black, is beautiful because of its sweet voice. Similarly, a woman becomes beautiful by her chastity and faithfulness to her husband, and an ugly person becomes beautiful when he becomes a learned scholar. In the same way, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras become beautiful by their qualities. Brāhmaṇas are beautiful when they are forgiving, kṣatriyas when they are heroic and never retreat from fighting, vaiśyas when they enrich cultural activities and protect cows, and śūdras when they are faithful in the discharge of duties pleasing to their masters. Thus everyone becomes beautiful by his special qualities. And the special quality of the brāhmaṇa, as described here, is forgiveness.





TEXT 41



rājño mūrdhābhiṣiktasya

vadho brahma-vadhād guruḥ

tīrtha-saṁsevayā cāṁho

jahy aṅgācyuta-cetanaḥ

SYNONYMS



rājñaḥ-of the king; mūrdha-abhiṣiktasya-who is noted as the emperor; vadhaḥ-the killing; brahma-vadhāt-than killing a brāhmaṇa; guruḥ-more severe; tīrtha-saṁsevayā-by worshiping the holy places; ca-also; aṁhaḥ-the sinful act; jahi-wash out; aṅga-O my dear son; acyuta-cetanaḥ-being fully Kṛṣṇa conscious.





My dear son, killing a king who is an emperor is more severely sinful than killing a brāhmaṇa. But now, if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious and worship the holy places, you can atone for this great sin.





One who fully surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is freed from all sins (ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi). From the very day or moment he fully surrenders to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, even the most sinful person is freed. Nonetheless, as an example, Jamadagni advised his son Paraśurāma to worship the holy places. Because an ordinary person cannot immediately surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is advised to go from one holy place to another to find saintly persons and thus gradually be released from sinful reactions.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Fifteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Paraśurāma, the Lord's Warrior Incarnation."



Chapter Sixteen



Lord Paraśurāma Destroys the World's Ruling Class





When Jamadagni was killed by the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna, as described in this chapter, Paraśurāma rid the entire world of kṣatriyas twenty-one times. This chapter also describes the descendants of Viśvāmitra.





When Jamadagni's wife, Reṇukā, went to bring water from the Ganges and saw the King of the Gandharvas enjoying the company of Apsarās, she was captivated, and she slightly desired to associate with him. Because of this sinful desire, she was punished by her husband. Paraśurāma killed his mother and brothers, but later, by dint of the austerities of Jamadagni, they were revived. The sons of Kārtavīryārjuna, however, remembering the death of their father, wanted to take revenge against Lord Paraśurāma, and therefore when Paraśurāma was absent from the āśrama, they killed Jamadagni, who was meditating on the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Paraśurāma returned to the āśrama and saw his father killed, he was very sorry, and after asking his brothers to take care of the dead body, he went out with determination to kill all the kṣatriyas on the surface of the world. Taking up his axe, he went to Māhiṣmatī-pura, the capital of Kārtavīryārjuna, and killed all of Kārtavīryārjuna's sons, whose blood became a great river. Paraśurāma, however, was not satisfied with killing only the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna; later, when the kṣatriyas became disturbing, he killed them twenty-one times, so that there were no kṣatriyas on the surface of the earth. Thereafter, Paraśurāma joined the head of his father to the dead body and performed various sacrifices to please the Supreme Lord. Thus Jamadagni got life again in his body, and later he was promoted to the higher planetary system known as Saptarṣi-maṇḍala. Paraśurāma, the son of Jamadagni, still lives in Mahendra-parvata. In the next manvantara, he will become a preacher of Vedic knowledge.





In the dynasty of Gādhi, the most powerful Viśvāmitra took birth. By dint of his austerity and penance, he became a brāhmaṇa. He had 101 sons, who were celebrated as the Madhucchandās. In the sacrificial arena of Hariścandra, the son of Ajīgarta named Śunaḥśepha was meant to be sacrificed, but by the mercy of the Prajāpatis he was released. Thereafter, he became Devarāta in the dynasty of Gādhi. The fifty elder sons of Viśvāmitra, however, did not accept Śunaḥśepha as their elder brother, and therefore Viśvāmitra cursed them to become mlecchas, unfaithful to the Vedic civilization. Viśvāmitra's fifty-first son, along with his younger brothers, then accepted Śunaḥśepha as their eldest brother, and their father, Viśvāmitra, being satisfied, blessed them. Thus Devarāta was accepted in the dynasty of Kauśika, and consequently there are different divisions of that dynasty.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

pitropaśikṣito rāmas

tatheti kuru-nandana

saṁvatsaraṁ tīrtha-yātrāṁ

caritvāśramam āvrajat

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pitrā-by his father; upaśikṣitaḥ-thus advised; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; tathā iti-let it be so; kuru-nandana-O son of the Kuru dynasty, Mahārāja Parīkṣit; saṁvatsaram-for one complete year; tīrtha-yātrām-traveling to all the holy places; caritvā-after executing; āśramam-to his own residence; āvrajat-returned.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear Mahārāja Parīkṣit, son of the Kuru dynasty, when Lord Paraśurāma was given this order by his father, he immediately agreed, saying, "Let it be so." For one complete year he traveled to holy places. Then he returned to his father's residence.





TEXT 2



kadācid reṇukā yātā

gaṅgāyāṁ padma-mālinam

gandharva-rājaṁ krīḍantam

apsarobhir apaśyata

SYNONYMS



kadācit-once upon a time; reṇukā-Jamadagni's wife, the mother of Lord Paraśurāma; yātā-went; gaṅgāyām-to the bank of the River Ganges; padma-mālinam-decorated with a garland of lotus flowers; gandharva-rājam-the King of the Gandharvas; krīḍantam-sporting; apsarobhiḥ-with the Apsarās (heavenly society girls); apaśyata-she saw.





Once when Reṇukā, the wife of Jamadagni, went to the bank of the Ganges to get water, she saw the King of the Gandharvas, decorated with a garland of lotuses and sporting in the Ganges with celestial women [Apsarās].





TEXT 3



vilokayantī krīḍantam

udakārthaṁ nadīṁ gatā

homa-velāṁ na sasmāra

kiñcic citraratha-spṛhā

SYNONYMS



vilokayantī-while looking at; krīḍantam-the King of the Gandharvas, engaged in such activities; udaka-artham-for getting some water; nadīm-to the river; gatā-as she went; homa-velām-the time for performing the homa, fire sacrifice; na sasmāra-did not remember; kiñcit-very little; citraratha-of the King of the Gandharvas, known as Citraratha; spṛhā-did desire the company.





She had gone to bring water from the Ganges, but when she saw Citraratha, the King of the Gandharvas, sporting with the celestial girls, she was somewhat inclined toward him and failed to remember that the time for the fire sacrifice was passing.





TEXT 4



kālātyayaṁ taṁ vilokya

muneḥ śāpa-viśaṅkitā

āgatya kalaśaṁ tasthau

purodhāya kṛtāñjaliḥ

SYNONYMS



kāla-atyayam-passing the time; tam-that; vilokya-observing; muneḥ-of the great sage Jamadagni; śāpa-viśaṅkitā-being afraid of the curse; āgatya-returning; kalaśam-the waterpot; tasthau-stood; purodhāya-putting in front of the sage; kṛta-añjaliḥ-with folded hands.





Later, understanding that the time for offering the sacrifice had passed, Reṇukā feared a curse from her husband. Therefore when she returned she simply put the waterpot before him and stood there with folded hands.





TEXT 5



vyabhicāraṁ munir jñātvā

patnyāḥ prakupito 'bravīt

ghnataināṁ putrakāḥ pāpām

ity uktās te na cakrire

SYNONYMS



vyabhicāram-adultery; muniḥ-the great sage Jamadagni; jñātvā-could understand; patnyāḥ-of his wife; prakupitaḥ-he became angry; abravīt-he said; ghnata-kill; enām-her; putrakāḥ-my dear sons; pāpām-sinful; iti uktāḥ-being thus advised; te-all the sons; na-did not; cakrire-carry out his order.





The great sage Jamadagni understood the adultery in the mind of his wife. Therefore he was very angry and told his sons, "My dear sons, kill this sinful woman!" But the sons did not carry out his order.





TEXT 6



rāmaḥ sañcoditaḥ pitrā

bhrātṝn mātrā sahāvadhīt

prabhāva-jño muneḥ samyak

samādhes tapasaś ca saḥ

SYNONYMS



rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; sañcoditaḥ-being encouraged (to kill his mother and brothers); pitrā-by his father; bhrātṝn-all his brothers; mātrā saha-with the mother; avadhīt-killed immediately; prabhāva-jñaḥ-aware of the prowess; muneḥ-of the great sage; samyak-completely; samādheḥ-by meditation; tapasaḥ-by austerity; ca-also; saḥ-he.





Jamadagni then ordered his youngest son, Paraśurāma, to kill his brothers, who had disobeyed this order, and his mother, who had mentally committed adultery. Lord Paraśurāma, knowing the power of his father, who was practiced in meditation and austerity, killed his mother and brothers immediately.





The word prabhāva jñaḥ is significant. Paraśurāma knew the prowess of his father, and therefore he agreed to carry out his father's order. He thought that if he refused to carry out the order he would be cursed, but if he carried it out his father would be pleased, and when his father was pleased, Paraśurāma would ask the benediction of having his mother and brothers brought back to life. Paraśurāma was confident in this regard, and therefore he agreed to kill his mother and brothers.





TEXT 7



vareṇa cchandayām āsa

prītaḥ satyavatī-sutaḥ

vavre hatānāṁ rāmo 'pi

jīvitaṁ cāsmṛtiṁ vadhe

SYNONYMS



vareṇa cchandayām āsa-asked to take a benediction as he liked; prītaḥ-being very pleased (with him); satyavatī-sutaḥ-Jamadagni, the son of Satyavatī; vavre-said; hatānām-of my dead mother and brothers; rāmaḥ-Paraśurāma; api-also; jīvitam-let them be alive; ca-also; asmṛtim-no remembrance; vadhe-of their having been killed by me.





Jamadagni, the son of Satyavatī, was very much pleased with Paraśurāma and asked him to take any benediction he liked. Lord Paraśurāma replied, "Let my mother and brothers live again and not remember having been killed by me. This is the benediction I ask."





TEXT 8



uttasthus te kuśalino

nidrāpāya ivāñjasā

pitur vidvāṁs tapo-vīryaṁ

rāmaś cakre suhṛd-vadham

SYNONYMS



uttasthuḥ-got up immediately; te-Lord Paraśurāma's mother and brothers; kuśalinaḥ-being happily alive; nidrā-apāye-at the end of sound sleep; iva-like; añjasā-very soon; pituḥ-of his father; vidvān-being aware of; tapaḥ-austerity; vīryam-power; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; cakre-executed; suhṛt-vadham-killing of his family members.





Thereafter, by the benediction of Jamadagni, Lord Paraśurāma's mother and brothers immediately came alive and were very happy, as if awakened from sound sleep. Lord Paraśurāma had killed his relatives in accordance with his father's order because he was fully aware of his father's power, austerity and learning.





TEXT 9



ye 'rjunasya sutā rājan

smarantaḥ sva-pitur vadham

rāma-vīrya-parābhūtā

lebhire śarma na kvacit

SYNONYMS



ye-those who; arjunasya-of Kārtavīryārjuna; sutāḥ-sons; rājan-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; smarantaḥ-always remembering; sva-pituḥ vadham-their father's having been killed (by Paraśurāma); rāma-vīrya-parābhūtāḥ-defeated by the superior power of Lord Paraśurāma; lebhire-achieved; śarma-happiness; na-not; kvacit-at any time.





My dear King Parīkṣit, the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna, who were defeated by the superior strength of Paraśurāma, never achieved happiness, for they always remembered the killing of their father.





Jamadagni was certainly very powerful due to his austerities, but because of a slight offense by his poor wife, Reṇukā, he ordered that she be killed. This certainly was a sinful act, and therefore Jamadagni was killed by the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna, as described herein. Lord Paraśurāma was also infected by sin because of killing Kārtavīryārjuna, although this was not very offensive. Therefore, whether one be Kārtavīryārjuna, Lord Paraśurāma, Jamadagni or whoever one may be, one must act very cautiously and sagaciously; otherwise one must suffer the results of sinful activities. This is the lesson we receive from Vedic literature.





TEXT 10



ekadāśramato rāme

sabhrātari vanaṁ gate

vairaṁ siṣādhayiṣavo

labdha-cchidrā upāgaman

SYNONYMS



ekadā-once upon a time; āśramataḥ-from the āśrama of Jamadagni; rāme-when Lord Paraśurāma; sa-bhrātari-with his brothers; vanam-into the forest; gate-having gone; vairam-revenge for past enmity; siṣādhayiṣavaḥ-desiring to fulfill; labdha-chidrāḥ-taking the opportunity; upāgaman-they came near the residence of Jamadagni.





Once when Paraśurāma left the āśrama for the forest with Vasumān and his other brothers, the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna took the opportunity to approach Jamadagni's residence to seek vengeance for their grudge.





TEXT 11



dṛṣṭvāgny-āgāra āsīnam

āveśita-dhiyaṁ munim

bhagavaty uttamaśloke

jaghnus te pāpa-niścayāḥ

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭvā-by seeing; agni-āgāre-at the place where the fire sacrifice is performed; āsīnam-sitting; āveśita-completely absorbed; dhiyam-by intelligence; munim-the great sage Jamadagni; bhagavati-unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-śloke-who is praised by the best of selected prayers; jaghnuḥ-killed; te-the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna; pāpa-niścayāḥ-determined to commit a greatly sinful act, or the personified sins.





The sons of Kārtavīryārjuna were determined to commit sinful deeds. Therefore when they saw Jamadagni sitting by the side of the fire to perform yajña and meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is praised by the best of selected prayers, they took the opportunity to kill him.





TEXT 12



yācyamānāḥ kṛpaṇayā

rāma-mātrātidāruṇāḥ

prasahya śira utkṛtya

ninyus te kṣatra-bandhavaḥ

SYNONYMS



yācyamānāḥ-being begged for the life of her husband; kṛpaṇayā-by the poor unprotected woman; rāma-mātrā-by the mother of Lord Paraśurāma; ati-dāruṇāḥ-very cruel; prasahya-by force; śiraḥ-the head of Jamadagni; utkṛtya-having separated; ninyuḥ-took away; te-the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna; kṣatra-bandhavaḥ-not kṣatriyas, but the most abominable sons of kṣatriyas.





With pitiable prayers, Reṇukā, the mother of Paraśurāma and wife of Jamadagni, begged for the life of her husband. But the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna, being devoid of the qualities of kṣatriyas, were so cruel that despite her prayers they forcibly cut off his head and took it away.





TEXT 13



reṇukā duḥkha-śokārtā

nighnanty ātmānam ātmanā

rāma rāmeti tāteti

vicukrośoccakaiḥ satī

SYNONYMS



reṇukā-Reṇukā, the wife of Jamadagni; duḥkha-śoka-artā-being very much aggrieved in lamentation (over her husband's death); nighnantī-striking; ātmānam-her own body; ātmanā-by herself; rāma-O Paraśurāma; rāma-O Paraśurāma; iti-thus; tāta-O my dear son; iti-thus; vicukrośa-began to cry; uccakaiḥ-very loudly; satī-the most chaste woman.





Lamenting in grief for the death of her husband, the most chaste Reṇukā struck her own body with her hands and cried very loudly, "O Rāma, my dear son Rāma!"





TEXT 14



tad upaśrutya dūrasthā

hā rāmety ārtavat svanam

tvarayāśramam āsādya

dadṛśuḥ pitaraṁ hatam

SYNONYMS



tat-that crying of Reṇukā; upaśrutya-upon hearing; dūra-sthāḥ-although staying a long distance away; hā rāma-O Rāma, O Rāma; iti-thus; ārta-vat-very aggrieved; svanam-the sound; tvarayā-very hastily; āśramam-to the residence of Jamadagni; āsādya-coming; dadṛśuḥ-saw; pitaram-the father; hatam-killed.





Although the sons of Jamadagni, including Lord Paraśurāma, were a long distance from home, as soon as they heard Reṇukā loudly calling "O Rāma, O my son," they hastily returned to the āśrama, where they saw their father already killed.





TEXT 15



te duḥkha-roṣāmarṣārti-

śoka-vega-vimohitāḥ

hā tāta sādho dharmiṣṭha

tyaktvāsmān svar-gato bhavān

SYNONYMS



te-all the sons of Jamadagni; duḥkha-of grief; roṣa-anger; amarṣa-indignation; ārti-affliction; śoka-and lamentation; vega-with the force; vimohitāḥ-bewildered; hā tāta-O father; sādho-the great saint; dharmiṣṭha-the most religious person; tyaktvā-leaving; asmān-us; svaḥ-gataḥ-have gone to the heavenly planets; bhavān-you.





Virtually bewildered by grief, anger, indignation, affliction and lamentation, the sons of Jamadagni cried, "O father, most religious, saintly person, you have left us and gone to the heavenly planets !"





TEXT 16



vilapyaivaṁ pitur dehaṁ

nidhāya bhrātṛṣu svayam

pragṛhya paraśuṁ rāmaḥ

kṣatrāntāya mano dadhe

SYNONYMS



vilapya-lamenting; evam-like this; pituḥ-of his father; deham-the body; nidhāya-entrusting; bhrātṛṣu-to his brothers; svayam-personally; pragṛhya-taking; paraśum-the axe; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; kṣatra-antāya-to put an end to all the kṣatriyas; manaḥ-the mind; dadhe-fixed.





Thus lamenting, Lord Paraśurāma entrusted his father's dead body to his brothers and personally took up his axe, having decided to put an end to all the kṣatriyas on the surface of the world.





TEXT 17



gatvā māhiṣmatīṁ rāmo

brahma-ghna-vihata-śriyam

teṣāṁ sa śīrṣabhī rājan

madhye cakre mahā-girim

SYNONYMS



gatvā-going; māhiṣmatīm-to the place known as Māhiṣmatī; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; brahma-ghna-because of the killing of a brāhmaṇa; vihata-śriyam-doomed, bereft of all opulences; teṣām-of all of them (the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna and the other kṣatriya inhabitants); saḥ-he, Lord Paraśurāma; śīrṣabhiḥ-by the heads cut off from their bodies; rājan-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; madhye-within the jurisdiction of Māhiṣmatī; cakre-made; mahā-girim-a great mountain.





O King, Lord Paraśurāma then went to Māhiṣmatī, which was already doomed by the sinful killing of a brāhmaṇa. In the midst of that city he made a mountain of heads, severed from the bodies of the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna.





TEXTS 18–19



tad-raktena nadīṁ ghorām

abrahmaṇya-bhayāvahām

hetuṁ kṛtvā pitṛ-vadhaṁ

kṣatre 'maṅgala-kāriṇi

triḥ-sapta-kṛtvaḥ pṛthivīṁ



kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṁ prabhuḥ

samanta-pañcake cakre

śoṇitodān hradān nava

SYNONYMS



tat-raktena-by the blood of the sons of Kārtavīryārjuna; nadīm-a river; ghorām-fierce; abrahmaṇya-bhaya-āvahām-causing fear to the kings who had no respect for brahminical culture; hetum-cause; kṛtvā-accepting; pitṛ-vadham-the killing of his father; kṣatre-when the whole royal class; amaṅgala-kāriṇi-was acting very inauspiciously; triḥ-sapta-kṛtvaḥ-twenty-one times; pṛthivīm-the entire world; kṛtvā-making; niḥkṣatriyām-without a kṣatriya dynasty; prabhuḥ-the Supreme Lord, Paraśurāma; samanta-pañcake-at the place known as Samanta-pañcaka; cakre-he made; śoṇita-udān-filled with blood instead of water; hradān-lakes; nava-nine.





With the blood of the bodies of these sons, Lord Paraśurāma created a ghastly river, which brought great fear to the kings who had no respect for brahminical culture. Because the kṣatriyas, the men of power in government, were performing sinful activities, Lord Paraśurāma, on the plea of retaliating for the murder of his father, rid all the kṣatriyas from the face of the earth twenty-one times. Indeed, in the place known as Samanta-pañcaka he created nine lakes filled with their blood.





Paraśurāma is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and his eternal mission is paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]-to protect the devotees and annihilate the miscreants. To kill all the sinful men is one among the tasks of the incarnation of Godhead. Lord Paraśurāma killed all the kṣatriyas twenty-one times consecutively because they were disobedient to the brahminical culture. That the kṣatriyas had killed his father was only a plea; the real fact is that because the kṣatriyas, the ruling class, had become polluted, their position was inauspicious. Brahminical culture is enjoined in the śāstra, especially in Bhagavad-gītā (cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ [Bg. 4.13]). According to the laws of nature, whether at the time of Paraśurāma or at the present, if the government becomes irresponsible and sinful, not caring for brahminical culture, there will certainly be an incarnation of God like Paraśurāma to create a devastation by fire, famine, pestilence or some other calamity. Whenever the government disrespects the supremacy of the personality of Godhead and fails to protect the institution of varṇāśrama-dharma, it will certainly have to face such catastrophes as formerly brought about by Lord Paraśurāma.





TEXT 20



pituḥ kāyena sandhāya

śira ādāya barhiṣi

sarva-deva-mayaṁ devam

ātmānam ayajan makhaiḥ

SYNONYMS



pituḥ-of his father; kāyena-with the body; sandhāya-joining; śiraḥ-the head; ādāya-keeping; barhiṣi-upon kuśa grass; sarva-deva-mayam-the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all the demigods; devam-Lord Vāsudeva; ātmānam-who is present everywhere as the Supersoul; ayajat-he worshiped; makhaiḥ-by offering sacrifices.





Thereafter, Paraśurāma joined his father's head to the dead body and placed the whole body and head upon kuśa grass. By offering sacrifices, he began to worship Lord Vāsudeva, who is the all-pervading Supersoul of all the demigods and of every living entity.





TEXTS 21–22



dadau prācīṁ diśaṁ hotre

brahmaṇe dakṣiṇāṁ diśam

adhvaryave pratīcīṁ vai

udgātre uttarāṁ diśam

anyebhyo 'vāntara-diśaḥ



kaśyapāya ca madhyataḥ

āryāvartam upadraṣṭre

sadasyebhyas tataḥ param

SYNONYMS



dadau-gave as a gift; prācīm-eastern; diśam-direction; hotre-unto the priest known as hotā; brahmaṇe-unto the priest known as brahmā; dakṣiṇām-southern; diśam-direction; adhvaryave-unto the priest known as adhvaryu; pratīcīm-the western side; vai-indeed; udgātre-unto the priest known as udgātā; uttarām-northern; diśam-side; anyebhyaḥ-unto the others; avāntara-diśaḥ-the different corners (northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest); kaśyapāya-unto Kaśyapa Muni; ca-also; madhyataḥ-the middle portion; āryāvartam-the portion known as Āryāvarta; upadraṣṭre-unto the upadraṣṭā, the priest acting as overseer to hear and check the mantras; sadasyebhyaḥ-unto the sadasyas, the associate priests; tataḥ param-whatever remained.





After completing the sacrifice, Lord Paraśurāma gave the eastern direction to the hotā as a gift, the south to the brahmā, the west to the adhvaryu, the north to the udgātā, and the four corners-northeast, southeast, northwest and southwest-to the other priests. He gave the middle to Kaśyapa and the place known as Āryāvarta to the upadraṣṭā. Whatever remained he distributed among the sadasyas, the associate priests.





The tract of land in India between the Himalaya Mountains and the Vindhya Hills is called Āryāvarta.





TEXT 23



tataś cāvabhṛtha-snāna-

vidhūtāśeṣa-kilbiṣaḥ

sarasvatyāṁ mahā-nadyāṁ

reje vyabbhra ivāṁśumān

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-thereafter; ca-also; avabhṛtha-snāna-by bathing after finishing the sacrifice; vidhūta-cleansed; aśeṣa-unlimited; kilbiṣaḥ-whose reactions of sinful activities; sarasvatyām-on the bank of the great river Sarasvatī; mahā-nadyām-one of the biggest rivers in India; reje-Lord Paraśurāma appeared; vyabbhraḥ-cloudless; iva aṁśumān-like the sun.





Thereafter, having completed the ritualistic sacrificial ceremonies, Lord Paraśurāma took the bath known as the avabhṛtha-snāna. Standing on the bank of the great river Sarasvatī, cleared of all sins, Lord Paraśurāma appeared like the sun in a clear, cloudless sky.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.9), yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ: "Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one to this material world." Karma-bandhanaḥ refers to the repeated acceptance of one material body after another. The whole problem of life is this repetition of birth and death. Therefore one is advised to work to perform yajña meant for satisfying Lord Viṣṇu. Although Lord Paraśurāma was an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he had to account for sinful activities. Anyone in this material world, however careful he may be, must commit some sinful activities, even though he does not want to. For example, one may trample many small ants and other insects while walking on the street and kill many living beings unknowingly. Therefore the Vedic principle of pañca-yajña, five kinds of recommended sacrifice, is compulsory. In this age of Kali, however, there is a great concession given to people in general. Yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ: [SB 11.5.32] we may worship Lord Caitanya, the hidden incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam: although He is Kṛṣṇa Himself, He always chants Hare Kṛṣṇa and preaches Kṛṣṇa consciousness. One is recommended to worship this incarnation by chanting, the saṅkīrtana-yajña. The performance of saṅkīrtana-yajña is a special concession for human society to save people from being affected by known or unknown sinful activities. We are surrounded by unlimited sins, and therefore it is compulsory that one take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra.





TEXT 24



sva-dehaṁ jamadagnis tu

labdhvā saṁjñāna-lakṣaṇam

ṛṣīṇāṁ maṇḍale so 'bhūt

saptamo rāma-pūjitaḥ

SYNONYMS



sva-deham-his own body; jamadagniḥ-the great sage Jamadagni; tu-but; labdhvā-regaining; saṁjñāna-lakṣaṇam-showing full symptoms of life, knowledge and remembrance; ṛṣīṇām-of the great ṛṣis; maṇḍale-in the group of seven stars; saḥ-he, Jamadagni; abhūt-later became; saptamaḥ-the seventh; rāma-pūjitaḥ-because of being worshiped by Lord Paraśurāma.





Thus Jamadagni, being worshiped by Lord Paraśurāma, was brought back to life with full remembrance, and he became one of the seven sages in the group of seven stars.





The seven stars revolving around the polestar at the zenith are called saptarṣi-maṇḍala. On these seven stars, which form the topmost part of our planetary system, reside seven sages: Kaśyapa, Atri, Vasiṣṭha, Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bharadvāja. These seven stars are seen every night, and they each make a complete orbit around the polestar within twenty-four hours. Along with these seven stars, all the others stars also orbit from east to west. The upper portion of the universe is called the north, and the lower portion is called the south. Even in our ordinary dealings, while studying a map, we regard the upper portion of the map as north.





TEXT 25



jāmadagnyo 'pi bhagavān

rāmaḥ kamala-locanaḥ

āgāminy antare rājan

vartayiṣyati vai bṛhat

SYNONYMS



jāmadagnyaḥ-the son of Jamadagni; api-also; bhagavān-the Personality of Godhead; rāmaḥ-Lord Paraśurāma; kamala-locanaḥ-whose eyes are like lotus petals; āgāmini-coming; antare-in the manvantara, the time of one Manu; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; vartayiṣyati-will propound; vai-indeed; bṛhat-Vedic knowledge.





My dear King Parīkṣit, in the next manvantara the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead Lord Paraśurāma, the son of Jamadagni, will be a great propounder of Vedic knowledge. In other words, he will be one of the seven sages.





TEXT 26



āste 'dyāpi mahendrādrau

nyasta-daṇḍaḥ praśānta-dhīḥ

upagīyamāna-caritaḥ

siddha-gandharva-cāraṇaiḥ

SYNONYMS



āste-is still existing; adya api-even now; mahendra-adrau-in the hilly country known as Mahendra; nyasta-daṇḍaḥ-having given up the weapons of a kṣatriya (the bow, arrows and axe); praśānta-now fully satisfied as a brāhmaṇa; dhīḥ-in such intelligence; upagīyamāna-caritaḥ-being worshiped and adored for his exalted character and activities; siddha-gandharva-cāraṇaiḥ-by such celestial persons as the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka, Siddhaloka and Cāraṇaloka.





Lord Paraśurāma still lives as an intelligent brāhmaṇa in the mountainous country known as Mahendra. Completely satisfied, having given up all the weapons of a kṣatriya, he is always worshiped, adored and offered prayers for his exalted character and activities by such celestial beings as the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas.





TEXT 27



evaṁ bhṛguṣu viśvātmā

bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

avatīrya paraṁ bhāraṁ

bhuvo 'han bahuśo nṛpān

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; bhṛguṣu-in the dynasty of Bhṛgu; viśva-ātmā-the soul of the universe, the Supersoul; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ-the Lord; īśvaraḥ-the supreme controller; avatīrya-appearing as an incarnation; param-great; bhāram-the burden; bhuvaḥ-of the world; ahan-killed; bahuśaḥ-many times; nṛpān-kings.





In this way the supreme soul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord and the supreme controller, descended as an incarnation in the Bhṛgu dynasty and released the universe from the burden of undesirable kings by killing them many times.





TEXT 28



gādher abhūn mahā-tejāḥ

samiddha iva pāvakaḥ

tapasā kṣātram utsṛjya

yo lebhe brahma-varcasam

SYNONYMS



gādheḥ-from Mahārāja Gādhi; abhūt-was born; mahā-tejāḥ-very powerful; samiddhaḥ-inflamed; iva-like; pāvakaḥ-fire; tapasā-by austerities and penances; kṣātram-the position of a kṣatriya; utsṛjya-giving up; yaḥ-one who (Viśvāmitra); lebhe-achieved; brahma-varcasam-the quality of a brāhmaṇa.





Viśvāmitra, the son of Mahārāja Gādhi, was as powerful as the flames of fire. From the position of a kṣatriya, he achieved the position of a powerful brāhmaṇa by undergoing penances and austerities.





Now, having narrated the history of Lord Paraśurāma, Śukadeva Gosvāmī begins the history of Viśvāmitra. From the history of Paraśurāma we can understand that although Paraśurāma belonged to the brahminical group, he circumstantially had to work as a kṣatriya. Later, after finishing his work as a kṣatriya, he again became a brāhmaṇa and returned to Mahendra-parvata. Similarly, we can see that although Viśvāmitra was born in a kṣatriya family, by austerities and penances he achieved the position of a brāhmaṇa. These histories confirm the statements in śāstra that a brāhmaṇa may become a kṣatriya, a kṣatriya may become a brāhmaṇa or vaiśya, and a vaiśya may become a brāhmaṇa, by achieving the required qualities. One's status does not depend upon birth. As confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.11.35) by Nārada:



yasya yal lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ

puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta

tat tenaiva vinirdiśet





"If one shows the symptoms of being a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra, even if he has appeared in a different class, he should be accepted according to those symptoms of classification." To know who is a brāhmaṇa and who is a kṣatriya, one must consider a man's quality and work. If all the unqualified śūdras become so-called brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas, social order will be impossible to maintain. Thus there will be discrepancies, human society will turn into a society of animals, and the situation all over the world will be hellish.





TEXT 29



viśvāmitrasya caivāsan

putrā eka-śataṁ nṛpa

madhyamas tu madhucchandā

madhucchandasa eva te

SYNONYMS



viśvāmitrasya-of Viśvāmitra; ca-also; eva-indeed; āsan-there were; putrāḥ-sons; eka-śatam-101; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; madhyamaḥ-the middle one; tu-indeed; madhucchandāḥ-known as Madhucchandā; madhucchandasaḥ-named the Madhucchandās; eva-indeed; te-all of them.





O King Parīkṣit, Viśvāmitra had 101 sons, of whom the middle one was known as Madhucchandā. In relation to him, all the other sons were celebrated as the Madhucchandās.





In this connection, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura quotes this statement from the Vedas: tasya ha viśvāmitrasyaika-śataṁ putrā āsuḥ pañcāśad eva jyāyāṁso madhucchandasaḥ pañcāśat kanīyāṁsaḥ. "Viśvāmitra had 101 sons. Fifty were older than Madhucchandā and fifty younger."





TEXT 30



putraṁ kṛtvā śunaḥśephaṁ

devarātaṁ ca bhārgavam

ājīgartaṁ sutān āha

jyeṣṭha eṣa prakalpyatām

SYNONYMS



putram-a son; kṛtvā-accepting; śunaḥśepham-whose name was Śunaḥśepha; devarātam-Devarāta, whose life was saved by the demigods; ca-also; bhārgavam-born in the Bhṛgu dynasty; ājīgartam-the son of Ajīgarta; sutān-to his own sons; āha-ordered; jyeṣṭhaḥ-the eldest; eṣaḥ-Śunaḥśepha; prakalpyatām-accept as such.





Viśvāmitra accepted the son of Ajīgarta known as Śunaḥśepha, who was born in the Bhṛgu dynasty and was also known as Devarāta, as one of his own sons. Viśvāmitra ordered his other sons to accept Śunaḥśepha as their eldest brother.





TEXT 31



yo vai hariścandra-makhe

vikrītaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ

stutvā devān prajeśādīn

mumuce pāśa-bandhanāt

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-he who (Śunaḥśepha); vai-indeed; hariścandra-makhe-in the sacrifice performed by King Hariścandra; vikrītaḥ-was sold; puruṣaḥ-man; paśuḥ-sacrificial animal; stutvā-offering prayers; devān-to the demigods; prajā-īśa-ādīn-headed by Lord Brahmā; mumuce-was released; pāśa-bandhanāt-from being bound with ropes like an animal.





Śunaḥśepha's father sold Śunaḥśepha to be sacrificed as a man-animal in the yajña of King Hariścandra. When Śunaḥśepha was brought into the sacrificial arena, he prayed to the demigods for release and was released by their mercy.





Here is a description of Śunaḥśepha. When Hariścandra was to sacrifice his son Rohita, Rohita arranged to save his own life by purchasing Śunaḥśepha from Śunaḥśepha's father to be sacrificed in the yajña. Śunaḥśepha was sold to Mahārāja Hariścandra because he was the middle son, between the oldest and the youngest. It appears that the sacrifice of a man as an animal in yajña has been practiced for a very long time.





TEXT 32



yo rāto deva-yajane

devair gādhiṣu tāpasaḥ

deva-rāta iti khyātaḥ

śunaḥśephas tu bhārgavaḥ

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-he who (Śunaḥśepha); rātaḥ-was protected; deva-yajane-in the arena for worshiping the demigods; devaiḥ-by the same demigods; gādhiṣu-in the dynasty of Gādhi; tāpasaḥ-advanced in executing spiritual life; deva-rātaḥ-protected by the demigods; iti-thus; khyātaḥ-celebrated; śunaḥśephaḥ tu-as well as Śunaḥśepha; bhārgavaḥ-in the dynasty of Bhṛgu.





Although Śunaḥśepha was born in the Bhārgava dynasty, he was greatly advanced in spiritual life, and therefore the demigods involved in the sacrifice protected him. Consequently he was also celebrated as the descendant of Gādhi named Devarāta.





TEXT 33



ye madhucchandaso jyeṣṭhāḥ

kuśalaṁ menire na tat

aśapat tān muniḥ kruddho

mlecchā bhavata durjanāḥ

SYNONYMS



ye-those who; madhucchandasaḥ-sons of Viśvāmitra, celebrated as the Madhucchandās; jyeṣṭhāḥ-eldest; kuśalam-very good; menire-accepting; na-not; tat-that (the proposal that he be accepted as the eldest brother); aśapat-cursed; tān-all the sons; muniḥ-Viśvāmitra Muni; kruddhaḥ-being angry; mlecchāḥ-disobedient to the Vedic principles; bhavata-all of you become; durjanāḥ-very bad sons.





When requested by their father to accept Śunaḥśepha as the eldest son, the elder fifty of the Madhucchandās, the sons of Viśvāmitra, did not agree. Therefore Viśvāmitra, being angry, cursed them. "May all of you bad sons become mlecchas," he said, "being opposed to the principles of Vedic culture."





In Vedic literature there are names like mleccha and yavana. The mlecchas are understood to be those who do not follow the Vedic principles. In former days, the mlecchas were fewer, and Viśvāmitra Muni cursed his sons to become mlecchas. But in the present age, Kali-yuga, there is no need of cursing, for people are automatically mlecchas. This is only the beginning of Kali-yuga, but at the end of Kali-yuga the entire population will consist of mlecchas because no one will follow the Vedic principles. At that time the incarnation Kalki will appear. Mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi kara-bālam. He will kill all the mlecchas indiscriminately with his sword.





TEXT 34



sa hovāca madhucchandāḥ

sārdhaṁ pañcāśatā tataḥ

yan no bhavān sañjānīte

tasmiṁs tiṣṭhāmahe vayam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-the middle son of Viśvāmitra; ha-indeed; uvāca-said; madhucchandāḥ-Madhucchandā; sārdham-with; pañcāśatā-the second fifty of the sons known as the Madhucchandās; tataḥ-then, after the first half were thus cursed; yat-what; naḥ-unto us; bhavān-O father; sañjānīte-as you please; tasmin-in that; tiṣṭhāmahe-shall remain; vayam-all of us.





When the elder Madhucchandās were cursed, the younger fifty, along with Madhucchandā himself, approached their father and agreed to accept his proposal. "Dear father," they said, "we shall abide by whatever arrangement you like."





TEXT 35



jyeṣṭhaṁ mantra-dṛśaṁ cakrus

tvām anvañco vayaṁ sma hi

viśvāmitraḥ sutān āha

vīravanto bhaviṣyatha

ye mānaṁ me 'nugṛhṇanto

vīravantam akarta mām

SYNONYMS



jyeṣṭham-the eldest; mantra-dṛśam-a seer of mantras; cakruḥ-they accepted; tvām-you; anvañcaḥ-have agreed to follow; vayam-we; sma-indeed; hi-certainly; viśvāmitraḥ-the great sage Viśvāmitra; sutān-to the obedient sons; āha-said; vīra-vantaḥ-fathers of sons; bhaviṣyatha-become in the future; ye-all of you who; mānam-honor; me-my; anugṛhṇantaḥ-accepted; vīra-vantam-the father of good sons; akarta-you have made; mām-me.





Thus the younger Madhucchandās accepted Śunaḥśepha as their eldest brother and told him, "We shall follow your orders." Viśvāmitra then said to his obedient sons, "Because you have accepted Śunaḥśepha as your eldest brother, I am very satisfied. By accepting my order, you have made me a father of worthy sons, and therefore I bless all of you to become the fathers of sons also."





Of the one hundred sons, half disobeyed Viśvāmitra by not accepting Śunaḥśepha as their eldest brother, but the other half accepted his order. Therefore the father blessed the obedient sons to become the fathers of sons. Otherwise they too would have been cursed to be sonless mlecchas.





TEXT 36



eṣa vaḥ kuśikā vīro

devarātas tam anvita

anye cāṣṭaka-hārīta-

jaya-kratumad-ādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



eṣaḥ-this (Śunaḥśepha); vaḥ-like you; kuśikāḥ-O Kuśikas; vīraḥ-my son; devarātaḥ-he is known as Devarāta; tam-him; anvita-just obey; anye-others; ca-also; aṣṭaka-Aṣṭaka; hārīta-Hārīta; jaya-Jaya; kratumat-Kratumān; ādayaḥ-and others.





Viśvāmitra said, "O Kuśikas [descendants of Kauśika], this Devarāta is my son and is one of you. Please obey his orders." O King Parīkṣit, Viśvāmitra had many other sons, such as Aṣṭaka, Hārīta, Jaya and Kratumān.





TEXT 37



evaṁ kauśika-gotraṁ tu

viśvāmitraiḥ pṛthag-vidham

pravarāntaram āpannaṁ

tad dhi caivaṁ prakalpitam

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way (some sons having been cursed and some blessed); kauśika-gotram-the dynasty of Kauśika; tu-indeed; viśvāmitraiḥ-by the sons of Viśvāmitra; pṛthak-vidham-in different varieties; pravara-antaram-differences between one another; āpannam-obtained; tat-that; hi-indeed; ca-also; evam-thus; prakalpitam-ascertained.





Viśvāmitra cursed some of his sons and blessed the others, and he also adopted a son. Thus there were varieties in the Kauśika dynasty, but among all the sons, Devarāta was considered the eldest.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Sixteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Lord Paraśurāma Destroys the World's Ruling Class."



Chapter Seventeen



The Dynasties of the Sons of Purūravā





Āyu, the eldest son of Purūravā, had five sons. This chapter describes the dynasties of four of them, beginning with Kṣatravṛddha.





Āyu, the son of Purūravā, had five sons- Nahuṣa, Kṣatravṛddha, Rajī, Rābha and Anenā. The son of Kṣatravṛddha was Suhotra, who had three sons, named Kāśya, Kuśa and Gṛtsamada. The son of Gṛtsamada was Śunaka, and his son was Śaunaka. The son of Kāśya was Kāśi. From Kāśi came the sons and grandsons known as Rāṣṭra, Dīrghatama and then Dhanvantari, who was the inaugurator of medical science and was a śaktyāveśa incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. The descendants of Dhanvantari were Ketumān, Bhīmaratha, Divodāsa and Dyumān, who was also known as Pratardana, Śatrujit, Vatsa, Ṛtadhvaja and Kuvalayāśva. The son of Dyumān was Alarka, who reigned over the kingdom for many, many years. Following in the dynasty of Alarka were Santati, Sunītha, Niketana, Dharmaketu, Satyaketu, Dhṛṣṭaketu, Sukumāra, Vītihotra, Bharga and Bhārgabhūmi. All of them belonged to the dynasty of Kāśi, the descendant of Kṣatravṛddha.





The son of Rābha was Rabhasa, and his son was Gambhīra. Gambhīra's son was Akriya, and from Akriya came Brahmavit. The son of Anenā was Śuddha, and his son was Śuci. The son of Śuci was Citrakṛt, whose son was Śāntaraja. Rajī had five hundred sons, all of extraordinary strength. Rajī was personally very powerful and was given the kingdom of heaven by Lord Indra. Later, after Rajī's death, when the sons of Rajī refused to return the kingdom to Indra, by Bṛhaspati's arrangement they became unintelligent, and Lord Indra conquered them.





The grandson of Kṣatravṛddha named Kuśa gave birth to a son named Prati. From Prati came Sañjaya; from Sañjaya, Jaya; from Jaya, Kṛta; and from Kṛta, Haryabala. The son of Haryabala was Sahadeva; the son of Sahadeva, Hīna; the son of Hīna, Jayasena; the son of Jayasena, Saṅkṛti; and the son of Saṅkṛti, Jaya.





TEXTS 1–3



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

yaḥ purūravasaḥ putra

āyus tasyābhavan sutāḥ

nahuṣaḥ kṣatravṛddhaś ca

rajī rābhaś ca vīryavān

anenā iti rājendra



śṛṇu kṣatravṛdho 'nvayam

kṣatravṛddha-sutasyāsan

suhotrasyātmajās trayaḥ

kāśyaḥ kuśo gṛtsamada



iti gṛtsamadād abhūt

śunakaḥ śaunako yasya

bahvṛca-pravaro muniḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yaḥ-one who; purūravasaḥ-of Purūravā; putraḥ-son; āyuḥ-his name was Āyu; tasya-of him; abhavan-there were; sutāḥ-sons; nahuṣaḥ-Nahuṣa; kṣatravṛddhaḥ ca-and Kṣatravṛddha; rajī-Rajī; rābhaḥ-Rābha; ca-also; vīryavān-very powerful; anenāḥ-Anenā; iti-thus; rāja-indra-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; śṛṇu-just hear from me; kṣatravṛdhaḥ-of Kṣatravṛddha; anvayam-the dynasty; kṣatravṛddha-of Kṣatravṛddha; sutasya-of the son; āsan-there were; suhotrasya-of Suhotra; ātmajāḥ-sons; trayaḥ-three; kāśyaḥ-Kāśya; kuśaḥ-Kuśa; gṛtsamadaḥ-Gṛtsamada; iti-thus; gṛtsamadāt-from Gṛtsamada; abhūt-there was; śunakaḥ-Śunaka; śaunakaḥ-Śaunaka; yasya-of whom (Śunaka); bahu-ṛca-pravaraḥ-the best of those conversant with the Ṛg Veda; muniḥ-a great saintly person.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: From Purūravā came a son named Āyu, whose very powerful sons were Nahuṣa, Kṣatravṛddha, Rajī, Rābha and Anenā. O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, now hear about the dynasty of Kṣatravṛddha. Kṣatravṛddha's son was Suhotra, who had three sons, named Kāśya, Kuśa and Gṛtsamada. From Gṛtsamada came Śunaka, and from him came Śaunaka, the great saint, the best of those conversant with the Ṛg Veda.





TEXT 4



kāśyasya kāśis tat-putro

rāṣṭro dīrghatamaḥ-pitā

dhanvantarir dīrghatamasa

āyur-veda-pravartakaḥ

yajña-bhug vāsudevāṁśaḥ

smṛta-mātrārti-nāśanaḥ

SYNONYMS



kāśyasya-of Kāśya; kāśiḥ-Kāśi; tat-putraḥ-his son; rāṣṭraḥ-Rāṣṭra; dīrghatamaḥ-pitā-he became the father of Dīrghatama; dhanvantariḥ-Dhanvantari; dīrghatamasaḥ-from Dīrghatama; āyuḥ-veda-pravartakaḥ-the inaugurator of medical science, Āyur Veda; yajña-bhuk-the enjoyer of the results of sacrifice; vāsudeva-aṁśaḥ-incarnation of Lord Vāsudeva; smṛta-mātra-if he is remembered; ārti-nāśanaḥ-it immediately vanquishes all kinds of disease.





The son of Kāśya was Kāśi, and his son was Rāṣṭra, the father of Dīrghatama. Dīrghatama had a son named Dhanvantari, who was the inaugurator of the medical science and an incarnation of Lord Vāsudeva, the enjoyer of the results of sacrifices. One who remembers the name of Dhanvantari can be released from all disease.





TEXT 5



tat-putraḥ ketumān asya

jajñe bhīmarathas tataḥ

divodāso dyumāṁs tasmāt

pratardana iti smṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-putraḥ-his son (the son of Dhanvantari); ketumān-Ketumān; asya-his; jajñe-took birth; bhīmarathaḥ-a son named Bhīmaratha; tataḥ-from him; divodāsaḥ-a son named Divodāsa; dyumān-Dyumān; tasmāt-from him; pratardanaḥ-Pratardana; iti-thus; smṛtaḥ-known.





The son of Dhanvantari was Ketumān, and his son was Bhīmaratha. The son of Bhīmaratha was Divodāsa, and the son of Divodāsa was Dyumān, also known as Pratardana.





TEXT 6



sa eva śatrujid vatsa

ṛtadhvaja itīritaḥ

tathā kuvalayāśveti

prokto 'larkādayas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that Dyumān; eva-indeed; śatrujit-Śatrujit; vatsaḥ-Vatsa; ṛtadhvajaḥ-Ṛtadhvaja; iti-like that; īritaḥ-known; tathā-as well as; kuvalayāśva-Kuvalayāśva; iti-thus; proktaḥ-well known; alarka-ādayaḥ-Alarka and other sons; tataḥ-from him.





Dyumān was also known as Śatrujit, Vatsa, Ṛtadhvaja and Kuvalayāśva. From him were born Alarka and other sons.





TEXT 7



ṣaṣṭiṁ varṣa-sahasrāṇi

ṣaṣṭiṁ varṣa-śatāni ca

nālarkād aparo rājan

bubhuje medinīṁ yuvā

SYNONYMS



ṣaṣṭim-sixty; varṣa-sahasrāṇi-such thousands of years; ṣaṣṭim-sixty; varṣa-śatāni-hundreds of years; ca-also; na-not; alarkāt-except for Alarka; aparaḥ-anyone else; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; bubhuje-enjoyed; medinīm-the surface of the world; yuvā-as a young man.





Alarka, the son of Dyumān, reigned over the earth for sixty-six thousand years, my dear King Parīkṣit. No one other than him has reigned over the earth for so long as a young man.





TEXT 8



alarkāt santatis tasmāt

sunītho 'tha niketanaḥ

dharmaketuḥ sutas tasmāt

satyaketur ajāyata

SYNONYMS



alarkāt-from Alarka; santatiḥ-a son known as Santati; tasmāt-from him; sunīthaḥ-Sunītha; atha-from him; niketanaḥ-a son named Niketana; dharmaketuḥ-Dharmaketu; sutaḥ-a son; tasmāt-and from Dharmaketu; satyaketuḥ-Satyaketu; ajāyata-was born.





From Alarka came a son named Santati, and his son was Sunītha. The son of Sunītha was Niketana, the son of Niketana was Dharmaketu, and the son of Dharmaketu was Satyaketu.





TEXT 9



dhṛṣṭaketus tatas tasmāt

sukumāraḥ kṣitīśvaraḥ

vītihotro 'sya bhargo 'to

bhārgabhūmir abhūn nṛpa

SYNONYMS



dhṛṣṭaketuḥ-Dhṛṣṭaketu; tataḥ-thereafter; tasmāt-from Dhṛṣṭaketu; sukumāraḥ-a son named Sukumāra; kṣiti-īśvaraḥ-the emperor of the entire world; vītihotraḥ-a son named Vītihotra; asya-his son; bhargaḥ-Bharga; ataḥ-from him; bhārgabhūmiḥ-a son named Bhārgabhūmi; abhūt-generated; nṛpa-O King.





O King Parīkṣit, from Satyaketu came a son named Dhṛṣṭaketu, and from Dhṛṣṭaketu came Sukumāra, the emperor of the entire world. From Sukumāra came a son named Vītihotra; from Vītihotra, Bharga; and from Bharga, Bhārgabhūmi.





TEXT 10



itīme kāśayo bhūpāḥ

kṣatravṛddhānvayāyinaḥ

rābhasya rabhasaḥ putro

gambhīraś cākriyas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; ime-all of them; kāśayaḥ-born in the dynasty of Kāśi; bhūpāḥ-kings; kṣatravṛddha-anvaya-āyinaḥ-also within the dynasty of Kṣatravṛddha; rābhasya-from Rābha; rabhasaḥ-Rabhasa; putraḥ-a son; gambhīraḥ-Gambhīra; ca-also; akriyaḥ-Akriya; tataḥ-from him.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, all of these kings were descendants of Kāśi, and they could also be called descendants of Kṣatravṛddha. The son of Rābha was Rabhasa, from Rabhasa came Gambhīra, and from Gambhīra came a son named Akriya.





TEXT 11



tad-gotraṁ brahmavij jajñe

śṛṇu vaṁśam anenasaḥ

śuddhas tataḥ śucis tasmāc

citrakṛd dharmasārathiḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-gotram-the descendant of Akriya; brahmavit-Brahmavit; jajñe-took birth; śṛṇu-just hear from me; vaṁśam-descendants; anenasaḥ-of Anenā; śuddhaḥ-a son known as Śuddha; tataḥ-from him; śuciḥ-Śuci; tasmāt-from him; citrakṛt-Citrakṛt; dharma-sārathiḥ-Dharmasārathi.





The son of Akriya was known as Brahmavit, O King. Now hear about the descendants of Anenā. From Anenā came a son named Śuddha, and his son was Śuci. The son of Śuci was Dharmasārathi, also called Citrakṛt.





TEXT 12



tataḥ śāntarajo jajñe

kṛta-kṛtyaḥ sa ātmavān

rajeḥ pañca-śatāny āsan

putrāṇām amitaujasām

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from Citrakṛt; śāntarajaḥ-a son named Śāntaraja; jajñe-was born; kṛta-kṛtyaḥ-performed all kinds of ritualistic ceremonies; saḥ-he; ātmavān-a self-realized soul; rajeḥ-of Rajī; pañca-śatāni-five hundred; āsan-there were; putrāṇām-sons; amita-ojasām-very, very powerful.





From Citrakṛt was born a son named Śāntaraja, a self-realized soul who performed all kinds of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and therefore did not beget any progeny. The sons of Rajī were five hundred, all very powerful.





TEXT 13



devair abhyarthito daityān

hatvendrāyādadād divam

indras tasmai punar dattvā

gṛhītvā caraṇau rajeḥ

ātmānam arpayām āsa

prahrādādy-ari-śaṅkitaḥ

SYNONYMS



devaiḥ-by the demigods; abhyarthitaḥ-being requested; daityān-the demons; hatvā-killing; indrāya-to Indra, the King of heaven; adadāt-delivered; divam-the kingdom of heaven; indraḥ-the King of heaven; tasmai-unto him, Rajī; punaḥ-again; dattvā-returning; gṛhītvā-capturing; caraṇau-the feet; rajeḥ-of Rajī; ātmānam-the self; arpayām āsa-surrendered; prahrāda-ādi-Prahlāda and others; ari-śaṅkitaḥ-being afraid of such enemies.





On the request of the demigods, Rajī killed the demons and thus returned the kingdom of heaven to Lord Indra. But Indra, fearing such demons as Prahlāda, returned the kingdom of heaven to Rajī and surrendered himself at Rajī's lotus feet.





TEXT 14



pitary uparate putrā

yācamānāya no daduḥ

triviṣṭapaṁ mahendrāya

yajña-bhāgān samādaduḥ

SYNONYMS



pitari-when their father; uparate-passed away; putrāḥ-the sons; yācamānāya-although requesting from them; no-not; daduḥ-returned; triviṣṭapam-the heavenly kingdom; mahendrāya-unto Mahendra; yajña-bhāgān-the shares of ritualistic ceremonies; samādaduḥ-gave.





Upon Rajī's death, Indra begged Rajī's sons for the return of the heavenly planet. They did not return it, however, although they agreed to return Indra's shares in ritualistic ceremonies.





Rajī conquered the kingdom of heaven, and therefore when Indra, the heavenly king, begged Rajī's sons to return it, they refused. Because they had not taken the heavenly kingdom from Indra but had inherited it from their father, they considered it their paternal property. Why then should they return it to the demigods?





TEXT 15



guruṇā hūyamāne 'gnau

balabhit tanayān rajeḥ

avadhīd bhraṁśitān mārgān

na kaścid avaśeṣitaḥ

SYNONYMS



guruṇā-by the spiritual master (Bṛhaspati); hūyamāne agnau-while oblations were being offered in the fire of sacrifice; balabhit-Indra; tanayān-the sons; rajeḥ-of Rajī; avadhīt-killed; bhraṁśitān-fallen; mārgāt-from the moral principles; na-not; kaścit-anyone; avaśeṣitaḥ-remained alive.





Thereafter, Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, offered oblations in the fire so that the sons of Rajī would fall from moral principles. When they fell, Lord Indra killed them easily because of their degradation. Not a single one of them remained alive.





TEXT 16



kuśāt pratiḥ kṣātravṛddhāt

sañjayas tat-suto jayaḥ

tataḥ kṛtaḥ kṛtasyāpi

jajñe haryabalo nṛpaḥ

SYNONYMS



kuśāt-from Kuśa; pratiḥ-a son named Prati; kṣātravṛddhāt-the grandson of Kṣatravṛddha; sañjayaḥ-a son named Sañjaya; tat-sutaḥ-his son; jayaḥ-Jaya; tataḥ-from him; kṛtaḥ-Kṛta; kṛtasya-from Kṛta; api-as well as; jajñe-was born; haryabalaḥ-Haryabala; nṛpaḥ-the king.





From Kuśa, the grandson of Kṣatravṛddha, was born a son named Prati. The son of Prati was Sañjaya, and the son of Sañjaya was Jaya. From Jaya, Kṛta was born, and from Kṛta, King Haryabala.





TEXT 17



sahadevas tato hīno

jayasenas tu tat-sutaḥ

saṅkṛtis tasya ca jayaḥ

kṣatra-dharmā mahā-rathaḥ

kṣatravṛddhānvayā bhūpā

ime śṛṇv atha nāhuṣān

SYNONYMS



sahadevaḥ-Sahadeva; tataḥ-from Sahadeva; hīnaḥ-a son named Hīna; jayasenaḥ-Jayasena; tu-also; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Hīna; saṅkṛtiḥ-Saṅkṛti; tasya-of Saṅkṛti; ca-also; jayaḥ-a son named Jaya; kṣatra-dharmā-expert in the duties of a kṣatriya; mahā-rathaḥ-a greatly powerful fighter; kṣatravṛddha-anvayāḥ-in the dynasty of Kṣatravṛddha; bhūpāḥ-kings; ime-all these; śṛṇu-hear from me; atha-now; nāhuṣān-the descendants of Nahuṣa.





From Haryabala came a son named Sahadeva, and from Sahadeva came Hīna. The son of Hīna was Jayasena, and the son of Jayasena was Saṅkṛti. The son of Saṅkṛti was the powerful and expert fighter named Jaya. These kings were the members of the Kṣatravṛddha dynasty. Now let me describe to you the dynasty of Nahuṣa.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Seventeenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasties of the Sons of Purūravā."



Chapter Eighteen



King Yayāti Regains His Youth





This chapter gives the history of King Yayāti, the son of Nahuṣa. Among Yayāti's five sons, the youngest son, Pūru, accepted Yayāti's invalidity.





When Nahuṣa, who had six sons, was cursed to become a python, his eldest son, Yati, took sannyāsa, and therefore the next son, Yayāti, was enthroned as king. By providence, Yayāti married the daughter of Śukrācārya. Śukrācārya was a brāhmaṇa and Yayāti a kṣatriya, but Yayāti married her nonetheless. Śukrācārya's daughter, named Devayānī, had a girl friend named Śarmiṣṭhā, who was the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā. King Yayāti married Śarmiṣṭhā also. The history of this marriage is as follows. Once Śarmiṣṭhā was sporting in the water with thousands of her girl friends, and Devayānī was also there. When the young girls saw Lord Śiva, seated on his bull with Umā, they immediately dressed themselves, but Śarmiṣṭhā mistakenly put on Devayānī's clothes. Devayānī, being very angry, rebuked Śarmiṣṭhā, who also became very angry and responded by rebuking Devayānī and throwing her into a well. By chance, King Yayāti came to that well to drink water, and he found Devayānī and rescued her. Thus Devayānī accepted Mahārāja Yayāti as her husband. Thereafter, Devayānī, crying loudly, told her father about Śarmiṣṭhā's behavior. Upon hearing of this incident, Śukrācārya was very angry and wanted to chastise Vṛṣaparvā, Śarmiṣṭhā's father. Vṛṣaparvā, however, satisfied Śukrācārya by offering Śarmiṣṭhā as Devayānī's maidservant. Thus Śarmiṣṭhā, as the maidservant of Devayānī, also went to the house of Devayānī's husband. When Śarmiṣṭhā found her friend Devayānī with a son she also desired to have a son. Therefore, at the proper time for conception, she also requested Mahārāja Yayāti for sex. When Śarmiṣṭhā became pregnant also, Devayānī was very envious. In great anger, she immediately left for her father's house and told her father everything. Śukrācārya again became angry and cursed Mahārāja Yayāti to become old, but when Yayāti begged Śukrācārya to be merciful to him, Śukrācārya gave him the benediction that he could transfer his old age and invalidity to some young man. Yayāti exchanged his old age for the youth of his youngest son, Pūru, and thus he was able to enjoy with young girls.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

yatir yayātiḥ saṁyātir

āyatir viyatiḥ kṛtiḥ

ṣaḍ ime nahuṣasyāsann

indriyāṇīva dehinaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yatiḥ-Yati; yayātiḥ-Yayāti; saṁyātiḥ-Saṁyāti; āyatiḥ-Āyati; viyatiḥ-Viyati; kṛtiḥ-Kṛti; ṣaṭ-six; ime-all of them; nahuṣasya-of King Nahuṣa; āsan-were; indriyāṇi-the (six) senses; iva-like; dehinaḥ-of an embodied soul.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, as the embodied soul has six senses, King Nahuṣa had six sons, named Yati, Yayāti, Saṁyāti, Āyati, Viyati and Kṛti.





TEXT 2



rājyaṁ naicchad yatiḥ pitrā

dattaṁ tat-pariṇāmavit

yatra praviṣṭaḥ puruṣa

ātmānaṁ nāvabudhyate

SYNONYMS



rājyam-the kingdom; na aicchat-did not accept; yatiḥ-the eldest son, Yati; pitrā-by his father; dattam-offered; tat-pariṇāma-vit-knowing the result of becoming powerful as a king; yatra-wherein; praviṣṭaḥ-having entered; puruṣaḥ-such a person; ātmānam-self-realization; na-not; avabudhyate-will take seriously and understand.





When one enters the post of king or head of the government, one cannot understand the meaning of self-realization. Knowing this, Yati, the eldest son of Nahuṣa, did not accept the power to rule, although it was offered by his father.





Self-realization is the prime objective of human civilization, and it is regarded seriously by those who are situated in the mode of goodness and have developed the brahminical qualities. Kṣatriyas are generally endowed with material qualities conducive to gaining material wealth and enjoying sense gratification, but those who are spiritually advanced are not interested in material opulence. Indeed, they accept only the bare necessities for a life of spiritual advancement in self-realization. It is specifically mentioned here that if one enters political life, especially in the modern day, one looses the chance for human perfection. Nonetheless, one can attain the highest perfection if one hears Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This hearing is described as nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā [SB 1.2.18]. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was involved in politics, but because at the end of his life he heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, he attained perfection very easily. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has therefore suggested:



sthāne sthitāḥ śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir

ye prāyaśo 'jita jito 'py asi tais tri-lokyām





(Bhāg. 10.14.3)



Regardless of whether one is in the mode of passion, ignorance or goodness, if one regularly hears Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the self-realized soul, one is freed from the bondage of material involvement.





TEXT 3



pitari bhraṁśite sthānād

indrāṇyā dharṣaṇād dvijaiḥ

prāpite 'jagaratvaṁ vai

yayātir abhavan nṛpaḥ

SYNONYMS



pitari-when his father; bhraṁśite-was caused to fall down; sthānāt-from the heavenly planets; indrāṇyāḥ-of Śacī, the wife of Indra; dharṣaṇāt-from offending; dvijaiḥ-by them (upon her lodging a complaint with the brāhmaṇas); prāpite-being degraded to; ajagaratvam-the life of a snake; vai-indeed; yayātiḥ-the son named Yayāti; abhavat-became; nṛpaḥ-the king.





Because Nahuṣa, the father of Yayāti, molested Indra's wife, Śacī, who then complained to Agastya and other brāhmaṇas, these saintly brāhmaṇas cursed Nahuṣa to fall from the heavenly planets and be degraded to the status of a python. Consequently, Yayāti became the king.





TEXT 4



catasṛṣv ādiśad dikṣu

bhrātṝn bhrātā yavīyasaḥ

kṛta-dāro jugoporvīṁ

kāvyasya vṛṣaparvaṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



catasṛṣu-over the four; ādiśat-allowed to rule; dikṣu-directions; bhrātṝn-four brothers; bhrātā-Yayāti; yavīyasaḥ-young; kṛta-dāraḥ-married; jugopa-ruled; ūrvīm-the world; kāvyasya-the daughter of Śukrācārya; vṛṣaparvaṇaḥ-the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā.





King Yayāti had four younger brothers, whom he allowed to rule the four directions. Yayāti himself married Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya, and Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā, and ruled the entire earth.





TEXT 5



śrī-rājovāca

brahmarṣir bhagavān kāvyaḥ

kṣatra-bandhuś ca nāhuṣaḥ

rājanya-viprayoḥ kasmād

vivāhaḥ pratilomakaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired; brahma-ṛṣiḥ-the best of the brāhmaṇas; bhagavān-very powerful; kāvyaḥ-Śukrācārya; kṣatra-bandhuḥ-belonged to the kṣatriya class; ca-also; nāhuṣaḥ-King Yayāti; rājanya-viprayoḥ-of a brāhmaṇa and a kṣatriya; kasmāt-how; vivāhaḥ-a marital relationship; pratilomakaḥ-against the customary regulative principles.





Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: Śukrācārya was a very powerful brāhmaṇa, and Mahārāja Yayāti was a kṣatriya. Therefore I am curious to know how there occurred this pratiloma marriage between a kṣatriya and a brāhmaṇa.





According to the Vedic system, marriages between kṣatriyas and kṣatriyas or between brāhmaṇas and brāhmaṇas are the general custom. If marriages sometimes take place between different classes, these marriages are of two types, namely anuloma and pratiloma. Anuloma, marriage between a brāhmaṇa and the daughter of a kṣatriya, is permissible, but pratiloma, marriage between a kṣatriya and the daughter of a brāhmaṇa, is not generally allowed. Therefore Mahārāja Parīkṣit was curious about how Śukrācārya, a powerful brāhmaṇa, could accept the principle of pratiloma. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was eager to know the cause for this uncommon marriage.





TEXTS 6–7



śrī-śuka uvāca

ekadā dānavendrasya

śarmiṣṭhā nāma kanyakā

sakhī-sahasra-saṁyuktā

guru-putryā ca bhāminī

devayānyā purodyāne



puṣpita-druma-saṅkule

vyacarat kala-gītāli-

nalinī-puline 'balā

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ekadā-once upon a time; dānava-indrasya-of Vṛṣaparvā; śarmiṣṭhā-Śarmiṣṭhā; nāma-by name; kanyakā-a daughter; sakhī-sahasra-saṁyuktā-accompanied by thousands of friends; guru-putryā-with the daughter of the guru, Śukrācārya; ca-also; bhāminī-very easily irritated; devayānyā-with Devayānī; pura-udyāne-within the palace garden; puṣpita-full of flowers; druma-with nice trees; saṅkule-congested; vyacarat-was walking; kala-gīta-with very sweet sounds; ali-with bumblebees; nalinī-with lotuses; puline-in such a garden; abalā-innocent.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: One day Vṛṣaparvā's daughter Śarmiṣṭhā, who was innocent but angry by nature, was walking with Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya, and with thousands of friends, in the palace garden. The garden was full of lotuses and trees of flowers and fruits and was inhabited by sweetly singing birds and bumblebees.





TEXT 8



tā jalāśayam āsādya

kanyāḥ kamala-locanāḥ

tīre nyasya dukūlāni

vijahruḥ siñcatīr mithaḥ

SYNONYMS



tāḥ-they; jala-āśayam-to the lakeside; āsādya-coming; kanyāḥ-all the girls; kamala-locanāḥ-with eyes like lotus petals; tīre-on the bank; nyasya-giving up; dukūlāni-their dresses; vijahruḥ-began to sport; siñcatīḥ-throwing water; mithaḥ-on one another.





When the young, lotus-eyed girls came to the bank of a reservoir of water, they wanted to enjoy by bathing. Thus they left their clothing on the bank and began sporting, throwing water on one another.





TEXT 9



vīkṣya vrajantaṁ giriśaṁ

saha devyā vṛṣa-sthitam

sahasottīrya vāsāṁsi

paryadhur vrīḍitāḥ striyaḥ

SYNONYMS



vīkṣya-seeing; vrajantam-passing by; giriśam-Lord Śiva; saha-with; devyā-Pārvatī, the wife of Lord Śiva; vṛṣa-sthitam-seated upon his bull; sahasā-quickly; uttīrya-getting out of the water; vāsāṁsi-garments; paryadhuḥ-put on the body; vrīḍitāḥ-being ashamed; striyaḥ-the young girls.





While sporting in the water, the girls suddenly saw Lord Śiva passing by, seated on the back of his bull with his wife, Pārvatī. Ashamed because they were naked, the girls quickly got out of the water and covered themselves with their garments.





TEXT 10



śarmiṣṭhājānatī vāso

guru-putryāḥ samavyayat

svīyaṁ matvā prakupitā

devayānīdam abravīt

SYNONYMS



śarmiṣṭhā-the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; ajānatī-without knowledge; vāsaḥ-the dress; guru-putryāḥ-of Devayānī, the daughter of the guru; samavyayat-put on the body; svīyam-her own; matvā-thinking; prakupitā-irritated and angry; devayānī-the daughter of Śukrācārya; idam-this; abravīt-said.





Śarmiṣṭhā unknowingly put Devayānī's dress on her own body, thus angering Devayānī, who then spoke as follows.





TEXT 11



aho nirīkṣyatām asyā

dāsyāḥ karma hy asāmpratam

asmad-dhāryaṁ dhṛtavatī

śunīva havir adhvare

SYNONYMS



aho-alas; nirīkṣyatām-just see; asyāḥ-of her (Śarmiṣṭhā); dāsyāḥ-just like our servant; karma-activities; hi-indeed; asāmpratam-without any etiquette; asmat-dhāryam-the garment meant for me; dhṛtavatī-she has put on; śunī iva-like a dog; haviḥ-clarified butter; adhvare-meant for offering in the sacrifice.





Oh, just see the activities of this servant-maid Śarmiṣṭhā! Disregarding all etiquette, she has put on my dress, just like a dog snatching clarified butter meant for use in a sacrifice.





TEXTS 12–14



yair idaṁ tapasā sṛṣṭaṁ

mukhaṁ puṁsaḥ parasya ye

dhāryate yair iha jyotiḥ

śivaḥ panthāḥ pradarśitaḥ

yān vandanty upatiṣṭhante



loka-nāthāḥ sureśvarāḥ

bhagavān api viśvātmā

pāvanaḥ śrī-niketanaḥ

vayaṁ tatrāpi bhṛgavaḥ



śiṣyo 'syā naḥ pitāsuraḥ

asmad-dhāryaṁ dhṛtavatī

śūdro vedam ivāsatī

SYNONYMS



yaiḥ-by which persons; idam-this entire universe; tapasā-by austerity; sṛṣṭam-was created; mukham-the face; puṁsaḥ-of the Supreme Person; parasya-transcendental; ye-those who (are); dhāryate-is always born; yaiḥ-by which persons; iha-here; jyotiḥ-the brahmajyoti, the effulgence of the Supreme Lord; śivaḥ-auspicious; panthāḥ-way; pradarśitaḥ-is directed; yān-to whom; vandanti-offer prayers; upatiṣṭhante-honor and follow; loka-nāthāḥ-the directors of the various planets; sura-īśvarāḥ-the demigods; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api-even; viśva-ātmā-the Supersoul; pāvanaḥ-the purifier; śrī-niketanaḥ-the husband of the goddess of fortune; vayam-we (are); tatra api-even greater than other brāhmaṇas; bhṛgavaḥ-descendants of Bhṛgu; śiṣyaḥ-disciple; asyāḥ-of her; naḥ-our; pitā-father; asuraḥ-belong to the demoniac group; asmat-dhāryam-meant to be worn by us; dhṛtavatī-she has put on; śūdraḥ-a non-brāhmaṇa worker; vedam-the Vedas; iva-like; asatī-unchaste.





We are among the qualified brāhmaṇas, who are accepted as the face of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The brāhmaṇas have created the entire universe by their austerity, and they always keep the Absolute Truth within the core of their hearts. They have directed the path of good fortune, the path of Vedic civilization, and because they are the only worshipable objects within this world, they are offered prayers and worshiped even by the great demigods, the directors of the various planets, and even by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, the supreme purifier, the husband of the goddess of fortune. And we are even more respectable because we are in the dynasty of Bhṛgu. Yet although this woman's father, being among the demons, is our disciple, she has put on my dress, exactly like a śūdra taking charge of Vedic knowledge.





TEXT 15



evaṁ kṣipantīṁ śarmiṣṭhā

guru-putrīm abhāṣata

ruṣā śvasanty uraṅgīva

dharṣitā daṣṭa-dacchadā

SYNONYMS



evam-thus; kṣipantīm-chastising; śarmiṣṭhā-the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; guru-putrīm-unto the daughter of the guru, Śukrācārya; abhāṣata-said; ruṣā-being very angry; śvasantī-breathing very heavily; uraṅgī iva-like a serpent; dharṣitā-offended, trampled; daṣṭa-dat-chadā-biting her lip with her teeth.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When thus rebuked in cruel words, Śarmiṣṭhā was very angry. Breathing heavily like a serpent and biting her lower lip with her teeth, she spoke to the daughter of Śukrācārya as follows.





TEXT 16



ātma-vṛttam avijñāya

katthase bahu bhikṣuki

kiṁ na pratīkṣase 'smākaṁ

gṛhān balibhujo yathā

SYNONYMS



ātma-vṛttam-one's own position; avijñāya-without understanding; katthase-you are talking madly; bahu-so much; bhikṣuki-beggar; kim-whether; na-not; pratīkṣase-you wait; asmākam-our; gṛhān-at the house; balibhujaḥ-crows; yathā-like.





You beggar, since you don't understand your position, why should you unnecessarily talk so much? Don't all of you wait at our house, depending on us for your livelihood like crows?





Crows have no independent life; they fully depend on the remnants of foodstuffs thrown by householders into the garbage tank. Therefore, because a brāhmaṇa depends on his disciples, when Śarmiṣṭhā was heavily rebuked by Devayānī she charged Devayānī with belonging to a family of crowlike beggars. It is the nature of women to fight verbally at even a slight provocation. As we see from this incident, this has been their nature for a long, long time.





TEXT 17



evaṁ-vidhaiḥ suparuṣaiḥ

kṣiptvācārya-sutāṁ satīm

śarmiṣṭhā prākṣipat kūpe

vāsaś cādāya manyunā

SYNONYMS



evam-vidhaiḥ-such; su-paruṣaiḥ-by unkind words; kṣiptvā-after chastising; ācārya-sutām-the daughter of Śukrācārya; satīm-Devayānī; śarmiṣṭhā-Śarmiṣṭhā; prākṣipat-threw (her); kūpe-into a well; vāsaḥ-the garments; ca-and; ādāya-taking away; manyunā-because of anger.





Using such unkind words, Śarmiṣṭhā rebuked Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya. In anger, she took away Devayānī's garments and threw Devayānī into a well.





TEXT 18



tasyāṁ gatāyāṁ sva-gṛhaṁ

yayātir mṛgayāṁ caran

prāpto yadṛcchayā kūpe

jalārthī tāṁ dadarśa ha

SYNONYMS



tasyām-when she; gatāyām-went; sva-gṛham-to her home; yayātiḥ-King Yayāti; mṛgayām-hunting; caran-wandering; prāptaḥ-arrived; yadṛcchayā-by chance; kūpe-in the well; jala-arthī-desiring to drink water; tām-her (Devayānī); dadarśa-saw; ha-indeed.





After throwing Devayānī into the well, Śarmiṣṭhā went home. Meanwhile, King Yayāti, while engaged in a hunting excursion, went to the well to drink water and by chance saw Devayānī.





TEXT 19



dattvā svam uttaraṁ vāsas

tasyai rājā vivāsase

gṛhītvā pāṇinā pāṇim

ujjahāra dayā-paraḥ

SYNONYMS



dattvā-giving; svam-his own; uttaram-upper; vāsaḥ-cloth; tasyai-unto her (Devayānī); rājā-the King; vivāsase-because she was naked; gṛhītvā-catching; pāṇinā-with his hand; pāṇim-her hand; ujjahāra-delivered; dayā-paraḥ-being very kind.





Seeing Devayānī naked in the well, King Yayāti immediately gave her his upper cloth. Being very kind to her, he caught her hand with his own and lifted her out.





TEXTS 20–21



taṁ vīram āhauśanasī

prema-nirbharayā girā

rājaṁs tvayā gṛhīto me

pāṇiḥ para-purañjaya

hasta-grāho 'paro mā bhūd



gṛhītāyās tvayā hi me

eṣa īśa-kṛto vīra

sambandho nau na pauruṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-unto him; vīram-Yayāti; āha-said; auśanasī-the daughter of Uśanā Kavi, Śukrācārya; prema-nirbharayā-saturated with love and kindness; girā-by such words; rājan-O King; tvayā-by you; gṛhītaḥ-accepted; me-my; pāṇiḥ-hand; para-purañjaya-the conqueror of the kingdoms of others; hasta-grāhaḥ-he who accepted my hand; aparaḥ-another; mā-may not; bhūt-become; gṛhītāyāḥ-accepted; tvayā-by you; hi-indeed; me-of me; eṣaḥ-this; īśa-kṛtaḥ-arranged by providence; vīra-O great hero; sambandhaḥ-relationship; nau-our; na-not; pauruṣaḥ-anything man-made.





With words saturated with love and affection, Devayānī said to King Yayāti: O great hero, O King, conqueror of the cities of your enemies, by accepting my hand you have accepted me as your married wife. Let me not be touched by others, for our relationship as husband and wife has been made possible by providence, not by any human being.





While taking Devayānī out of the well, King Yayāti must certainly have appreciated her youthful beauty, and therefore he might have asked her which caste she belonged to. Thus Devayānī would have immediately replied, "We are already married because you have accepted my hand." Uniting the hands of the bride and bridegroom is a system perpetually existing in all societies. Therefore, as soon as Yayāti accepted Devayānī's hand, they could be regarded as married. Because Devayānī was enamored with the hero Yayāti, she requested him not to change his mind and let another come to marry her.





TEXT 22



yad idaṁ kūpa-magnāyā

bhavato darśanaṁ mama

na brāhmaṇo me bhavitā

hasta-grāho mahā-bhuja

kacasya bārhaspatyasya

śāpād yam aśapaṁ purā

SYNONYMS



yat-because of; idam-this; kūpa-magnāyāḥ-fallen in the well; bhavataḥ-of your good self; darśanam-meeting; mama-with me; na-not; brāhmaṇaḥ-a qualified brāhmaṇa; me-my; bhavitā-will become; hasta-grāhaḥ-husband; mahā-bhuja-O great mighty-armed one; kacasya-of Kaca; bārhaspatyasya-the son of the learned brāhmaṇa and celestial priest Bṛhaspati; śāpāt-because of the curse; yam-whom; aśapam-I cursed; purā-in the past.





Because of falling in the well, I met you. Indeed, this has been arranged by providence. After I cursed Kaca, the son of the learned scholar Bṛhaspati, he cursed me by saying that I would not have a brāhmaṇa for a husband. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, there is no possibility of my becoming the wife of a brāhmaṇa.





Kaca, the son of the learned celestial priest Bṛhaspati, had been a student of Śukrācārya, from whom he had learned the art of reviving a man who has died untimely. This art, called mṛta-sañjīvanī, was especially used during wartime. When there was a war, soldiers would certainly die untimely, but if a soldier's body was intact, he could be brought to life again by this art of mṛta-sañjīvanī. This art was known to Śukrācārya and many others, and Kaca, the son of Bṛhaspati, became Śukrācārya's student to learn it. Devayānī desired to have Kaca as her husband, but Kaca, out of regard for Śukrācārya, looked upon the guru's daughter as a respectable superior and therefore refused to marry her. Devayānī angrily cursed Kaca by saying that although he had learned the art of mṛta-sañjīvanī from her father, it would be useless. When cursed in this way, Kaca retaliated by cursing Devayānī never to have a husband who was a brāhmaṇa. Because Devayānī liked Yayāti, who was a kṣatriya, she requested him to accept her as his bona fide wife. Although this would be pratiloma-vivāha, a marriage between the daughter of a high family and the son of a lower family, she explained that this arrangement was made by providence.





TEXT 23



yayātir anabhipretaṁ

daivopahṛtam ātmanaḥ

manas tu tad-gataṁ buddhvā

pratijagrāha tad-vacaḥ

SYNONYMS



yayātiḥ-King Yayāti; anabhipretam-not liked; daiva-upahṛtam-brought about by providential arrangements; ātmanaḥ-his personal interest; manaḥ-mind; tu-however; tat-gatam-being attracted to her; buddhvā-by such intelligence; pratijagrāha-accepted; tat-vacaḥ-the words of Devayānī.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Because such a marriage is not sanctioned by regular scriptures, King Yayāti did not like it, but because it was arranged by providence and because he was attracted by Devayānī's beauty, he accepted her request.





According to the Vedic system, the parents would consider the horoscopes of the boy and girl who were to be married. If according to astrological calculations the boy and girl were compatible in every respect, the match was called yoṭaka and the marriage would be accepted. Even fifty years ago, this system was current in Hindu society. Regardless of the affluence of the boy or the personal beauty of the girl, without this astrological compatibility the marriage would not take place. A person is born in one of three categories, known as deva-gaṇa, manuṣya-gaṇa and rakṣasa-gaṇa. In different parts of the universe there are demigods and demons, and in human society also some people resemble demigods whereas others resemble demons. If according to astrological calculations there was conflict between a godly and a demoniac nature, the marriage would not take place. Similarly, there were calculations of pratiloma and anuloma. The central idea is that if the boy and girl were on an equal level the marriage would be happy, whereas inequality would lead to unhappiness. Because care is no longer taken in marriage, we now find many divorces. Indeed, divorce has now become a common affair, although formerly one's marriage would continue lifelong, and the affection between husband and wife was so great that the wife would voluntarily die when her husband died or would remain a faithful widow throughout her entire life. Now, of course, this is no longer possible, for human society has fallen to the level of animal society. Marriage now takes place simply by agreement. Dāmpatye 'bhirucir hetuḥ (Bhāg. 12.2.3). The word abhiruci means "agreement." If the boy and girl simply agree to marry, the marriage takes place. But when the Vedic system is not rigidly observed, marriage frequently ends in divorce.





TEXT 24



gate rājani sā dhīre

tatra sma rudatī pituḥ

nyavedayat tataḥ sarvam

uktaṁ śarmiṣṭhayā kṛtam

SYNONYMS



gate rājani-after the departure of the King; sā-she (Devayānī); dhīre-learned; tatra sma-returning to her home; rudatī-crying; pituḥ-before her father; nyavedayat-submitted; tataḥ-thereafter; sarvam-all; uktam-mentioned; śarmiṣṭhayā-by Śarmiṣṭhā; kṛtam-done.





Thereafter, when the learned King returned to his palace, Devayānī returned home crying and told her father, Śukrācārya, about all that had happened because of Śarmiṣṭhā. She told how she had been thrown into the well but was saved by the King.





TEXT 25



durmanā bhagavān kāvyaḥ

paurohityaṁ vigarhayan

stuvan vṛttiṁ ca kāpotīṁ

duhitrā sa yayau purāt

SYNONYMS



durmanāḥ-being very unhappy; bhagavān-the most powerful; kāvyaḥ-Śukrācārya; paurohityam-the business of priesthood; vigarhayan-condemning; stuvan-praising; vṛttim-the profession; ca-and; kāpotīm-of collecting grains from the field; duhitrā-with his daughter; saḥ-he (Śukrācārya); yayau-went; purāt-from his own residence.





As Śukrācārya listened to what had happened to Devayānī, his mind was very much aggrieved. Condemning the profession of priesthood and praising the profession of uñcha-vṛtti [collecting grains from the fields], he left home with his daughter.





When a brāhmaṇa adopts the profession of a kapota, or pigeon, he lives by collecting grains from the field. This is called uñcha-vṛtti. A brāhmaṇa who takes to this uñcha-vṛtti profession is called first class because he depends completely on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and does not beg from anyone. Although the profession of begging is allowed for a brāhmaṇa or sannyāsī, one does better if he can avoid such a profession and completely depend on the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead for maintenance. Śukrācārya was certainly very sorry that because of his daughter's complaint he had to go to his disciple to beg some mercy, which he was obliged to do because he had accepted the profession of priesthood. In his heart, Śukrācārya did not like his profession, but since he had accepted it, he was obliged to go unwillingly to his disciple to settle the grievance submitted by his daughter.





TEXT 26



vṛṣaparvā tam ājñāya

pratyanīka-vivakṣitam

guruṁ prasādayan mūrdhnā

pādayoḥ patitaḥ pathi

SYNONYMS



vṛṣaparvā-the King of the demons; tam ājñāya-understanding the motive of Śukrācārya; pratyanīka-some curse; vivakṣitam-desiring to speak; gurum-his spiritual master, Śukrācārya; prasādayat-he satisfied immediately; mūrdhnā-with his head; pādayoḥ-at the feet; patitaḥ-fell down; pathi-on the road.





King Vṛṣaparvā understood that Śukrācārya was coming to chastise or curse him. Consequently, before Śukrācārya came to his house, Vṛṣaparvā went out and fell down in the street at the feet of his guru and satisfied him, checking his wrath.





TEXT 27



kṣaṇārdha-manyur bhagavān

śiṣyaṁ vyācaṣṭa bhārgavaḥ

kāmo 'syāḥ kriyatāṁ rājan

naināṁ tyaktum ihotsahe

SYNONYMS



kṣaṇa-ardha-lasting only a few moments; manyuḥ-whose anger; bhagavān-the most powerful; śiṣyam-unto his disciple, Vṛṣaparvā; vyācaṣṭa-said; bhārgavaḥ-Śukrācārya, the descendant of Bhṛgu; kāmaḥ-the desire; asyāḥ-of this Devayānī; kriyatām-please fulfill; rājan-O King; na-not; enām-this girl; tyaktum-to give up; iha-in this world; utsahe-I am able.





The powerful Śukrācārya was angry for a few moments, but upon being satisfied he said to Vṛṣaparvā: My dear King, kindly fulfill the desire of Devayānī, for she is my daughter and in this world I cannot give her up or neglect her.





Sometimes a great personality like Śukrācārya cannot neglect sons and daughters, for sons and daughters are by nature dependent on their father and the father has affection for them. Although Śukrācārya knew that the quarrel between Devayānī and Śarmiṣṭhā was childish, as Devayānī's father he had to side with his daughter. He did not like to do this, but he was obliged to because of affection. He plainly admitted that although he should not have asked the King for mercy for his daughter, because of affection he could not avoid doing so.





TEXT 28



tathety avasthite prāha

devayānī manogatam

pitrā dattā yato yāsye

sānugā yātu mām anu

SYNONYMS



tathā iti-when King Vṛṣaparvā agreed to Śukrācārya's proposal; avasthite-the situation being settled in this way; prāha-said; devayānī-the daughter of Śukrācārya; manogatam-her desire; pitrā-by the father; dattā-given; yataḥ-to whomever; yāsye-I shall go; sa-anugā-with her friends; yātu-shall go; mām anu-as my follower or servant.





After hearing Śukrācārya's request, Vṛṣaparvā agreed to fulfill Devayānī's desire, and he awaited her words. Devayānī then expressed her desire as follows: "Whenever I marry by the order of my father, my friend Śarmiṣṭhā must go with me as my maidservant, along with her friends."





TEXT 29



pitrā dattā devayānyai

śarmiṣṭhā sānugā tadā

svānāṁ tat saṅkaṭaṁ vīkṣya

tad-arthasya ca gauravam

devayānīṁ paryacarat

strī-sahasreṇa dāsavat

SYNONYMS



pitrā-by the father; dattā-given; devayānyai-unto Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya; śarmiṣṭhā-the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; sa-anugā-with her friends; tadā-at that time; svānām-of his own; tat-that; saṅkaṭam-dangerous position; vīkṣya-observing; tat-from him; arthasya-of the benefit; ca-also; gauravam-the greatness; devayānīm-unto Devayānī; paryacarat-served; strī-sahasreṇa-with thousands of other women; dāsa-vat-acting as a slave.





Vṛṣaparvā wisely thought that Śukrācārya's displeasure would bring danger and that his pleasure would bring material gain. Therefore he carried out Śukrācārya's order and served him like a slave. He gave his daughter Śarmiṣṭhā to Devayānī, and Śarmiṣṭhā served Devayānī like a slave, along with thousands of other women.





In the beginning of these affairs concerning Śarmiṣṭhā and Devayānī, we saw that Śarmiṣṭhā had many friends. Now these friends became maidservants of Devayānī. When a girl married a kṣatriya king, it was customary for all her girl friends to go with her to her husband's house. For instance, when Vasudeva married Devakī, the mother of Kṛṣṇa, he married all six of her sisters, and she also had many friends who accompanied her. A king would maintain not only his wife but also the many friends and maidservants of his wife. Some of these maidservants would become pregnant and give birth to children. Such children were accepted as dāsī-putra, the sons of the maidservants, and the king would maintain them. The female population is always greater than the male, but since a woman needs to be protected by a man, the king would maintain many girls, who acted either as friends or as maidservants of the queen. In the history of Kṛṣṇa's household life we find that Kṛṣṇa married 16,108 wives. These were not maidservants but direct queens, and Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself into 16,108 forms to maintain different establishments for each and every wife. This is not possible for ordinary men. Therefore although the kings had to maintain many, many servants and wives, not all of them had different establishments.





TEXT 30



nāhuṣāya sutāṁ dattvā

saha śarmiṣṭhayośanā

tam āha rājañ charmiṣṭhām

ādhās talpe na karhicit

SYNONYMS



nāhuṣāya-unto King Yayāti, the descendant of Nahuṣa; sutām-his daughter; dattvā-giving in marriage; saha-with; śarmiṣṭhayā-Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā and servant of Devayānī; uśanā-Śukrācārya; tam-unto him (King Yayāti); āha-said; rājan-my dear King; śarmiṣṭhām-Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; ādhāḥ-allow; talpe-on your bed; na-not; karhicit-at any time.





When Śukrācārya gave Devayānī in marriage to Yayāti, he had Śarmiṣṭhā go with her, but he warned the King, "My dear King, never allow this girl Śarmiṣṭhā to lie with you in your bed."





TEXT 31



vilokyauśanasīṁ rājañ

charmiṣṭhā suprajāṁ kvacit

tam eva vavre rahasi

sakhyāḥ patim ṛtau satī

SYNONYMS



vilokya-by seeing; auśanasīm-Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya; rājan-O King Parīkṣit; śarmiṣṭhā-the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; su-prajām-possessing nice children; kvacit-at some time; tam-him (King Yayāti); eva-indeed; vavre-requested; rahasi-in a secluded place; sakhyāḥ-of her friend; patim-the husband; ṛtau-at the appropriate time; satī-being in that position.





O King Parīkṣit, upon seeing Devayānī with a nice son, Śarmiṣṭhā once approached King Yayāti at the appropriate time for conception. In a secluded place, she requested the King, the husband of her friend Devayānī, to enable her to have a son also.





TEXT 32



rāja-putryārthito 'patye

dharmaṁ cāvekṣya dharmavit

smarañ chukra-vacaḥ kāle

diṣṭam evābhyapadyata

SYNONYMS



rāja-putryā-by Śarmiṣṭhā, who was the daughter of a king; arthitaḥ-being requested; apatye-for a son; dharmam-religious principles; ca-as well as; avekṣya-considering; dharma-vit-aware of all religious principles; smaran-remembering; śukra-vacaḥ-the warning of Śukrācārya; kāle-at the time; diṣṭam-circumstantially; eva-indeed; abhyapadyata-accepted (to fulfill the desire of Śarmiṣṭhā).





When Princess Śarmiṣṭhā begged King Yayāti for a son, the King was certainly aware of the principles of religion, and therefore he agreed to fulfill her desire. Although he remembered the warning of Śukrācārya, he thought of this union as the desire of the Supreme, and thus he had sex with Śarmiṣṭhā.





King Yayāti was completely aware of the duty of a kṣatriya. When a kṣatriya is approached by a woman, he cannot deny her. This is a religious principle. Consequently, when Dharmarāja, Yudhiṣṭhira, saw Arjuna unhappy after Arjuna returned from Dvārakā, he asked whether Arjuna had refused a woman who had begged for a son. Although Mahārāja Yayāti remembered Śukrācārya's warning, he could not refuse Śarmiṣṭhā. He thought it wise to give her a son, and thus he had sexual intercourse with her after her menstrual period. This kind of lust is not against religious principles. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.11), dharmāviruddho bhūteṣu kāmo 'smi: sex life not contrary to the principles of religion is sanctioned by Kṛṣṇa. Because Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of a king, had begged Yayāti for a son, their combination was not lust but an act of religion.





TEXT 33



yaduṁ ca turvasuṁ caiva

devayānī vyajāyata

druhyuṁ cānuṁ ca pūruṁ ca

śarmiṣṭhā vārṣaparvaṇī

SYNONYMS



yadum-Yadu; ca-and; turvasum-Turvasu; ca eva-as well as; devayānī-the daughter of Śukrācārya; vyajāyata-gave birth to; druhyum-Druhyu; ca-and; anum-Anu; ca-also; pūrum-Pūru; ca-also; śarmiṣṭhā-Śarmiṣṭhā; vārṣaparvaṇī-the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā.





Devayānī gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu, and Śarmiṣṭhā gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and Pūru.





TEXT 34



garbha-sambhavam āsuryā

bhartur vijñāya māninī

devayānī pitur gehaṁ

yayau krodha-vimūrchitā

SYNONYMS



garbha-sambhavam-pregnancy; āsuryāḥ-of Śarmiṣṭhā; bhartuḥ-made possible by her husband; vijñāya-knowing (from the brāhmaṇa astrologers); māninī-being very proud; devayānī-the daughter of Śukrācārya; pituḥ-of her father; geham-to the house; yayau-departed; krodha-vimūrchitā-frenzied because of anger.





When the proud Devayānī understood from outside sources that Śarmiṣṭhā was pregnant by her husband, she was frenzied with anger. Thus she departed for her father's house.





TEXT 35



priyām anugataḥ kāmī

vacobhir upamantrayan

na prasādayituṁ śeke

pāda-saṁvāhanādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



priyām-his beloved wife; anugataḥ-following; kāmī-very, very lusty; vacobhiḥ-by great words; upamantrayan-appeasing; na-not; prasādayitum-to appease; śeke-was able; pāda-saṁvāhana-ādibhiḥ-even by massaging her feet.





King Yayāti, who was very lusty, followed his wife, caught her and tried to appease her by speaking pleasing words and massaging her feet, but he could not satisfy her by any means.





TEXT 36



śukras tam āha kupitaḥ

strī-kāmānṛta-pūruṣa

tvāṁ jarā viśatāṁ manda

virūpa-karaṇī nṛṇām

SYNONYMS



śukraḥ-Śukrācārya; tam-unto him (King Yayāti); āha-said; kupitaḥ-being very angry at him; strī-kāma-O you who have lusty desires for women; anṛta-pūruṣa-O untruthful person; tvām-unto you; jarā-old age, invalidity; viśatām-may enter; manda-you fool; virūpa-karaṇī-which disfigures; nṛṇām-the bodies of human beings.





Śukrācārya was extremely angry. "You untruthful fool, lusting after women! You have done a great wrong," he said. "I therefore curse you to be attacked and disfigured by old age and invalidity."





TEXT 37



śrī-yayātir uvāca

atṛpto 'smy adya kāmānāṁ

brahman duhitari sma te

vyatyasyatāṁ yathā-kāmaṁ

vayasā yo 'bhidhāsyati

SYNONYMS



śrī-yayātiḥ uvāca-King Yayāti said; atṛptaḥ-unsatisfied; asmi-I am; adya-till now; kāmānām-to satisfy my lusty desires; brahman-O learned brāhmaṇa; duhitari-in connection with the daughter; sma-in the past; te-your; vyatyasyatām-just exchange; yathā-kāmam-as long as you are lusty; vayasā-with youth; yaḥ abhidhāsyati-of one who agrees to exchange your old age for his youth.





King Yayāti said, "O learned, worshipable brāhmaṇa, I have not yet satisfied my lusty desires with your daughter." Śukrācārya then replied, "You may exchange your old age with someone who will agree to transfer his youth to you."





When King Yayāti said that he had not yet satisfied his lusty desires with Śukrācārya's daughter, Śukrācārya saw that it was against the interests of his own daughter for Yayāti to continue in old age and invalidity, for certainly his lusty daughter would not be satisfied. Therefore Śukrācārya blessed his son-in-law by saying that he could exchange his old age for someone else's youth. He indicated that if Yayāti's son would exchange his youth for Yayāti's old age, Yayāti could continue to enjoy sex with Devayānī.





TEXT 38



iti labdha-vyavasthānaḥ

putraṁ jyeṣṭham avocata

yado tāta pratīcchemāṁ

jarāṁ dehi nijaṁ vayaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; labdha-vyavasthānaḥ-getting the opportunity to exchange his old age; putram-unto his son; jyeṣṭham-the eldest; avocata-he requested; yado-O Yadu; tāta-you are my beloved son; pratīccha-kindly exchange; imām-this; jarām-invalidity; dehi-and give; nijam-your own; vayaḥ-youth.





When Yayāti received this benediction from Śukrācārya, he requested his eldest son: My dear son Yadu, please give me your youth in exchange for my old age and invalidity.





TEXT 39



mātāmaha-kṛtāṁ vatsa

na tṛpto viṣayeṣv aham

vayasā bhavadīyena

raṁsye katipayāḥ samāḥ

SYNONYMS



mātāmaha-kṛtām-given by your maternal grandfather, Śukrācārya; vatsa-my dear son; na-not; tṛptaḥ-satisfied; viṣayeṣu-in sex life, sense gratification; aham-I (am); vayasā-by age; bhavadīyena-of your good self; raṁsye-I shall enjoy sex life; katipayāḥ-for a few; samāḥ-years.





My dear son, I am not yet satisfied in my sexual desires. But if you are kind to me, you can take the old age given by your maternal grandfather, and I may take your youth so that I may enjoy life for a few years more.





This is the nature of lusty desires. In Bhagavad-gītā (7.20) it is said, kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ: when one is too attached to sense gratification, he actually loses his sense. The word hṛta jñānāḥ refers to one who has lost his sense. Here is an example: the father shamelessly asked his son to exchange youth for old age. Of course, the entire world is under such illusion. Therefore it is said that everyone is pramattaḥ, or exclusively mad. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma: [SB 5.5.4] when one becomes almost like a madman, he indulges in sex and sense gratification. Sex and sense gratification can be controlled, however, and one achieves perfection when he has no desires for sex. This is possible only when one is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious.



yadavadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-pādāravinde

nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt

tadavadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne

bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu-niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca





"Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of Kṛṣṇa, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex pleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl with distaste." Sexual desire can be stopped only when one is fully Kṛṣṇa conscious, and not otherwise. As long as one has desires for sex, one must change his body and transmigrate from one body to another to enjoy sex in different species or forms. But although the forms may differ, the business of sex is the same. Therefore it is said, punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]. Those who are very much attached to sex transmigrate from one body to another, with the same business of "chewing the chewed," tasting sex enjoyment as a dog, sex enjoyment as a hog, sex enjoyment as a demigod, and so on.





TEXT 40



śrī-yadur uvāca

notsahe jarasā sthātum

antarā prāptayā tava

aviditvā sukhaṁ grāmyaṁ

vaitṛṣṇyaṁ naiti pūruṣaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-yaduḥ uvāca-Yadu, the eldest son to Yayāti, replied; na utsahe-I am not enthusiastic; jarasā-with your old age and invalidity; sthātum-to remain; antarā-while in youth; prāptayā-accepted; tava-your; aviditvā-without experiencing; sukham-happiness; grāmyam-material or bodily; vaitṛṣṇyam-indifference to material enjoyment; na-does not; eti-attain; pūruṣaḥ-a person.





Yadu replied: My dear father, you have already achieved old age, although you also were a young man. But I do not welcome your old age and invalidity, for unless one enjoys material happiness, one cannot attain renunciation.





Renunciation of material enjoyment is the ultimate goal of human life. Therefore the varṇāśrama institution is most scientific. It aims at giving one the facility to return home, back to Godhead, which one cannot do without completely renouncing all connections with the material world. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya: one who wants to go back home, back to Godhead, must be niṣkiñcana, free from all affinity for material enjoyment. Brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam: unless one is fully renounced, one cannot engage in devotional service or stay in Brahman. Devotional service is rendered on the Brahman platform. Therefore, unless one attains the Brahman platform, or spiritual platform, one cannot engage in devotional service; or, in other words, a person engaged in devotional service is already on the Brahman platform.



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman." (Bg. 14.26) If one attains devotional service, therefore, he is certainly liberated. Generally, unless one enjoys material happiness, one cannot attain renunciation. Varṇāśrama therefore gives the opportunity for gradual elevation. Yadu, the son of Mahārāja Yayāti, explained that he was unable to give up his youth, for he wanted to use it to attain the renounced order in the future.



Mahārāja Yadu was different from his brothers. As stated in the next verse, turvasuś coditaḥ pitrā druhyuś cānuś ca bhārata/ pratyācakhyur adharmajñāḥ. Mahārāja Yadu's brothers refused to accept their father's proposal because they were not completely aware of dharma. To accept orders that follow religious principles, especially the orders of one's father, is very important. Therefore when the brothers of Mahārāja Yadu refused their father's order, this was certainly irreligious. Mahārāja Yadu's refusal, however, was religious. As stated in the Tenth Canto, yadoś ca dharma-śīlāya: Mahārāja Yadu was completely aware of the principles of religion. The ultimate principle of religion is to engage oneself in devotional service to the Lord. Mahārāja Yadu was very eager to engage himself in the Lord's service, but there was an impediment: during youth the material desire to enjoy the material senses is certainly present, and unless one fully satisfies these lusty desires in youth, there is a chance of one's being disturbed in rendering service to the Lord. We have actually seen that many sannyāsīs who accept sannyāsa prematurely, not having satisfied their material desires, fall down because they are disturbed. Therefore the general process is to go through gṛhastha life and vānaprastha life and finally come to sannyāsa and devote oneself completely to the service of the Lord. Mahārāja Yadu was ready to accept his father's order and exchange youth for old age because he was confident that the youth taken by his father would be returned. But because this exchange would delay his complete engagement in devotional service, he did not want to accept his father's old age, for he was eager to achieve freedom from disturbances. Moreover, among the descendants of Yadu would be Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, because Yadu was eager to see the Lord's appearance in his dynasty as soon as possible, Yadu refused to accept his father's proposal. This was not irreligious, however, because Yadu's purpose was to serve the Lord. Because Yadu was a faithful servant of the Lord, Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared in his dynasty. As confirmed in the prayers of Kuntī, yadoḥ priyasyānvavāye. Yadu was very dear to Kṛṣṇa, who was therefore eager to descend in Yadu's dynasty. In conclusion, Mahārāja Yadu should not be considered adharma jña, ignorant of religious principles, as the next verse designates his brothers. He was like the four Sanakas (catuḥ-sana), who refused the order of their father, Brahmā, for the sake of a better cause. Because the four Kumāras wanted to engage themselves completely in the service of the Lord as brahmacārīs, their refusal to obey their father's order was not irreligious.





TEXT 41



turvasuś coditaḥ pitrā

druhyuś cānuś ca bhārata

pratyācakhyur adharmajñā

hy anitye nitya-buddhayaḥ

SYNONYMS



turvasuḥ-Turvasu, another son; coditaḥ-requested; pitrā-by the father (to exchange old age and invalidity for his youth); druhyuḥ-Druhyu, another son; ca-and; anuḥ-Anu, another son; ca-also; bhārata-O King Parīkṣit; pratyācakhyuḥ-refused to accept; adharma-jñāḥ-because they did not know religious principles; hi-indeed; a-nitye-temporary youth; nitya-buddhayaḥ-thinking to be permanent.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Yayāti similarly requested his sons Turvasu, Druhyu and Anu to exchange their youth for his old age, but because they were unaware of religious principles, they thought that their flickering youth was eternal, and therefore they refused to carry out their father's order.





TEXT 42



apṛcchat tanayaṁ pūruṁ

vayasonaṁ guṇādhikam

na tvam agrajavad vatsa

māṁ pratyākhyātum arhasi

SYNONYMS



apṛcchat-requested; tanayam-the son; pūrum-Pūru; vayasā-by age; ūnam-although younger; guṇa-adhikam-better than the others by quality; na-not; tvam-you; agraja-vat-like your older brothers; vatsa-my dear son; mām-me; pratyākhyātum-to refuse; arhasi-ought.





King Yayāti then requested Pūru, who was younger than these three brothers but more qualified, "My dear son, do not be disobedient like your elder brothers, for that is not your duty."





TEXT 43



śrī-pūrur uvāca

ko nu loke manuṣyendra

pitur ātma-kṛtaḥ pumān

pratikartuṁ kṣamo yasya

prasādād vindate param

SYNONYMS



śrī-pūruḥ uvāca-Pūru said; kaḥ-what; nu-indeed; loke-in this world; manuṣya-indra-O Your Majesty, best of human beings; pituḥ-the father; ātma-kṛtaḥ-who has given this body; pumān-a person; pratikartum-to repay; kṣamaḥ-is able; yasya-of whom; prasādāt-by the mercy; vindate-one enjoys; param-superior life.





Pūru replied: O Your Majesty, who in this world can repay his debt to his father? By the mercy of one's father, one gets the human form of life, which can enable one to become an associate of the Supreme Lord.





The father gives the seed of the body, and this seed gradually grows and develops until one ultimately attains the developed human body, with consciousness higher than that of the animals. In the human body one can be elevated to the higher planets, and, furthermore, if one cultivates Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one can return home, back to Godhead. This important human body is obtained by the grace of the father, and therefore everyone is indebted to his father. Of course, in other lives one also gets a father and mother; even cats and dogs have fathers and mothers. But in the human form of life the father and mother can award their son the greatest benediction by teaching him to become a devotee. When one becomes a devotee, he achieves the greatest benediction because he completely averts the repetition of birth and death. Therefore the father who trains his child in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the most benevolent father in this world. It is said:



janame janame sabe pitā mātā pāya

kṛṣṇa guru nahi mile bhaja hari ei





Everyone gets a father and mother, but if one gets the benediction of Kṛṣṇa and guru, he can conquer material nature and return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 44



uttamaś cintitaṁ kuryāt

prokta-kārī tu madhyamaḥ

adhamo 'śraddhayā kuryād

akartoccaritaṁ pituḥ

SYNONYMS



uttamaḥ-the best; cintitam-considering the father's idea; kuryāt-acts accordingly; prokta-kārī-one who acts on the order of the father; tu-indeed; madhyamaḥ-mediocre; adhamaḥ-lower class; aśraddhayā-without any faith; kuryāt-acts; akartā-unwilling to do; uccaritam-like stool; pituḥ-of the father.





A son who acts by anticipating what his father wants him to do is first class, one who acts upon receiving his father's order is second class, and one who executes his father's order irreverently is third class. But a son who refuses his father's order is like his father's stool.





Pūru, Yayāti's last son, immediately accepted his father's proposal, for although he was the youngest, he was very qualified. Pūru thought, "I should have accepted my father's proposal before he asked, but I did not. Therefore I am not a first-class son. I am second class. But I do not wish to become the lowest type of son, who is compared to his father's stool." One Indian poet has spoken of putra and mūtra. putra means "son," and mūtra means "urine." Both a son and urine come from the same genitals. If a son is an obedient devotee of the Lord he is called putra, or a real son; otherwise, if he is not learned and is not a devotee, a son is nothing better than urine.





TEXT 45



iti pramuditaḥ pūruḥ

pratyagṛhṇāj jarāṁ pituḥ

so 'pi tad-vayasā kāmān

yathāvaj jujuṣe nṛpa

SYNONYMS



iti-in this way; pramuditaḥ-very pleased; pūruḥ-Pūru; pratyagṛhṇāt-accepted; jarām-the old age and invalidity; pituḥ-of his father; saḥ-that father (Yayāti); api-also; tat-vayasā-by the youth of his son; kāmān-all desires; yathā-vat-as required; jujuṣe-satisfied; nṛpa-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: In this way, O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the son named Pūru was very pleased to accept the old age of his father, Yayāti, who took the youth of his son and enjoyed this material world as he required.





TEXT 46



sapta-dvīpa-patiḥ saṁyak

pitṛvat pālayan prajāḥ

yathopajoṣaṁ viṣayāñ

jujuṣe 'vyāhatendriyaḥ

SYNONYMS



sapta-dvīpa-patiḥ-the master of the entire world, consisting of seven islands; saṁyak-completely; pitṛ-vat-exactly like a father; pālayan-ruling; prajāḥ-the subjects; yathā-upajoṣam-as much as he wanted; viṣayān-material happiness; jujuṣe-enjoyed; avyāhata-without being disturbed; indriyaḥ-his senses.





Thereafter, King Yayāti became the ruler of the entire world, consisting of seven islands, and ruled the citizens exactly like a father. Because he had taken the youth of his son, his senses were unimpaired, and he enjoyed as much material happiness as he desired.





TEXT 47



devayāny apy anudinaṁ

mano-vāg-deha-vastubhiḥ

preyasaḥ paramāṁ prītim

uvāha preyasī rahaḥ

SYNONYMS



devayānī-Mahārāja Yayāti's wife, the daughter of Śukrācārya; api-also; anudinam-twenty-four hours, day after day; manaḥ-vāk-by her mind and words; deha-body; vastubhiḥ-with all requisite things; preyasaḥ-of her beloved husband; paramām-transcendental; prītim-bliss; uvāha-executed; preyasī-very dear to her husband; rahaḥ-in seclusion, without any disturbance.





In secluded places, engaging her mind, words, body and various paraphernalia, Devayānī, the dear wife of Mahārāja Yayāti, always brought her husband the greatest possible transcendental bliss.





TEXT 48



ayajad yajña-puruṣaṁ

kratubhir bhūri-dakṣiṇaiḥ

sarva-devamayaṁ devaṁ

sarva-vedamayaṁ harim

SYNONYMS



ayajat-worshiped; yajña-puruṣam-the yajña-puruṣa, the Lord; kratubhiḥ-by performing various sacrifices; bhūri-dakṣiṇaiḥ-giving abundant gifts to the brāhmaṇas; sarva-deva-mayam-the reservoir of all the demigods; devam-the Supreme Lord; sarva-veda-mayam-the ultimate object of all Vedic knowledge; harim-the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





King Yayāti performed various sacrifices, in which he offered abundant gifts to the brāhmaṇas to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Hari, who is the reservoir of all the demigods and the object of all Vedic knowledge.





TEXT 49



yasminn idaṁ viracitaṁ

vyomnīva jaladāvaliḥ

nāneva bhāti nābhāti

svapna-māyā-manorathaḥ

SYNONYMS



yasmin-in whom; idam-this entire cosmic manifestation; viracitam-created; vyomni-in the sky; iva-just like; jalada-āvaliḥ-clouds; nānā iva-as if in different varieties; bhāti-is manifested; na ābhāti-is unmanifested; svapna-māyā-illusion, like a dream; manaḥ-rathaḥ-created to be traversed by the chariot of the mind.





The Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva, who created the cosmic manifestation, exhibits Himself as all-pervading, like the sky that holds clouds. And when the creation is annihilated, everything enters into the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, and varieties are no longer manifested.





As stated by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19):



bahūnāṁ janmanām ante

jñānavān māṁ prapadyate

vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti

sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ





"After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare." The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, is one with the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth. Everything is in Him in the beginning, and at the end all manifestations enter into Him. He is situated in everyone's heart (sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭaḥ). And from Him everything has emanated (janmādy asya yataḥ [SB 1.1.1]). All material manifestations, however, are temporary. The word svapna means "dreams," māyā means "illusion," and manoratha means "mental creations." Dreams, illusions and mental creations are temporary. Similarly, all material creation is temporary, but Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the eternal Absolute Truth.





TEXT 50



tam eva hṛdi vinyasya

vāsudevaṁ guhāśayam

nārāyaṇam aṇīyāṁsaṁ

nirāśīr ayajat prabhum

SYNONYMS



tam eva-Him only; hṛdi-within the heart; vinyasya-placing; vāsudevam-Lord Vāsudeva; guha-āśayam-who exists in everyone's heart; nārāyaṇam-who is Nārāyaṇa, or an expansion of Nārāyaṇa; aṇīyāṁsam-invisible to material eyes, although existing everywhere; nirāśīḥ-Yayāti, without any material desires; ayajat-worshiped; prabhum-the Supreme Lord.





Without material desires, Mahārāja Yayāti worshiped the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone's heart as Nārāyaṇa and is invisible to material eyes, although existing everywhere.





King Yayāti, although externally seeming very fond of material enjoyment, was internally thinking of becoming an eternal servant of the Lord.





TEXT 51



evaṁ varṣa-sahasrāṇi

manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhair manaḥ-sukham

vidadhāno 'pi nātṛpyat

sārva-bhaumaḥ kad-indriyaiḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; varṣa-sahasrāṇi-for one thousand years; manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhaiḥ-by the mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses; manaḥ-sukham-temporary happiness created by the mind; vidadhānaḥ-executing; api-although; na atṛpyat-could not be satisfied; sārva-bhaumaḥ-although he was the king of the entire world; kat-indriyaiḥ-because of possessing impure senses.





Although Mahārāja Yayāti was the king of the entire world and he engaged his mind and five senses in enjoying material possessions for one thousand years, he was unable to be satisfied.





The kad-indriya, or unpurified senses, can be purified if one engages the senses and the mind in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. One must be freed from all designations. When one identifies himself with the material world, his senses are impure. But when one achieves spiritual realization and identifies himself as a servant of the Lord, his senses are purified immediately. Engagement of the purified senses in the service of the Lord is called bhakti. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate. One may enjoy the senses for many thousands of years, but unless one purifies the senses, one cannot be happy.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Eighteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Yayāti Regains His Youth."



Chapter Nineteen



King Yayāti Achieves Liberation





This Nineteenth Chapter describes how Mahārāja Yayāti achieved liberation after he recounted the figurative story of the he-goat and she-goat.





After many, many years of sexual relationships and enjoyment in the material world, King Yayāti finally became disgusted with such materialistic happiness. When satiated with material enjoyment, he devised a story of a he-goat and she-goat, corresponding to his own life, and narrated the story before his beloved Devayānī. The story is as follows. Once upon a time, while a goat was searching in a forest for different types of vegetables to eat, by chance he came to a well, in which he saw a she-goat. He became attracted to this she-goat and somehow or other delivered her from the well, and thus they were united. One day thereafter, when the she-goat saw the he-goat enjoying sex with another she-goat, she became angry, abandoned the he-goat, and returned to her brāhmaṇa owner, to whom she described her husband's behavior. The brāhmaṇa became very angry and cursed the he-goat to lose his sexual power. Thereupon, the he-goat begged the brāhmaṇa's pardon and was given back the power for sex. Then the he-goat enjoyed sex with the she-goat for many years, but still he was not satisfied. If one is lusty and greedy, even the total stock of gold in this world cannot satisfy one's lusty desires. These desires are like a fire. One may pour clarified butter on a blazing fire, but one cannot expect the fire to be extinguished. To extinguish such a fire, one must adopt a different process. The śāstra therefore advises that by intelligence one renounce the life of enjoyment. Without great endeavor, those with a poor fund of knowledge cannot give up sense enjoyment, especially in relation to sex, because a beautiful woman bewilders even the most learned man. King Yayāti, however, renounced worldly life and divided his property among his sons. He personally adopted the life of a mendicant, or sannyāsī, giving up all attraction to material enjoyment, and engaged himself fully in devotional service to the Lord. Thus he attained perfection. Later, when his beloved wife, Devayānī, was freed from her mistaken way of life, she also engaged herself in the devotional service of the Lord.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

sa ittham ācaran kāmān

straiṇo 'pahnavam ātmanaḥ

buddhvā priyāyai nirviṇṇo

gāthām etām agāyata

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saḥ-Mahārāja Yayāti; ittham-in this way; ācaran-behaving; kāmān-in regard to lusty desires; straiṇaḥ-very much attached to woman; apahnavam-counteraction; ātmanaḥ-of his own welfare; buddhvā-understanding with intelligence; priyāyai-unto his beloved wife, Devayānī; nirviṇṇaḥ-disgusted; gāthām-story; etām-this (as follows); agāyata-narrated.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Yayāti was very much attached to woman. In due course of time, however, when disgusted with sexual enjoyment and its bad effects, he renounced this way of life and narrated the following story to his beloved wife.





TEXT 2



śṛṇu bhārgavy amūṁ gāthāṁ

mad-vidhācaritāṁ bhuvi

dhīrā yasyānuśocanti

vane grāma-nivāsinaḥ

SYNONYMS



śṛṇu-please hear; bhārgavi-O daughter of Śukrācārya; amūm-this; gāthām-history; mat-vidhā-exactly resembling my behavior; ācaritām-behavior; bhuvi-within this world; dhīrāḥ-those who are sober and intelligent; yasya-of whom; anuśocanti-lament very much; vane-in the forest; grāma-nivāsinaḥ-very much attached to materialistic enjoyment.





My dearly beloved wife, daughter of Śukrācārya, in this world there was someone exactly like me. Please listen as I narrate the history of his life. By hearing about the life of such a householder, those who have retired from householder life always lament.





Persons who live in the village or town are called grāma-nivāsī, and those who live in the forest are called vana-vāsī or vānaprastha. The vānaprasthas, who have retired from family life, generally lament about their past family life because it engaged them in trying to fulfill lusty desires. Prahlāda Mahārāja said that one should retire from family life as soon as possible, and he described family life as the darkest well (hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpam). If one continuously or permanently concentrates on living with his family, he should be understood to be killing himself. In the Vedic civilization, therefore, it is recommended that one retire from family life at the end of his fiftieth year and go to vana, the forest. When he becomes expert or accustomed to forest life, or retired life as a vānaprastha, he should accept sannyāsa. Vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta [SB 7.5.5]. Sannyāsa means accepting unalloyed engagement in the service of the Lord. Vedic civilization therefore recommends four different stages of life-brahmacarya, gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa. One should be very much ashamed of remaining a householder and not promoting oneself to the two higher stages, namely vānaprastha and sannyāsa.





TEXT 3



basta eko vane kaścid

vicinvan priyam ātmanaḥ

dadarśa kūpe patitāṁ

sva-karma-vaśagām ajām

SYNONYMS



bastaḥ-goat; ekaḥ-one; vane-in a forest; kaścit-some; vicinvan-searching for food; priyam-very dear; ātmanaḥ-for himself; dadarśa-saw by chance; kūpe-within a well; patitām-fallen; sva-karma-vaśa-gām-under the influence of the results of fruitive activities; ajām-a she-goat.





While wandering in the forest, eating to satisfy his senses, a he-goat by chance approached a well, in which he saw a she-goat standing helplessly, having fallen into it by the influence of the results of fruitive activities.





Here Mahārāja Yayāti compares himself to a he-goat and Devayānī to a she-goat and describes the nature of man and woman. Like a he-goat, a man searches for sense gratification, wandering here and there, and a woman without the shelter of a man or husband is like a she-goat that has fallen into a well. Without being cared for by a man, a woman cannot be happy. Indeed, she is just like a she-goat that has fallen into a well and is struggling for existence. Therefore a woman must take shelter of her father, as Devayānī did when under the care of Śukrācārya, and then the father must give the daughter in charity to a suitable man, or a suitable man should help the woman by placing her under the care of a husband. This is shown vividly by the life of Devayānī. When King Yayāti delivered Devayānī from the well, she felt great relief and requested Yayāti to accept her as his wife. But when Mahārāja Yayāti accepted Devayānī, he became too attached and had sex life not only with her but with others, like Śarmiṣṭhā. Yet still he was dissatisfied. Therefore one should retire by force from such family life as Yayāti's. When one is fully convinced of the degrading nature of worldly family life, one should completely renounce this way of life, take sannyāsa, and engage himself fully in the service of the Lord. Then one's life will be successful.





TEXT 4



tasyā uddharaṇopāyaṁ

bastaḥ kāmī vicintayan

vyadhatta tīrtham uddhṛtya

viṣāṇāgreṇa rodhasī

SYNONYMS



tasyāḥ-of the she-goat; uddharaṇa-upāyam-the means of deliverance (from the well); bastaḥ-the he-goat; kāmī-having lusty desires; vicintayan-planning; vyadhatta-executed; tīrtham-a way to come out; uddhṛtya-digging the earth; viṣāṇa-agreṇa-by the point of the horns; rodhasī-at the edge of the well.





After planning how to get the she-goat out of the well, the lusty he-goat dug up the earth on the well's edge with the point of his horns in such a way that she was able to come out very easily.





Attraction for woman is the impetus for economic development, housing and many other things meant for living comfortably in this material world. Digging up the earth to make a way out for the she-goat was a laborious task, but before accepting the she-goat, the he-goat underwent this labor. Aho gṛha-kṣetra-sutāpta-vittair janasya moho 'yam ahaṁ mameti [SB 5.5.8]. The union between male and female provides the impetus for gaining a nice apartment, a good income, children and friends. Thus one becomes entangled in this material world.





TEXTS 5–6



sottīrya kūpāt suśroṇī

tam eva cakame kila

tayā vṛtaṁ samudvīkṣya

bahvyo 'jāḥ kānta-kāminīḥ

pīvānaṁ śmaśrulaṁ preṣṭhaṁ



mīḍhvāṁsaṁ yābha-kovidam

sa eko 'javṛṣas tāsāṁ

bahvīnāṁ rati-vardhanaḥ

reme kāma-graha-grasta

ātmānaṁ nāvabudhyata

SYNONYMS



sā-the she-goat; uttīrya-getting out; kūpāt-from the well; su-śroṇī-possessing very nice hips; tam-unto the he-goat; eva-indeed; cakame-desired to get as her husband; kila-indeed; tayā-by her; vṛtam-accepted; samudvīkṣya-seeing; bahvyaḥ-many others; ajāḥ-she-goats; kānta-kāminīḥ-desiring to get the he-goat as their husband; pīvānam-very stout and strong; śmaśrulam-having a very nice mustache and beard; preṣṭham-first-class; mīḍhvāṁsam-expert in discharging semen; yābha-kovidam-expert in the art of sexual intercourse; saḥ-that he-goat; ekaḥ-alone; aja-vṛṣaḥ-the hero of the goats; tāsām-of all the she-goats; bahvīnām-a great number; rati-vardhanaḥ-could increase the lusty desire; reme-he enjoyed; kāma-graha-grastaḥ-being haunted by the ghost of lusty desire; ātmānam-his own self; na-not; avabudhyata-could understand.





When the she-goat, who had very nice hips, got out of the well and saw the very handsome he-goat, she desired to accept him as her husband. When she did so, many other she-goats also desired him as their husband because he had a very beautiful bodily structure and a nice mustache and beard and was expert in discharging semen and in the art of sexual intercourse. Therefore, just as a person haunted by a ghost exhibits madness, the best of the he-goats, attracted by the many she-goats, engaged in erotic activities and naturally forgot his real business of self-realization.





Materialists are certainly very much attracted by sexual intercourse. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Although one becomes a gṛhastha, or householder, to enjoy sex life to his heart's content, one is never satisfied. Such a lusty materialist is like a goat, for it is said that if goats meant for slaughter get the opportunity, they enjoy sex before being killed. Human beings, however, are meant for self-realization.



tapo divyaṁ putrakā yena sattvaṁ

śuddhyed yasmād brahma-saukhyaṁ tv anantam





Human life is meant for realization of the self, the spiritual soul within the body (dehino 'smin yathā dehe [Bg. 2.13]). A materialistic rascal does not know that he is not the body but a spiritual soul within the body. However, one should understand his real position and cultivate knowledge by which to get free from bodily entanglement. Like an unfortunate person who acts madly, haunted by ghosts, a materialist haunted by the ghost of lust forgets his real business so that he can enjoy so-called happiness in the bodily concept of life.





TEXT 7



tam eva preṣṭhatamayā

ramamāṇam ajānyayā

vilokya kūpa-saṁvignā

nāmṛṣyad basta-karma tat

SYNONYMS



tam-the he-goat; eva-indeed; preṣṭhatamayā-beloved; ramamāṇam-engaged in sexual activities; ajā-the she-goat; anyayā-with another she-goat; vilokya-by seeing; kūpa-saṁvignā-the she-goat who had fallen into the well; na-not; amṛṣyat-tolerated; basta-karma-the business of the goat; tat-that (sex is accepted here as the business of the goat).





When the she-goat who had fallen into the well saw her beloved goat engaged in sexual affairs with another she-goat, she could not tolerate the goat's activities.





TEXT 8



taṁ durhṛdaṁ suhṛd-rūpaṁ

kāminaṁ kṣaṇa-sauhṛdam

indriyārāmam utsṛjya

svāminaṁ duḥkhitā yayau

SYNONYMS



tam-him (the he-goat); durhṛdam-cruel hearted; suhṛt-rūpam-pretending to be a friend; kāminam-very lusty; kṣaṇa-sauhṛdam-having friendship for the time being; indriya-ārāmam-interested only in sense gratification or sensuality; utsṛjya-giving up; svāminam-to her present husband, or to the former maintainer; duḥkhitā-being very much aggrieved; yayau-she left.





Aggrieved by her husband's behavior with another, the she-goat thought that the he-goat was not actually her friend but was hardhearted and was her friend only for the time being. Therefore, because her husband was lusty, she left him and returned to her former maintainer.





The word svāminam is significant. Svāmī means "caretaker" or "master." Devayānī was cared for by Śukrācārya before her marriage, and after her marriage she was cared for by Yayāti, but here the word svāminam indicates that Devayānī left the protection of her husband, Yayāti, and returned to her former protector, Śukrācārya. Vedic civilization recommends that a woman stay under the protection of a man. During childhood she should be cared for by her father, in youth by her husband, and in old age by a grown son. In any stage of life, a woman should not have independence.





TEXT 9



so 'pi cānugataḥ straiṇaḥ

kṛpaṇas tāṁ prasāditum

kurvann iḍaviḍā-kāraṁ

nāśaknot pathi sandhitum

SYNONYMS



saḥ-that he-goat; api-also; ca-also; anugataḥ-following the she-goat; straiṇaḥ-hen pecked; kṛpaṇaḥ-very poor; tām-her; prasāditum-to satisfy; kurvan-making; iḍaviḍā-kāram-an utterance in the language of the goats; na-not; aśaknot-was able; pathi-on the road; sandhitum-to satisfy.





Being very sorry, the he-goat, who was subservient to his wife, followed the she-goat on the road and tried his best to flatter her, but he could not pacify her.





TEXT 10



tasya tatra dvijaḥ kaścid

ajā-svāmy acchinad ruṣā

lambantaṁ vṛṣaṇaṁ bhūyaḥ

sandadhe 'rthāya yogavit

SYNONYMS



tasya-of the he-goat; tatra-thereupon; dvijaḥ-brāhmaṇa; kaścit-some; ajā-svāmī-the maintainer of another she-goat; acchinat-castrated, made effeminate; ruṣā-out of anger; lambantam-long; vṛṣaṇam-testicles; bhūyaḥ-again; sandadhe-joined; arthāya-for self-interest; yoga-vit-expert in the power of mystic yoga.





The she-goat went to the residence of a brāhmaṇa who was the maintainer of another she-goat, and that brāhmaṇa angrily cut off the he-goat's dangling testicles. But at the he-goat's request, the brāhmaṇa later rejoined them by the power of mystic yoga.





Here Śukrācārya is figuratively described as the husband of another she-goat. This indicates that the relationship between husband and wife in any society, whether higher or lower than human society, is nothing but the same relationship between he-goat and she-goat, for the material relationship between man and woman is one of sex. Yan maithunādi-gṛhamedhi-sukhaṁ hi tuccham [SB 7.9.45]. Śukrācārya was an ācārya, or expert, in family affairs, which involve the transfer of semen from he-goat to she-goat, The words kaścid ajā-svāmī expressly indicate herein that Śukrācārya was no better than Yayāti, for both of them were interested in family affairs generated by śukra, or semen. Śukrācārya first cursed Yayāti to become old so that he could no longer indulge in sex, but when Śukrācārya saw that Yayāti's emasculation would make his own daughter a victim of punishment, he used his mystic power to restore Yayāti's masculinity. Because he used his power of mystic yoga for family affairs and not to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this exercise in the magic of yoga was no better than the affairs of he-goats and she-goats. Yogic power should properly be used to realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord Himself recommends in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all."





TEXT 11



sambaddha-vṛṣaṇaḥ so 'pi

hy ajayā kūpa-labdhayā

kālaṁ bahu-tithaṁ bhadre

kāmair nādyāpi tuṣyati

SYNONYMS



sambaddha-vṛṣaṇaḥ-rejoined with his testicles; saḥ-he; api-also; hi-indeed; ajayā-with the she-goat; kūpa-labdhayā-whom he got from the well; kālam-for a time; bahu-titham-of a long, long duration; bhadre-O my dear wife; kāmaiḥ-with such lusty desires; na-not; adya api-even until now; tuṣyati-is satisfied.





My dear wife, when the he-goat had his testicles restored, he enjoyed the she-goat he had gotten from the well, but although he continued to enjoy for many, many years, even now he has not been fully satisfied.





When one is bound by affection for one's wife, one is attached to sexual desires that are very difficult to overcome. Therefore, according to Vedic civilization, one must voluntarily leave his so-called home and go to the forest. Pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. Human life is meant for such tapasya, or austerity. By the austerity of voluntarily stopping sex life at home and going to the forest to engage in spiritual activities in the association of devotees, one achieves the actual purpose of human life.





TEXT 12



tathāhaṁ kṛpaṇaḥ subhru

bhavatyāḥ prema-yantritaḥ

ātmānaṁ nābhijānāmi

mohitas tava māyayā

SYNONYMS



tathā-exactly like the he-goat; aham-I; kṛpaṇaḥ-a miser with no sense of the importance of life; su-bhru-O my wife, with beautiful eyebrows; bhavatyāḥ-in your company; prema-yantritaḥ-as if tied in love, although it is actually lust; ātmānam-self-realization (what I am and what my duty is); na abhijānāmi-I could not realize even until now; mohitaḥ-being bewildered; tava-your; māyayā-by the materially attractive feature.





O my dear wife with beautiful eyebrows, I am exactly like that he-goat, for I am so poor in intelligence that I am captivated by your beauty and have forgotten the real task of self-realization.





If one remains a victim of the so-called beauty of his wife, his family life is nothing but a dark well. Hitvātma-pātaṁ gṛham andha-kūpam. Existence in such a dark well is certainly suicidal. If one wants relief from the miserable condition of material life, one must voluntarily give up his lusty relationship with his wife; otherwise there is no question of self-realization. Unless one is extremely advanced in spiritual consciousness, household life is nothing but a dark well in which one commits suicide. Prahlāda Mahārāja therefore recommended that in due time, at least after one's fiftieth year, one must give up household life and go to the forest. Vanaṁ gato yad dharim āśrayeta [SB 7.5.5]. There one should seek shelter at the lotus feet of Hari.





TEXT 13



yat pṛthivyāṁ vrīhi-yavaṁ

hiraṇyaṁ paśavaḥ striyaḥ

na duhyanti manaḥ-prītiṁ

puṁsaḥ kāma-hatasya te

SYNONYMS



yat-what; pṛthivyām-within this world; vrīhi-food grains, rice; yavam-barley; hiraṇyam-gold; paśavaḥ-animals; striyaḥ-wives or other women; na duhyanti-do not give; manaḥ-prītim-satisfaction of the mind; puṁsaḥ-to a person; kāma-hatasya-because of being victimized by lusty desires; te-they.





A person who is lusty cannot satisfy his mind even if he has enough of everything in this world, including rice, barley and other food grains, gold, animals and women. Nothing can satisfy him.





Improvement of one's economic condition is the aim and object of a materialist, but there is no end to this material advancement, for if one cannot control his lusty desires, he will never be pleased, even if he gets all the material wealth of the world. In this age we see much material improvement, but still people are struggling to get more and more material opulence. Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. Although every living entity is a part of the Supreme Being, because of lusty desires one continuously struggles for so-called betterment of one's economic condition. To have a satisfied mind, one must give up his heart disease of lusty desires. This can be done only when one is Kṛṣṇa conscious.



bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ





(Bhāg. 10.33.39)



If one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious, then he can give up this heart disease; otherwise this disease of lusty desires will continue, and one cannot have peace in his mind.





TEXT 14



na jātu kāmaḥ kāmānām

upabhogena śāṁyati

haviṣā kṛṣṇa-vartmeva

bhūya evābhivardhate

SYNONYMS



na-not; jātu-at any time; kāmaḥ-lusty desires; kāmānām-of persons who are very lusty; upabhogena-by enjoyment of lusty desires; śāṁyati-can be pacified; haviṣā-by supplying butter; kṛṣṇa-vartmā-fire; iva-like; bhūyaḥ-again and again; eva-indeed; abhivardhate-increases more and more.





As supplying butter to a fire does not diminish the fire but instead increases it more and more, the endeavor to stop lusty desires by continual enjoyment can never be successful. [In fact, one must voluntarily cease from material desires.]





One may have enough money and enough resources to satisfy the senses but still not be satisfied, for the endeavor to stop lusty desires by enjoying can never be successful. The example given here is very appropriate. One cannot stop a blazing fire by trying to extinguish it with butter.





TEXT 15



yadā na kurute bhāvaṁ

sarva-bhūteṣv amaṅgalam

sama-dṛṣṭes tadā puṁsaḥ

sarvāḥ sukhamayā diśaḥ

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; na-not; kurute-does; bhāvam-a different attitude of attachment or envy; sarva-bhūteṣu-to all living entities; amaṅgalam-inauspicious; sama-dṛṣṭeḥ-because of being equipoised; tadā-at that time; puṁsaḥ-of the person; sarvāḥ-all; sukha-mayāḥ-in a happy condition; diśaḥ-directions.





When a man is nonenvious and does not desire ill fortune for anyone, he is equipoised. For such a person, all directions appear happy.





Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī said, viśvaṁ pūrṇa-sukhāyate: when one becomes Kṛṣṇa conscious by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, for him the entire world appears happy, and he has nothing for which to hanker. On the brahma-bhūta stage, or the platform of spiritual realization, there is no lamentation and no material hankering (na śocati na kāṅkṣati). As long as one lives in the material world, actions and reactions will continue, but when one is unaffected by such material actions and reactions, he is to be considered free from the danger of being victimized by material desires. The symptoms of those who are satiated with lusty desires are described in this verse. As explained by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, when one is not envious even of his enemy, does not expect honor from anyone, but instead desires all well-being even for his enemy, he is understood to be a paramahaṁsa, one who has fully subdued the lusty desires for sense gratification.





TEXT 16



yā dustyajā durmatibhir

jīryato yā na jīryate

tāṁ tṛṣṇāṁ duḥkha-nivahāṁ

śarma-kāmo drutaṁ tyajet

SYNONYMS



yā-that which; dustyajā-extremely difficult to give up; durmatibhiḥ-by persons too attached to material enjoyment; jīryataḥ-even by one who is an invalid because of old age; yā-that which; na-not; jīryate-is vanquished; tām-such; tṛṣṇām-desire; duḥkha-nivahām-which is the cause of all tribulations; śarma-kāmaḥ-a person desiring his own happiness; drutam-very soon; tyajet-should give up.





For those who are too attached to material enjoyment, sense gratification is very difficult to give up. Even when one is an invalid because of old age, one cannot give up such desires for sense gratification. Therefore, one who actually desires happiness must give up such unsatisfied desires, which are the cause of all tribulations.





We have actually seen, especially in the Western countries, that men who have reached more than eighty years of age still go to nightclubs and pay heavy fees to drink wine and associate with women. Although such men are too old to enjoy anything, their desires have not ceased. Time deteriorates even the body itself, which is the medium for all sensual satisfaction, but even when a man becomes old and invalid, his desires are strong enough to dictate that he go here and there to satisfy the desires of his senses. Therefore, by the practice of bhakti-yoga, one should give up his lusty desires. As explained by Śrī Yāmunācārya:



yadavadhi mama cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-pādāravinde

nava-nava-rasa-dhāmany udyataṁ rantum āsīt

tadavadhi bata nārī-saṅgame smaryamāne

bhavati mukha-vikāraḥ suṣṭhu-niṣṭhīvanaṁ ca





When one is Kṛṣṇa conscious, he gets more and more happiness by discharging duties for Kṛṣṇa. Such a person spits on sense gratification, especially that of sexual enjoyment. An experienced, advanced devotee is no longer interested in sex life. The strong desire for sex can be subdued only by advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





TEXT 17



mātrā svasrā duhitrā vā

nāviviktāsano bhavet

balavān indriya-grāmo

vidvāṁsam api karṣati

SYNONYMS



mātrā-with one's mother; svasrā-with one's sister; duhitrā-with ones own daughter; vā-either; na-not; avivikta-āsanaḥ-seated closely on one seat; bhavet-one should be; balavān-very strong; indriya-grāmaḥ-the group of senses; vidvāṁsam-the very learned and advanced person; api-even; karṣati-agitates.





One should not allow oneself to sit on the same seat even with one's own mother, sister or daughter, for the senses are so strong that even though one is very advanced in knowledge, he may be attracted by sex.





Learning the etiquette of how to deal with women does not free one from sexual attraction. As specifically mentioned herewith, such attraction is possible even with one's mother, sister or daughter. Generally, of course, one is not sexually attracted to his mother, sister or daughter, but if one allows himself to sit very close to such a woman, one may be attracted. This is a psychological fact. It may be said that one is liable to be attracted if he is not very advanced in civilized life; however, as specifically mentioned here, vidvāṁsam api karṣati: even if one is highly advanced, materially or spiritually, he may be attracted by lusty desires. The object of attraction may even be one's mother, sister or daughter. Therefore, one should be extremely careful in dealings with women. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was most strict in such dealings, especially after He accepted the sannyāsa order. Indeed, no woman could come near Him to offer Him respect. Again, one is warned herewith that one should be extremely careful in dealings with women. A brahmacārī is forbidden even to see the wife of his spiritual master if she happens to be young. The wife of the spiritual master may sometimes take some service from the disciple of her husband, as she would from a son, but if the wife of the spiritual master is young, a brahmacārī is forbidden to render service to her.





TEXT 18



pūrṇaṁ varṣa-sahasraṁ me

viṣayān sevato 'sakṛt

tathāpi cānusavanaṁ

tṛṣṇā teṣūpajāyate

SYNONYMS



pūrṇam-completely; varṣa-sahasram-one thousand years; me-my; viṣayān-sense gratification; sevataḥ-enjoying; asakṛt-without cessation, continuously; tathā api-still; ca-indeed; anusavanam-more and more; tṛṣṇā-lusty desires; teṣu-in sense gratification; upajāyate-are increased.





I have spent a full one thousand years enjoying sense gratification, yet my desire to enjoy such pleasure increases daily.





Mahārāja Yayāti is explaining, in terms of his actual experience, how strong are sexual desires, even in old age.





TEXT 19



tasmād etām ahaṁ tyaktvā

brahmaṇy adhyāya mānasam

nirdvandvo nirahaṅkāraś

cariṣyāmi mṛgaiḥ saha

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; etām-such strong desires for lusty affairs; aham-I; tyaktvā-giving up; brahmaṇi-upon the Supreme Absolute Truth; adhyāya-fixing; mānasam-the mind; nirdvandvaḥ-without duality; nirahaṅkāraḥ-without an identity of false prestige; cariṣyāmi-I shall loiter or wander in the forest; mṛgaiḥ saha-with the forest animals.





Therefore, I shall now give up all these desires and meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Free from the dualities of mental concoction and free from false prestige, I shall wander in the forest with the animals.





To go to the forest and live there with the animals, meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the only means by which to give up lusty desires. Unless one gives up such desires, one's mind cannot be freed from material contamination. Therefore, if one is at all interested in being freed from the bondage of repeated birth, death, old age and disease, after a certain age one must go to the forest. pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet. After fifty years of age, one should voluntarily give up family life and go to the forest. The best forest is Vṛndāvana, where one need not live with the animals but can associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who never leaves Vṛndāvana. Cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness in Vṛndāvana is the best means of being liberated from material bondage, for in Vṛndāvana one can automatically meditate upon Kṛṣṇa. Vṛndāvana has many temples, and in one or more of these temples one may see the form of the Supreme Lord as Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma and meditate upon this form. As expressed here by the words brahmaṇy adhyāya, one should concentrate one's mind upon the Supreme Lord, Parabrahman. This Parabrahman is Kṛṣṇa, as confirmed by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gītā (paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān [Bg. 10.12]). Kṛṣṇa and His abode, Vṛndāvana, are not different. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas tad-dhāma vṛndāvanam. Vṛndāvana is as good as Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, if one somehow or other gets the opportunity to live in Vṛndāvana, and if one is not a pretender but simply lives in Vṛndāvana and concentrates his mind upon Kṛṣṇa, one is liberated from material bondage. One's mind is not purified, however, even in Vṛndāvana, if one is agitated by lusty desires. One should not live in Vṛndāvana and commit offenses, for a life of offenses in Vṛndāvana is no better than the lives of the monkeys and hogs there. Many monkeys and hogs live in Vṛndāvana, and they are concerned with their sexual desires. Men who have gone to Vṛndāvana but who still hanker for sex should immediately leave Vṛndāvana and stop their grievous offenses at the lotus feet of the Lord. There are many misguided men who live in Vṛndāvana to satisfy their sexual desires, but they are certainly no better than the monkeys and hogs. Those who are under the control of māyā, and specifically under the control of lusty desires, are called māyā-mṛga. Indeed, everyone in the conditional stage of material life is a māyā-mṛga. It is said, māyā-mṛgaṁ dayitayepsitam anvadhāvad: [SB 11.5.34] Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa to show His causeless mercy to the māyā-mṛgas, the people of this material world, who suffer because of lusty desires. One should follow the principles of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and always think of Kṛṣṇa in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Then one will be eligible to live in Vṛndāvana, and his life will be successful.





TEXT 20



dṛṣṭaṁ śrutam asad buddhvā

nānudhyāyen na sandiśet

saṁsṛtiṁ cātma-nāśaṁ ca

tatra vidvān sa ātma-dṛk

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭam-the material enjoyment we experience in our present life; śrutam-material enjoyment as promised to the fruitive workers for future happiness (either in this life or in the next, in the heavenly planets and so on); asat-all temporary and bad; buddhvā-knowing; na-not; anudhyāyet-one should even think of; na-nor; sandiśet-should actually enjoy; saṁsṛtim-prolongation of material existence; ca-and; ātma-nāśam-forgetfulness of one's own constitutional position; ca-as well as; tatra-in such a subject matter; vidvān-one who is completely aware; saḥ-such a person; ātma-dṛk-a self-realized soul.





One who knows that material happiness, whether good or bad, in this life or in the next, on this planet or on the heavenly planets, is temporary and useless, and that an intelligent person should not try to enjoy or even think of such things, is the knower of the self. Such a self-realized person knows quite well that material happiness is the very cause of continued material existence and forgetfulness of one's own constitutional position.





The living entity is a spiritual soul, and the material body is his encagement. This is the beginning of spiritual understanding.



dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati





"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) The real mission of human life is to get free from encagement in the material body. Therefore Kṛṣṇa descends to teach the conditioned soul about spiritual realization and how to become free from material bondage. Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata [Bg. 4.7]. The words dharmasya glāniḥ mean "pollution of one's existence." Our existence is now polluted, and it must be purified (sattvaṁ śuddhyet). The human life is meant for this purification, not for thinking of happiness in terms of the external body, which is the cause of material bondage. Therefore, in this verse, Mahārāja Yayāti advises that whatever material happiness we see and whatever is promised for enjoyment is all merely flickering and temporary. Ābrahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino 'rjuna [Bg. 8.16]. Even if one is promoted to Brahmaloka, if one is not freed from material bondage one must return to this planet earth and continue in the miserable condition of material existence (bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate). One should always keep this understanding in mind so as not to be allured by any kind of sense enjoyment, in this life or in the next. One who is fully aware of this truth is self-realized (sa ātma-dṛk), but aside from him, everyone suffers in the cycle of birth and death (mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani). This understanding is one of true intelligence, and anything contrary to this is but a cause of unhappiness. Kṛṣṇa-bhakta-niṣkāma, ataeva 'śānta.' Only a Kṛṣṇa conscious person, who knows the aim and object of life, is peaceful. All others, whether karmīs, jñānīs or yogīs, are restless and cannot enjoy real peace.





TEXT 21



ity uktvā nāhuṣo jāyāṁ

tadīyaṁ pūrave vayaḥ

dattvā sva-jarasaṁ tasmād

ādade vigata-spṛhaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti uktvā-saying this; nāhuṣaḥ-Mahārāja Yayāti, the son of King Nahuṣa; jāyām-unto his wife, Devayānī; tadīyam-his own; pūrave-unto his son Pūru; vayaḥ-youth; dattvā-delivering; sva-jarasam-his own invalidity and old age; tasmāt-from him; ādade-took back; vigata-spṛhaḥ-being freed from all material lusty desires.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After speaking in this way to his wife, Devayānī, King Yayāti, who was now free from all material desires, called his youngest son, Pūru, and returned Pūru's youth in exchange for his own old age.





TEXT 22



diśi dakṣiṇa-pūrvasyāṁ

druhyuṁ dakṣiṇato yadum

pratīcyāṁ turvasuṁ cakra

udīcyām anum īśvaram

SYNONYMS



diśi-in the direction; dakṣiṇa-pūrvasyām-southeast; druhyum-his son named Druhyu; dakṣiṇataḥ-in the southern side of the world; yadum-Yadu; pratīcyām-in the western side of the world; turvasum-his son known as Turvasu; cakre-he made; udīcyām-in the northern side of the world; anum-his son named Anu; īśvaram-the King.





King Yayāti gave the southeast to his son Druhyu, the south to his son Yadu, the west to his son Turvasu, and the north to his son Anu. In this way he divided the kingdom.





TEXT 23



bhū-maṇḍalasya sarvasya

pūrum arhattamaṁ viśām

abhiṣicyāgrajāṁs tasya

vaśe sthāpya vanaṁ yayau

SYNONYMS



bhū-maṇḍalasya-of the entire planet earth; sarvasya-of all wealth and riches; pūrum-his youngest son, Pūru; arhat-tamam-the most worshipable person, the king; viśām-of the citizens or the subjects of the world; abhiṣicya-crowning on the throne of the emperor; agrajān-all his elder brothers, beginning from Yadu; tasya-of Pūru; vaśe-under the control; sthāpya-establishing; vanam-in the forest; yayau-he went away.





Yayāti enthroned his youngest son, Pūru, as the emperor of the entire world and the proprietor of all its riches, and he placed all the other sons, who were older than Pūru, under Pūru's control.





TEXT 24



āsevitaṁ varṣa-pūgān

ṣaḍ-vargaṁ viṣayeṣu saḥ

kṣaṇena mumuce nīḍaṁ

jāta-pakṣa iva dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



āsevitam-being always engaged in; varṣa-pūgān-for many, many years; ṣaṭ-vargam-the six senses, including the mind; viṣayeṣu-in sense enjoyment; saḥ-King Yayāti; kṣaṇena-within a moment; mumuce-gave up; nīḍam-nest; jāta-pakṣaḥ-one that has grown its wings; iva-like; dvijaḥ-a bird.





Having enjoyed sense gratification for many, many years, O King Parīkṣit, Yayāti was accustomed to it, but he gave it up entirely in a moment, just as a bird flies away from the nest as soon as its wings have grown.





That Mahārāja Yayāti was immediately liberated from the bondage of conditioned life is certainly astonishing. But the example given herewith is appropriate. A tiny baby bird, dependent fully on its father and mother even to eat, suddenly flies away from the nest when its wings have grown. Similarly, if one fully surrenders to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is immediately liberated from the bondage of conditioned life, as promised by the Lord Himself (ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi). As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.18):



kirāta-hūṇāndhra-pulinda-pulkaśā

ābhīra-śumbhā yavanāḥ khasādayaḥ

ye 'nye ca pāpā yad-apāśrayāśrayāḥ

śudhyanti tasmai prabhaviṣṇave namaḥ





"Kirāta, Hūṇa, Āndhra, Pulinda, Pulkaśa, Ābhīra, Śumbha, Yavana and the Khasa races and even others addicted to sinful acts can be purified by taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, for He is the supreme power. I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him." Lord Viṣṇu is so powerful that He can deliver anyone at once if He is pleased to do so. And Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, can be pleased immediately if we accept His order by surrendering unto Him, as Mahārāja Yayāti did. Mahārāja Yayāti was eager to serve Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, and therefore as soon as he wanted to renounce material life, Lord Vāsudeva helped him. We must therefore be very sincere in surrendering ourselves unto the lotus feet of the Lord. Then we can immediately be liberated from all the bondage of conditioned life. This is clearly expressed in the next verse.





TEXT 25



sa tatra nirmukta-samasta-saṅga

ātmānubhūtyā vidhuta-triliṅgaḥ

pare 'male brahmaṇi vāsudeve

lebhe gatiṁ bhāgavatīṁ pratītaḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-Mahārāja Yayāti; tatra-upon doing this; nirmukta-was immediately liberated from; samasta-saṅgaḥ-all contamination; ātma-anubhūtyā-simply by understanding his constitutional position; vidhuta-was cleansed of; tri-liṅgaḥ-the contamination caused by the three modes of material nature (sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa); pare-unto the Transcendence; amale-without material contact; brahmaṇi-the Supreme Lord; vāsudeve-Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, Bhagavān; lebhe-achieved; gatim-the destination; bhāgavatīm-as an associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratītaḥ-famous.





Because King Yayāti completely surrendered unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, he was freed from all contamination of the material modes of nature. Because of his self-realization, he was able to fix his mind upon the Transcendence [Parabrahman, Vāsudeva], and thus he ultimately achieved the position of an associate of the Lord.





The word vidhuta, meaning "cleansed," is very significant. Everyone in this material world is contaminated (kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya). Because we are in a material condition, we are contaminated either by sattva-guṇa, by rajo-guṇa or by tamo-guṇa. Even if one becomes a qualified brāhmaṇa in the mode of goodness (sattva-guṇa), he is still materially contaminated. One must come to the platform of śuddha-sattva, transcending the sattva-guṇa. Then one is vidhuta-triliṅga, cleansed of the contamination caused by the three modes of material nature. This is possible by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17):



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt-satām





"Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the personality of Godhead, who is the Paramātmā [Supersoul] in everyone's heart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who has developed the urge to hear His messages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted." A person trying to be perfectly Kṛṣṇa conscious by hearing the words of Kṛṣṇa from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or Bhagavad-gītā certainly has all the dirty things cleansed from the core of his heart. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also says, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam: [Cc. Antya 20.12] the process of hearing and chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord washes away the dirty things accumulated in the core of the heart. As soon as one is freed from all the dirt of material contamination, as Mahārāja Yayāti was, one's original position as an associate of the Lord is revealed. This is called , or personal perfection.





TEXT 26



śrutvā gāthāṁ devayānī

mene prastobham ātmanaḥ

strī-puṁsoḥ sneha-vaiklavyāt

parihāsam iveritam

SYNONYMS



śrutvā-hearing; gāthām-the narration; devayānī-Queen Devayānī, the wife of Mahārāja Yayāti; mene-understood; prastobham ātmanaḥ-when instructed for her self-realization; strī-puṁsoḥ-between the husband and wife; sneha-vaiklavyāt-from an exchange of love and affection; parihāsam-a funny joke or story; iva-like; īritam-spoken (by Mahārāja Yayāti).





When Devayānī heard Mahārāja Yayāti's story of the he-goat and she-goat, she understood that this story, which was presented as if a funny joke for entertainment between husband and wife, was intended to awaken her to her constitutional position.





When one actually awakens from material life, one understands his real position as an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. This is called liberation. Muktir hitvānyathā rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ (Bhāg. 2.10.6). Under the influence of māyā, everyone living in this material world thinks that he is the master of everything (ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate [Bg. 3.27]). One thinks that there is no God or controller and that one is independent and can do anything. This is the material condition, and when one awakens from this ignorance, he is called liberated. Mahārāja Yayāti had delivered Devayānī from the well, and finally, as a dutiful husband, he instructed her with the story about the he-goat and she-goat and thus delivered her from the misconception of material happiness. Devayānī was quite competent to understand her liberated husband, and therefore she decided to follow him as his faithful wife.





TEXTS 27–28



sā sannivāsaṁ suhṛdāṁ

prapāyām iva gacchatām

vijñāyeśvara-tantrāṇāṁ

māyā-viracitaṁ prabhoḥ

sarvatra saṅgam utsṛjya



svapnaupamyena bhārgavī

kṛṣṇe manaḥ samāveśya

vyadhunol liṅgam ātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



sā-Devayānī; sannivāsam-living in the association; suhṛdām-of friends and relatives; prapāyām-in a place where water is supplied; iva-like; gacchatām-of tourists on a program for going from one place to another; vijñāya-understanding; īśvara-tantrāṇām-under the influence of the rigid laws of nature; māyā-viracitam-the laws enforced by māyā, the illusory energy; prabhoḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarvatra-everywhere in this material world; saṅgam-association; utsṛjya-giving up; svapna-aupamyena-by the analogy of a dream; bhārgavī-Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya; kṛṣṇe-unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; manaḥ-complete attention; samāveśya-fixing; vyadhunot-gave up; liṅgam-the gross and subtle bodies; ātmanaḥ-of the soul.





Thereafter, Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya, understood that the materialistic association of husband, friends and relatives is like the association in a hotel full of tourists. The relationships of society, friendship and love are created by the māyā of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, exactly as in a dream. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa, Devayānī gave up her imaginary position in the material world. Completely fixing her mind upon Kṛṣṇa, she achieved liberation from the gross and subtle bodies.





One should be convinced that he is a spirit soul, part and parcel of the Supreme Brahman, Kṛṣṇa, but has somehow or other been entrapped by the material coverings of the gross and subtle bodies, consisting of earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego. One should know that the association of society, friendship, love, nationalism, religion and so on are nothing but creations of māyā. One's only business is to become Kṛṣṇa conscious and render service unto Kṛṣṇa as extensively as possible for a living being. In this way one is liberated from material bondage. By the grace of Kṛṣṇa, Devayānī attained this state through the instructions of her husband.





TEXT 29



namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate

vāsudevāya vedhase

sarva-bhūtādhivāsāya

śāntāya bṛhate namaḥ

SYNONYMS



namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances; tubhyam-unto You; bhagavate-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevāya-Lord Vāsudeva; vedhase-the creator of everything; sarva-bhūta-adhivāsāya-present everywhere (within the heart of every living entity and within the atom also); śāntāya-peaceful, as if completely inactive; bṛhate-the greatest of all; namaḥ-I offer my respectful obeisances.





O Lord Vāsudeva, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are the creator of the entire cosmic manifestation. You live as the Supersoul in everyone's heart and are smaller than the smallest, yet You are greater than the greatest and are all-pervading. You appear completely silent, having nothing to do, but this is due to Your all-pervading nature and Your fullness in all opulences. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.





How Devayānī became self-realized by the grace of her great husband, Mahārāja Yayāti, is described here. Describing such realization is another way of performing the bhakti process.



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

[SB 7.5.23]





"Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name, form, qualities, paraphernalia and pastimes of Lord Viṣṇu, remembering them, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, offering the Lord respectful worship, offering prayers to the Lord, becoming His servant, considering the Lord one's best friend, and surrendering everything unto Him-these nine processes are accepted as pure devotional service." (Bhāg. 7.5.23) śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam, hearing and chanting, are especially important. By hearing from her husband about the greatness of Lord Vāsudeva, Devayānī certainly became convinced and surrendered herself unto the lotus feet of the Lord (oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya). This is knowledge. Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate [Bg. 7.19]. Surrender to Vāsudeva is the result of hearing about Him for many, many births. As soon as one surrenders unto Vāsudeva, one is liberated immediately. Because of her association with her great husband, Mahārāja Yayāti, Devayānī became purified, adopted the means of bhakti-yoga, and thus became liberated.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Nineteenth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "King Yayāti Achieves Liberation."



Chapter Twenty



The Dynasty of Pūru





This chapter describes the history of Pūru and his descendant Duṣmanta. The son of Pūru was Janamejaya, and his son was Pracinvān. The sons and grandsons in the line of Pracinvān, one after another, were Pravīra, Manusyu, Cārupada, Sudyu, Bahugava, Saṁyāti, Ahaṁyāti and Raudrāśva. Raudrāśva had ten sons-Ṛteyu, Kakṣeyu, Sthaṇḍileyu, Kṛteyuka, Jaleyu, Sannateyu, Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and Vaneyu. The son of Ṛteyu was Rantināva, who had three sons-Sumati, Dhruva and Apratiratha. The son of Apratiratha was Kaṇva, and Kaṇva's son was Medhātithi. The sons of Medhātithi, headed by Praskanna, were all brāhmaṇas. The son of Rantināva named Sumati had a son named Rebhi, and his son was Duṣmanta.





While hunting in the forest, Duṣmanta once approached the āśrama of Mahāṛṣi Kaṇva, where he saw an extremely beautiful woman and became attracted to her. That woman was the daughter of Viśvāmitra, and her name was Śakuntalā. Her mother was Menakā, who had left her in the forest, where Kaṇva Muni found her. Kaṇva Muni brought her to his āśrama, where he raised and maintained her. When Śakuntalā accepted Mahārāja Duṣmanta as her husband, he married her according to the gāndharva-vidhi. Śakuntalā later became pregnant by her husband, who left her in the āśrama of Kaṇva Muni and returned to his kingdom.





In due course of time, Śakuntalā gave birth to a Vaiṣṇava son, but Duṣmanta, having returned to the capital, forgot what had taken place. Therefore, when Śakuntalā approached him with her newly born child, Mahārāja Duṣmanta refused to accept them as his wife and son. Later, however, after a mysterious omen, the King accepted them. After Mahārāja Duṣmanta's death, Bharata, the son of Śakuntalā, was enthroned. He performed many great sacrifices, in which he gave great riches in charity to the brāhmaṇas. This chapter ends by describing the birth of Bharadvāja and how Mahārāja Bharata accepted Bharadvāja as his son.





TEXT 1



śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca

pūror vaṁśaṁ pravakṣyāmi

yatra jāto 'si bhārata

yatra rājarṣayo vaṁśyā

brahma-vaṁśyāś ca jajñire

SYNONYMS



śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pūroḥ vaṁśam-the dynasty of Mahārāja Pūru; pravakṣyāmi-now I shall narrate; yatra-in which dynasty; jātaḥ asi-you were born; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Mahārāja Bharata; yatra-in which dynasty; rāja-ṛṣayaḥ-all the kings were saintly; vaṁśyāḥ-one after another; brahma-vaṁśyāḥ-many brāhmaṇa dynasties; ca-also; jajñire-grew up.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Mahārāja Bharata, I shall now describe the dynasty of Pūru, in which you were born, in which many saintly kings appeared, and from which many dynasties of brāhmaṇas began.





There are many historical instances by which we can understand that from kṣatriyas many brāhmaṇas have been born and that from brāhmaṇas many kṣatriyas have been born. The Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.13), cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ: "According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me." Therefore, regardless of the family in which one takes birth, when one is qualified with the symptoms of a particular section, he is to be described accordingly. Yal-lakṣaṇaṁ proktam. One's place in the varṇa divisions of society is determined according to one's symptoms or qualities. This is maintained everywhere in the śāstra. Birth is a secondary consideration; the first consideration is one's qualities and activities.





TEXT 2



janamejayo hy abhūt pūroḥ

pracinvāṁs tat-sutas tataḥ

pravīro 'tha manusyur vai

tasmāc cārupado 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



janamejayaḥ-King Janamejaya; hi-indeed; abhūt-appeared; pūroḥ-from Pūru; pracinvān-Pracinvān; tat-his (Janamejaya's); sutaḥ-son; tataḥ-from him (Pracinvān); pravīraḥ-Pravīra; atha-thereafter; manusyuḥ-Pravīra's son Manusyu; vai-indeed; tasmāt-from him (Manusyu); cārupadaḥ-King Cārupada; abhavat-appeared.





King Janamejaya was born of this dynasty of Pūru. Janamejaya's son was Pracinvān, and his son was Pravīra. Thereafter, Pravīra's son was Manusyu, and from Manusyu came the son named Cārupada.





TEXT 3



tasya sudyur abhūt putras

tasmād bahugavas tataḥ

saṁyātis tasyāhaṁyātī

raudrāśvas tat-sutaḥ smṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Cārupada); sudyuḥ-by the name Sudyu; abhūt-appeared; putraḥ-a son; tasmāt-from him (Sudyu); bahugavaḥ-a son named Bahugava; tataḥ-from him; saṁyātiḥ-a son named Saṁyāti; tasya-and from him; ahaṁyātiḥ-a son named Ahaṁyāti; raudrāśvaḥ-Raudrāśva; tat-sutaḥ-his son; smṛtaḥ-well known.





The son of Cārupada was Sudyu, and the son of Sudyu was Bahugava. Bahugava's son was Saṁyāti. From Saṁyāti came a son named Ahaṁyāti, from whom Raudrāśva was born.





TEXTS 4–5



ṛteyus tasya kakṣeyuḥ

sthaṇḍileyuḥ kṛteyukaḥ

jaleyuḥ sannateyuś ca

dharma-satya-vrateyavaḥ

daśaite 'psarasaḥ putrā



vaneyuś cāvamaḥ smṛtaḥ

ghṛtācyām indriyāṇīva

mukhyasya jagad-ātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



ṛteyuḥ-Ṛteyu; tasya-of him (Raudrāśva); kakṣeyuḥ-Kakṣeyu; sthaṇḍileyuḥ-Sthaṇḍileyu; kṛteyukaḥ-Kṛteyuka; jaleyuḥ-Jaleyu; sannateyuḥ-Sannateyu; ca-also; dharma-Dharmeyu; satya-Satyeyu; vrateyavaḥ-and Vrateyu; daśa-ten; ete-all of them; apsarasaḥ-born of an Apsarā; putrāḥ-sons; vaneyuḥ-the son named Vaneyu; ca-and; avamaḥ-the youngest; smṛtaḥ-known; ghṛtācyām-Ghṛtācī; indriyāṇi iva-exactly like the ten senses; mukhyasya-of the living force; jagat-ātmanaḥ-the living force of the entire universe.





Raudrāśva had ten sons, named Ṛteyu, Kakṣeyu, Sthaṇḍileyu, Kṛteyuka, Jaleyu, Sannateyu, Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and Vaneyu. Of these ten sons, Vaneyu was the youngest. As the ten senses, which are products of the universal life, act under the control of life, these ten sons of Raudrāśva acted under Raudrāśva's full control. All of them were born of the Apsarā named Ghṛtācī.





TEXT 6



ṛteyo rantināvo 'bhūt

trayas tasyātmajā nṛpa

sumatir dhruvo 'pratirathaḥ

kaṇvo 'pratirathātmajaḥ

SYNONYMS



ṛteyoḥ-from the son named Ṛteyu; rantināvaḥ-the son named Rantināva; abhūt-appeared; trayaḥ-three; tasya-his (Rantināva's); ātmajāḥ-sons; nṛpa-O King; sumatiḥ-Sumati; dhruvaḥ-Dhruva; apratirathaḥ-Apratiratha; kaṇvaḥ-Kaṇva; apratiratha-ātmajaḥ-the son of Apratiratha.





Ṛteyu had a son named Rantināva, who had three sons, named Sumati, Dhruva and Apratiratha. Apratiratha had only one son, whose name was Kaṇva.





TEXT 7



tasya medhātithis tasmāt

praskannādyā dvijātayaḥ

putro 'bhūt sumate rebhir

duṣmantas tat-suto mataḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Kaṇva); medhātithiḥ-a son named Medhātithi; tasmāt-from him (Medhātithi); praskanna-ādyāḥ-sons headed by Praskanna; dvijātayaḥ-all brāhmaṇas; putraḥ-a son; abhūt-there was; sumateḥ-from Sumati; rebhiḥ-Rebhi; duṣmantaḥ-Mahārāja Duṣmanta; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Rebhi; mataḥ-is well-known.





The son of Kaṇva was Medhātithi, whose sons, all brāhmaṇas, were headed by Praskanna. The son of Rantināva named Sumati had a son named Rebhi. Mahārāja Duṣmanta is well known as the son of Rebhi.





TEXTS 8–9



duṣmanto mṛgayāṁ yātaḥ

kaṇvāśrama-padaṁ gataḥ

tatrāsīnāṁ sva-prabhayā

maṇḍayantīṁ ramām iva

vilokya sadyo mumuhe



deva-māyām iva striyam

babhāṣe tāṁ varārohāṁ

bhaṭaiḥ katipayair vṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



duṣmantaḥ-Mahārāja Duṣmanta; mṛgayām yātaḥ-when he went hunting; kaṇva-āśrama-padam-to the residence of Kaṇva; gataḥ-he came; tatra-there; āsīnām-a woman sitting; sva-prabhayā-by her own beauty; maṇḍayantīm-illuminating; ramām iva-exactly like the goddess of fortune; vilokya-by observing; sadyaḥ-immediately; mumuhe-he became enchanted; deva-māyām iva-exactly like the illusory energy of the Lord; striyam-a beautiful woman; babhāṣe-he addressed; tām-her (the woman); vara-ārohām-who was the best of beautiful women; bhaṭaiḥ-by soldiers; katipayaiḥ-a few; vṛtaḥ-surrounded.





Once when King Duṣmanta went to the forest to hunt and was very much fatigued, he approached the residence of Kaṇva Muni. There he saw a most beautiful woman who looked exactly like the goddess of fortune and who sat there illuminating the entire āśrama by her effulgence. The King was naturally attracted by her beauty, and therefore he approached her, accompanied by some of his soldiers, and spoke to her.





TEXT 10



tad-darśana-pramuditaḥ

sannivṛtta-pariśramaḥ

papraccha kāma-santaptaḥ

prahasañ ślakṣṇayā girā

SYNONYMS



tat-darśana-pramuditaḥ-being very much enlivened by seeing the beautiful woman; sannivṛtta-pariśramaḥ-being relieved of the fatigue of the hunting excursion; papraccha-he inquired from her; kāma-santaptaḥ-being agitated by lusty desires; prahasan-in a joking mood; ślakṣṇayā-very beautiful and pleasing; girā-with words.





Seeing the beautiful woman, the King was very much enlivened, and the fatigue of his hunting excursion was relieved. He was of course very much attracted because of lusty desires, and thus he inquired from her as follows, in a joking mood.





TEXT 11



kā tvaṁ kamala-patrākṣi

kasyāsi hṛdayaṅ-game

kiṁ svic cikīrṣitaṁ tatra

bhavatyā nirjane vane

SYNONYMS



kā-who; tvam-are you; kamala-patra-akṣi-O beautiful woman with eyes like the petals of a lotus; kasya asi-with whom are you related; hṛdayam-game-O most beautiful one, pleasing to the heart; kim svit-what kind of business; cikīrṣitam-is being thought of; tatra-there; bhavatyāḥ-by you; nirjane-solitary; vane-in the forest.





O beautiful lotus-eyed woman, who are you? Whose daughter are you? What purpose do you have in this solitary forest? Why are you staying here?





TEXT 12



vyaktaṁ rājanya-tanayāṁ

vedmy ahaṁ tvāṁ sumadhyame

na hi cetaḥ pauravāṇām

adharme ramate kvacit

SYNONYMS



vyaktam-it appears; rājanya-tanayām-the daughter of a kṣatriya; vedmi-can realize; aham-I; tvām-your good self; su-madhyame-O most beautiful; na-not; hi-indeed; cetaḥ-the mind; pauravāṇām-of persons who have taken birth in the Pūru dynasty; adharme-in irreligion; ramate-enjoys; kvacit-at any time.





O most beautiful one, it appears to my mind that you must be the daughter of a kṣatriya. Because I belong to the Pūru dynasty, my mind never endeavors to enjoy anything irreligiously.





Mahārāja Duṣmanta indirectly expressed his desire to marry Śakuntalā, for she appeared to his mind to be the daughter of some kṣatriya king.





TEXT 13



śrī-śakuntalovāca

viśvāmitrātmajaivāhaṁ

tyaktā menakayā vane

vedaitad bhagavān kaṇvo

vīra kiṁ karavāma te

SYNONYMS



śrī-śakuntalā uvāca-Śrī Śakuntalā replied; viśvāmitra-ātmajā-the daughter of Viśvāmitra; eva-indeed; aham-I (am); tyaktā-left; menakayā-by Menakā; vane-in the forest; veda-knows; etat-all these incidents; bhagavān-the most powerful saintly person; kaṇvaḥ-Kaṇva Muni; vīra-O hero; kim-what; karavāma-can I do; te-for you.





Śakuntalā said: I am the daughter of Viśvāmitra. My mother, Menakā, left me in the forest. O hero, the most powerful saint Kaṇva Muni knows all about this. Now let me know, how may I serve you?





Śakuntalā informed Mahārāja Duṣmanta that although she never saw or knew her father or mother, Kaṇva Muni knew everything about her, and she had heard from him that she was the daughter of Viśvāmitra and that her mother was Menakā, who had left her in the forest.





TEXT 14



āsyatāṁ hy aravindākṣa

gṛhyatām arhaṇaṁ ca naḥ

bhujyatāṁ santi nīvārā

uṣyatāṁ yadi rocate

SYNONYMS



āsyatām-please come sit here; hi-indeed; aravinda-akṣa-O great hero with eyes like the petals of a lotus; gṛhyatām-please accept; arhaṇam-humble reception; ca-and; naḥ-our; bhujyatām-please eat; santi-what there is in stock; nīvārāḥ-nīvārā rice; uṣyatām-stay here; yadi-if; rocate-you so desire.





O King with eyes like the petals of a lotus, kindly come sit down and accept whatever reception we can offer. We have a supply of nīvārā rice that you may kindly take. And if you so desire, stay here without hesitation.





TEXT 15



śrī-duṣmanta uvāca

upapannam idaṁ subhru

jātāyāḥ kuśikānvaye

svayaṁ hi vṛṇute rājñāṁ

kanyakāḥ sadṛśaṁ varam

SYNONYMS



śrī-duṣmantaḥ uvāca-King Duṣmanta replied; upapannam-just befitting your position; idam-this; su-bhru-O Śakuntalā, with beautiful eyebrows; jātāyāḥ-because of your birth; kuśika-anvaye-in the family of Viśvāmitra; svayam-personally; hi-indeed; vṛṇute-select; rājñām-of a royal family; kanyakāḥ-daughters; sadṛśam-on an equal level; varam-husbands.





King Duṣmanta replied: O Śakuntalā, with beautiful eyebrows, you have taken your birth in the family of the great saint Viśvāmitra, and your reception is quite worthy of your family. Aside from this, the daughters of a king generally select their own husbands.





In her reception of Mahārāja Duṣmanta, Śakuntalā clearly said, "Your Majesty may stay here, and you may accept whatever reception I can offer." Thus she indicated that she wanted Mahārāja Duṣmanta as her husband. As far as Mahārāja Duṣmanta was concerned, he desired Śakuntalā as his wife from the very beginning, as soon as he saw her, so the agreement to unite as husband and wife was natural. To induce Śakuntalā to accept the marriage, Mahārāja Duṣmanta reminded her that as the daughter of a king she could select her husband in an open assembly. In the history of Āryan civilization there have been many instances in which famous princesses have selected their husbands in open competitions. For example, it was in such a competition that Sītādevī accepted Lord Rāmacandra as her husband and that Draupadī accepted Arjuna, and there are many other instances. So marriage by agreement or by selecting one's own husband in an open competition is allowed. There are eight kinds of marriage, of which marriage by agreement is called gāndharva marriage. Generally the parents select the husband or wife for their daughter or son, but gāndharva marriage takes place by personal selection. Still, although marriage by personal selection or by agreement took place in the past, we find no such thing as divorce by disagreement. Of course, divorce by disagreement took place among low-class men, but marriage by agreement was found even in the very highest classes, especially in the royal kṣatriya families. Mahārāja Duṣmanta's acceptance of Śakuntalā as his wife was sanctioned by Vedic culture. How the marriage took place is described in the next verse.





TEXT 16



om ity ukte yathā-dharmam

upayeme śakuntalām

gāndharva-vidhinā rājā

deśa-kāla-vidhānavit

SYNONYMS



om iti ukte-by reciting the Vedic praṇava, invoking the Supreme Personality of Godhead to witness the marriage; yathā-dharmam-exactly according to the principles of religion (because Nārāyaṇa becomes the witness in an ordinary religious marriage also); upayeme-he married; śakuntalām-the girl Śakuntalā; gāndharva-vidhinā-by the regulative principle of the Gandharvas, without deviation from religious principles; rājā-Mahārāja Duṣmanta; deśa-kāla-vidhāna-vit-completely aware of duties according to time, position and objective.





When Śakuntalā responded to Mahārāja Duṣmanta's proposal with silence, the agreement was complete. Then the King, who knew the laws of marriage, immediately married her by chanting the Vedic praṇava [oṁkāra], in accordance with the marriage ceremony as performed among the Gandharvas.





The oṁkāra, praṇava, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead represented by letters. Bhagavad-gītā says that the letters a-u-m, combined together as oṁ, represent the Supreme Lord. Religious principles are meant to invoke the blessings and mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who says in Bhagavad-gītā that He is personally present in sexual desires that are not contrary to religious principles. The word vidhinā means, "according to religious principles." The association of men and women according to religious principles is allowed in the Vedic culture. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement we allow marriage on the basis of religious principles, but the sexual combination of men and women as friends is irreligious and is not allowed.





TEXT 17



amogha-vīryo rājarṣir

mahiṣyāṁ vīryam ādadhe

śvo-bhūte sva-puraṁ yātaḥ

kālenāsūta sā sutam

SYNONYMS



amogha-vīryaḥ-a person who discharges semen without being baffled, or, in other words, who must beget a child; rāja-ṛṣiḥ-the saintly King Duṣmanta; mahiṣyām-into the Queen, Śakuntalā (after her marriage, Śakuntalā became the Queen); vīryam-semen; ādadhe-placed; śvaḥ-bhūte-in the morning; sva-puram-to his own place; yātaḥ-returned; kālena-in due course of time; asūta-gave birth; sā-she (Śakuntalā); sutam-to a son.





King Duṣmanta, who never discharged semen without a result, placed his semen at night in the womb of his Queen, Śakuntalā, and in the morning he returned to his palace. Thereafter, in due course of time, Śakuntalā gave birth to a son.





TEXT 18



kaṇvaḥ kumārasya vane

cakre samucitāḥ kriyāḥ

baddhvā mṛgendraṁ tarasā

krīḍati sma sa bālakaḥ

SYNONYMS



kaṇvaḥ-Kaṇva Muni; kumārasya-of the son born of Śakuntalā; vane-in the forest; cakre-executed; samucitāḥ-prescribed; kriyāḥ-ritualistic ceremonies; baddhvā-capturing; mṛga-indram-a lion; tarasā-by force; krīḍati-playing; sma-in the past; saḥ-he; bālakaḥ-the child.





In the forest, Kaṇva Muni performed all the ritualistic ceremonies concerning the newborn child. Later, the boy became so powerful that he would capture a lion and play with it.





TEXT 19



taṁ duratyaya-vikrāntam

ādāya pramadottamā

harer aṁśāṁśa-sambhūtaṁ

bhartur antikam āgamat

SYNONYMS



tam-him; duratyaya-vikrāntam-whose strength was insurmountable; ādāya-taking with her; pramadā-uttamā-the best of women, Śakuntalā; hareḥ-of God; aṁśa-aṁśa-sambhūtam-a partial plenary incarnation; bhartuḥ antikam-unto her husband; āgamat-approached.





Śakuntalā, the best of beautiful women, along with her son, whose strength was insurmountable and who was a partial expansion of the Supreme Godhead, approached her husband, Duṣmanta.





TEXT 20



yadā na jagṛhe rājā

bhāryā-putrāv aninditau

śṛṇvatāṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ

khe vāg āhāśarīriṇī

SYNONYMS



yadā-when; na-not; jagṛhe-accepted; rājā-the King (Duṣmanta); bhāryā-putrau-his real son and real wife; aninditau-not abominable, not accused by anyone; śṛṇvatām-while hearing; sarva-bhūtānām-all the people; khe-in the sky; vāk-a sound vibration; āha-declared; aśarīriṇī-without a body.





When the King refused to accept his wife and son, who were both irreproachable, an unembodied voice spoke from the sky as an omen and was heard by everyone present.





Mahārāja Duṣmanta knew that Śakuntalā and the boy were his own wife and son, but because they came from outside and were unknown to the citizens, he at first declined to accept them. Śakuntalā, however, was so chaste that an omen from the sky declared the truth so that others could hear. When everyone heard from the omen that Śakuntalā and her child were truly the King's wife and son, the King gladly accepted them.





TEXT 21



mātā bhastrā pituḥ putro

yena jātaḥ sa eva saḥ

bharasva putraṁ duṣmanta

māvamaṁsthāḥ śakuntalām

SYNONYMS



mātā-the mother; bhastrā-just like the skin of a bellows containing air; pituḥ-of the father; putraḥ-the son; yena-by whom; jātaḥ-one is born; saḥ-the father; eva-indeed; saḥ-the son; bharasva-just maintain; putram-your son; duṣmanta-O Mahārāja Duṣmanta; mā-do not; avamaṁsthāḥ-insult; śakuntalām-Śakuntalā.





The voice said: O Mahārāja Duṣmanta, a son actually belongs to his father, whereas the mother is only a container, like the skin of a bellows. According to Vedic injunctions, the father is born as the son. Therefore, maintain your own son and do not insult Śakuntalā.





According to the Vedic injunction ātmā vai putra-nāmāsi, the father becomes the son. The mother is simply like a storekeeper, because the seed of the child is placed in her womb, but it is the father who is responsible for maintaining the son. In Bhagavad-gītā the Lord says that He is the seed-giving father of all living entities (ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā), and therefore He is responsible for maintaining them. This is also confirmed in the Vedas. Eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān: although God is one, He maintains all living entities with their necessities for life. The living entities in different forms are sons of the Lord, and therefore the father, the Supreme Lord, supplies them food according to their different bodies. The small ant is supplied a grain of sugar, and the elephant is supplied tons of food, but everyone is able to eat. Therefore there is no question of overpopulation. Because the father, Kṛṣṇa, is fully opulent, there is no scarcity of food, and because there is no scarcity, the propaganda of overpopulation is only a myth. Actually one suffers for want of food when material nature, under the order of the father, refuses to supply him food. It is the living entity's position that determines whether food will be supplied or not. When a diseased person is forbidden to eat, this does not mean that there is a scarcity of food; rather, the diseased person requires the treatment of not being supplied with food. In Bhagavad-gītā (7.10) the Lord also says, bījaṁ māṁ sama-bhūtānām: "I am the seed of all living entities." A particular type of seed is sown within the earth, and then a particular type of tree or plant comes out. The mother resembles the earth, and when a particular type of seed is sown by the father, a particular type of body takes birth.





TEXT 22



reto-dhāḥ putro nayati

naradeva yama-kṣayāt

tvaṁ cāsya dhātā garbhasya

satyam āha śakuntalā

SYNONYMS



retaḥ-dhāḥ-a person who discharges semen; putraḥ-the son; nayati-saves; nara-deva-O King (Mahārāja Duṣmanta); yama-kṣayāt-from punishment by Yamarāja, or from the custody of Yamarāja; tvam-your good self; ca-and; asya-of this child; dhātā-the creator; garbhasya-of the embryo; satyam-truthfully; āha-said; śakuntalā-your wife, Śakuntalā.





O King Duṣmanta, he who discharges semen is the actual father, and his son saves him from the custody of Yamarāja. You are the actual procreator of this child. Indeed, Śakuntalā is speaking the truth.





Upon hearing the omen, Mahārāja Duṣmanta accepted his wife and child. According to Vedic smṛti:



pun-nāmno narakād yasmāt

pitaraṁ trāyate sutaḥ

tasmāt putra iti proktaḥ

svayam eva svayambhuvā





Because a son delivers his father from punishment in the hell called put, the son is called putra. According to this principle, when there is a disagreement between the father and mother, it is the father, not the mother, who is delivered by the son. But if the wife is faithful and firmly adherent to her husband, when the father is delivered the mother is also delivered. Consequently, there is no such thing as divorce in the Vedic literature. A wife is always trained to be chaste and faithful to her husband, for this helps her achieve deliverance from any abominable material condition. This verse clearly says, putro nayati naradeva yama-kṣayāt: "The son saves his father from the custody of Yamarāja." It never says, putro nayati mātaram: "The son saves his mother." The seed-giving father is delivered, not the storekeeper mother. Consequently, husband and wife should not separate under any condition, for if they have a child whom they raise to be a Vaiṣṇava, he can save both the father and mother from the custody of Yamarāja and punishment in hellish life.





TEXT 23



pitary uparate so 'pi

cakravartī mahā-yaśāḥ

mahimā gīyate tasya

harer aṁśa-bhuvo bhuvi

SYNONYMS



pitari-after his father; uparate-passed away; saḥ-the King's son; api-also; cakravartī-the emperor; mahā-yaśāḥ-very famous; mahimā-glories; gīyate-are glorified; tasya-his; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aṁśa-bhuvaḥ-a partial representation; bhuvi-upon this earth.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Mahārāja Duṣmanta passed away from this earth, his son became the emperor of the world, the proprietor of the seven islands. He is referred to as a partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this world.





In Bhagavad-gītā (10.41) it is said:



yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ

śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā

tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ

mama tejo 'ṁśa-sambhavam





Anyone extraordinarily powerful must be considered a partial representation of the opulence of the Supreme Godhead. Therefore when the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta became the emperor of the entire world, he was celebrated in this way.





TEXTS 24–26



cakraṁ dakṣiṇa-haste 'sya

padma-kośo 'sya pādayoḥ

īje mahābhiṣekeṇa

so 'bhiṣikto 'dhirāḍ vibhuḥ

pañca-pañcāśatā medhyair



gaṅgāyām anu vājibhiḥ

māmateyaṁ purodhāya

yamunām anu ca prabhuḥ

aṣṭa-saptati-medhyāśvān



babandha pradadad vasu

bharatasya hi dauṣmanter

agniḥ sācī-guṇe citaḥ

sahasraṁ badvaśo yasmin

brāhmaṇā gā vibhejire

SYNONYMS



cakram-the mark of Kṛṣṇa's disc; dakṣiṇa-haste-on the palm of the right hand; asya-of him (Bharata); padma-kośaḥ-the mark of the whorl of a lotus; asya-of him; pādayoḥ-on the soles of the feet; īje-worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-abhiṣekeṇa-by a grand Vedic ritualistic ceremony; saḥ-he (Mahārāja Bharata); abhiṣiktaḥ-being promoted; adhirāṭ-to the topmost position of a ruler; vibhuḥ-the master of everything; pañca-pañcāśatā-fifty-five; medhyaiḥ-fit for sacrifices; gaṅgāyām anu-from the mouth of the Ganges to the source; vājibhiḥ-with horses; māmateyam-the great sage Bhṛgu; purodhāya-making him the great priest; yamunām-on the bank of the Yamunā; anu-in regular order; ca-also; prabhuḥ-the supreme master, Mahārāja Bharata; aṣṭa-saptati-seventy-eight; medhya-aśvān-horses fit for sacrifice; babandha-he bound; pradadat-gave in charity; vasu-riches; bharatasya-of Mahārāja Bharata; hi-indeed; dauṣmanteḥ-the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta; agniḥ-the sacrificial fire; sācī-guṇe-on an excellent site; citaḥ-established; sahasram-thousands; badvaśaḥ-by the number of one badva (one badva equals 13,084); yasmin-in which sacrifices; brāhmaṇāḥ-all the brāhmaṇas present; gāḥ-the cows; vibhejire-received their respective share.





Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Duṣmanta, had the mark of Lord Kṛṣṇa's disc on the palm of his right hand, and he had the mark of a lotus whorl on the soles of his feet. By worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead with a grand ritualistic ceremony, he became the emperor and master of the entire world. Then, under the priesthood of Māmateya, Bhṛgu Muni, he performed fifty-five horse sacrifices on the bank of the Ganges, beginning from its mouth and ending at its source, and seventy-eight horse sacrifices on the bank of the Yamunā, beginning from the confluence at Prayāga and ending at the source. He established the sacrificial fire on an excellent site, and he distributed great wealth to the brāhmaṇas. Indeed, he distributed so many cows that each of thousands of brāhmaṇas had one badva [13,084] as his share.





As indicated here by the words dauṣmanter agniḥ sācī-guṇe citaḥ, Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta, arranged for many ritualistic ceremonies all over the world, especially all over India on the banks of the Ganges and Yamunā, from the mouth to the source, and all such sacrifices were performed in very distinguished places. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (3.9), yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ: "Work done as a sacrifice for Viṣṇu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one to this material world." Everyone should engage in the performance of yajña, and the sacrificial fire should be ignited everywhere, the entire purpose being to make people happy, prosperous and progressive in spiritual life. Of course, these things were possible before the beginning of Kali-yuga because there were qualified brāhmaṇas who could perform such yajñas. For the present, however, the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa enjoins:



aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ

sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ

kalau pañca vivarjayet

[Cc. Ādi 17.164]





"In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: offering a horse in sacrifice, offering a cow in sacrifice, accepting the order of sannyāsa, offering oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and begetting children in the wife of one's brother." In this age, such yajñas as the aśvamedha-yajña and gomedha-yajña are impossible to perform because there are neither sufficient riches nor qualified brāhmaṇas. This verse says, māmateyaṁ purodhāya: Mahārāja Bharata engaged the son of Mamatā, Bhṛgu Muni, to take charge of performing this yajña. Now, however, such brāhmaṇas are impossible to find. Therefore the śāstras recommend, yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ: those who are intelligent should perform the saṅkīrtana-yajña inaugurated by Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

saṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi sumedhasaḥ





"In this age of Kali, people endowed with sufficient intelligence will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by His associates, by performance of saṅkīrtana-yajña." (Bhāg. 11.5.32) Yajña must be performed, for otherwise people will be entangled in sinful activities and will suffer immensely. Therefore the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement has taken charge of introducing the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa all over the world. This Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is also yajña, but without the difficulties involved in securing paraphernalia and qualified brāhmaṇas. This congregational chanting can be performed anywhere and everywhere. If people somehow or other assemble together and are induced to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, all the purposes of yajña will be fulfilled. The first purpose is that there must be sufficient rain, for without rain there cannot be any produce (annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ). All our necessities can be produced simply by rainfall (kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ [SB 1.10.4]), and the earth is the original source of all necessities (sarva-kāma-dughā mahī). In conclusion, therefore, in this age of Kali people all over the world should refrain from the four principles of sinful life-illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling-and in a pure state of existence should perform the simple yajña of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Then the earth will certainly produce all the necessities for life, and people will be happy economically, politically, socially, religiously and culturally. Everything will be in proper order.





TEXT 27



trayas-triṁśac-chataṁ hy aśvān

baddhvā vismāpayan nṛpān

dauṣmantir atyagān māyāṁ

devānāṁ gurum āyayau

SYNONYMS



trayaḥ-three; triṁśat-thirty; śatam-hundred; hi-indeed; aśvān-horses; baddhvā-arresting in the yajña; vismāpayan-astonishing; nṛpān-all other kings; dauṣmantiḥ-the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta; atyagāt-surpassed; māyām-material opulences; devānām-of the demigods; gurum-the supreme spiritual master; āyayau-achieved.





Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta, bound thirty-three hundred horses for those sacrifices, and thus he astonished all other kings. He surpassed even the opulence of the demigods, for he achieved the supreme spiritual master, Hari.





One who achieves the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead certainly surpasses all material wealth, even that of the demigods in the heavenly planets. Yaṁ labdhvā cāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ. The achievement of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the most exalted achievement in life.





TEXT 28



mṛgāñ chukla-dataḥ kṛṣṇān

hiraṇyena parīvṛtān

adāt karmaṇi maṣṇāre

niyutāni caturdaśa

SYNONYMS



mṛgān-first-class elephants; śukla-dataḥ-with very white tusks; kṛṣṇān-with black bodies; hiraṇyena-with gold ornaments; parīvṛtān-completely covered; adāt-give in charity; karmaṇi-in the sacrifice; maṣṇāre-by the name Maṣṇāra, or in the place known as Maṣṇāra; niyutāni-lakhs (one lakh equals one hundred thousand); caturdaśa-fourteen.





When Mahārāja Bharata performed the sacrifice known as Maṣṇāra [or a sacrifice in the place known as Maṣṇāra], he gave in charity fourteen lakhs of excellent elephants with white tusks and black bodies, completely covered with golden ornaments.





TEXT 29



bharatasya mahat karma

na pūrve nāpare nṛpāḥ

naivāpur naiva prāpsyanti

bāhubhyāṁ tridivaṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



bharatasya-of Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta; mahat-very great, exalted; karma-activities; na-neither; pūrve-previously; na-nor; apare-after his time; nṛpāḥ-kings as a class; na-neither; eva-certainly; āpuḥ-attained; na-nor; eva-certainly; prāpsyanti-will get; bāhubhyām-by the strength of his arms; tri-divam-the heavenly planets; yathā-as.





As one cannot approach the heavenly planets simply by the strength of his arms (for who can touch the heavenly planets with his hands?), one cannot imitate the wonderful activities of Mahārāja Bharata. No one could perform such activities in the past, nor will anyone be able to do so in the future.





TEXT 30



kirāta-hūṇān yavanān

pauṇḍrān kaṅkān khaśāñ chakān

abrahmaṇya-nṛpāṁś cāhan

mlecchān dig-vijaye 'khilān

SYNONYMS



kirāta-the black people called Kirātas (mostly the Africans); hūṇān-the Huns, the tribes from the far north; yavanān-the meat-eaters; pauṇḍrān-the Pauṇḍras; kaṅkān-the Kaṅkas; khaśān-the Mongolians; śakān-the Śakas; abrahmaṇya-against the brahminical culture; nṛpān-kings; ca-and; ahan-he killed; mlecchān-such atheists, who had no respect for Vedic civilization; dik-vijaye-while conquering all directions; akhilān-all of them.





When Mahārāja Bharata was on tour, he defeated or killed all the Kirātas, Hūṇas, Yavanas, Pauṇḍras, Kaṅkas, Khaśas, Śakas and the kings who were opposed to the Vedic principles of brahminical culture.





TEXT 31



jitvā purāsurā devān

ye rasaukāṁsi bhejire

deva-striyo rasāṁ nītāḥ

prāṇibhiḥ punar āharat

SYNONYMS



jitvā-conquering; purā-formerly; asurāḥ-the demons; devān-the demigods; ye-all who; rasa-okāṁsi-in the lower planetary system known as Rasātala; bhejire-took shelter; deva-striyaḥ-the wives and daughters of the demigods; rasām-in the lower planetary system; nītāḥ-were brought; prāṇibhiḥ-with their own dear associates; punaḥ-again; āharat-brought back to their original places.





Formerly, after conquering the demigods, all the demons had taken shelter in the lower planetary system known as Rasātala and had brought all the wives and daughters of the demigods there also. Mahārāja Bharata, however, rescued all those women, along with their associates, from the clutches of the demons, and he returned them to the demigods.





TEXT 32



sarvān kāmān duduhatuḥ

prajānāṁ tasya rodasī

samās tri-ṇava-sāhasrīr

dikṣu cakram avartayat

SYNONYMS



sarvān kāmān-all necessities or desirable things; duduhatuḥ-fulfilled; prajānām-of the subjects; tasya-his; rodasī-this earth and the heavenly planets; samāḥ-years; tri-nava-sāhasrīḥ-three times nine thousand (that is, twenty-seven thousand); dikṣu-in all directions; cakram-soldiers or orders; avartayat-circulated.





Mahārāja Bharata provided all necessities for his subjects, both on this earth and in the heavenly planets, for twenty-seven thousand years. He circulated his orders and distributed his soldiers in all directions.





TEXT 33



sa saṁrāḍ loka-pālākhyam

aiśvaryam adhirāṭ śriyam

cakraṁ cāskhalitaṁ prāṇān

mṛṣety upararāma ha

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (Mahārāja Bharata); saṁrāṭ-the emperor; loka-pāla-ākhyam-known as the ruler of all the lokas, or planets; aiśvaryam-such opulences; adhirāṭ-thoroughly in power; śriyam-kingdom; cakram-soldiers or orders; ca-and; askhalitam-without failure; prāṇān-life or sons and family; mṛṣā-all false; iti-thus; upararāma-ceased to enjoy; ha-in the past.





As the ruler of the entire universe, Emperor Bharata had the opulences of a great kingdom and unconquerable soldiers. His sons and family had seemed to him to be his entire life. But finally he thought of all this as an impediment to spiritual advancement, and therefore he ceased from enjoying it.





Mahārāja Bharata had incomparable opulence in sovereignty, soldiers, sons, daughters and everything for material enjoyment, but when he realized that all such material opulences were useless for spiritual advancement, he retired from material enjoyment. The Vedic civilization enjoins that after a certain age, following in the footsteps of Mahārāja Bharata, one should cease to enjoy material opulences and should take the order of vānaprastha.





TEXT 34



tasyāsan nṛpa vaidarbhyaḥ

patnyas tisraḥ susammatāḥ

jaghnus tyāga-bhayāt putrān

nānurūpā itīrite

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Mahārāja Bharata); āsan-there were; nṛpa-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); vaidarbhyaḥ-daughters of Vidarbha; patnyaḥ-wives; tisraḥ-three; su-sammatāḥ-very pleasing and suitable; jaghnuḥ-killed; tyāga-bhayāt-fearing rejection; putrān-their sons; na anurūpāḥ-not exactly like the father; iti-like this; īrite-considering.





O King Parīkṣit, Mahārāja Bharata had three pleasing wives, who were daughters of the King of Vidarbha. When all three of them bore children who did not resemble the King, these wives thought that he would consider them unfaithful queens and reject them, and therefore they killed their own sons.





TEXT 35



tasyaivaṁ vitathe vaṁśe

tad-arthaṁ yajataḥ sutam

marut-stomena maruto

bharadvājam upādaduḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-his (Mahārāja Bharata's); evam-thus; vitathe-being baffled; vaṁśe-in generating progeny; tat-artham-to get sons; yajataḥ-performing sacrifices; sutam-a son; marut-stomena-by performing a marut-stoma sacrifice; marutaḥ-the demigods named the Maruts; bharadvājam-Bharadvāja; upādaduḥ-presented.





The King, his attempt for progeny frustrated in this way, performed a sacrifice named marut-stoma to get a son. The demigods known as the Maruts, being fully satisfied with him, then presented him a son named Bharadvāja.





TEXT 36



antarvatnyāṁ bhrātṛ-patnyāṁ

maithunāya bṛhaspatiḥ

pravṛtto vārito garbhaṁ

śaptvā vīryam upāsṛjat

SYNONYMS



antaḥ-vatnyām-pregnant; bhrātṛ-patnyām-with the brother's wife; maithunāya-desiring sexual enjoyment; bṛhaspatiḥ-the demigod named Bṛhaspati; pravṛttaḥ-so inclined; vāritaḥ-when forbidden to do so; garbham-the son within the abdomen; śaptvā-by cursing; vīryam-semen; upāsṛjat-discharged.





When the demigod named Bṛhaspati was attracted by his brother's wife, Mamatā, who at that time was pregnant, he desired to have sexual relations with her. The son within her womb forbid this, but Bṛhaspati cursed him and forcibly discharged semen into the womb of Mamatā.





The sex impulse is so strong in this material world that even Bṛhaspati, who is supposed to be the priest of the demigods and a very learned scholar, wanted to have a sexual relationship with his brother's pregnant wife. This can happen even in the society of the higher demigods, so what to speak of human society? The sex impulse is so strong that it can agitate even a learned personality like Bṛhaspati.





TEXT 37



taṁ tyaktu-kāmāṁ mamatāṁ

bhartus tyāga-viśaṅkitām

nāma-nirvācanaṁ tasya

ślokam enaṁ surā jaguḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-that newly born baby; tyaktu-kāmām-who was trying to avoid; mamatām-unto Mamatā; bhartuḥ tyāga-viśaṅkitām-very much afraid of being forsaken by her husband because of giving birth to an illegitimate son; nāma-nirvācanam-a name-giving ceremony, or nāma-karaṇa; tasya-to the child; ślokam-verse; enam-this; surāḥ-the demigods; jaguḥ-enunciated.





Mamatā very much feared being forsaken by her husband for giving birth to an illegitimate son, and therefore she considered giving up the child. But then the demigods solved the problem by enunciating a name for the child.





According to Vedic scripture, whenever a child is born there are some ceremonies known as jāta-karma and nāma-karaṇa, in which learned brāhmaṇas, immediately after the birth of the child, make a horoscope according to astrological calculations. But the child to which Mamatā gave birth was begotten by Bṛhaspati irreligiously, for although Mamatā was the wife of Utathya, Bṛhaspati made her pregnant by force. Therefore Bṛhaspati became bhartā. According to Vedic culture, a wife is considered the property of her husband, and a son born by illicit sex is called dvāja. The common word still current in Hindu society for such a son is doglā, which refers to a son not begotten by the husband of his mother. In such a situation, it is difficult to give the child a name according to proper regulative principles. Mamatā, therefore, was perplexed, but the demigods gave the child the appropriate name Bharadvāja, which indicated that the child born illegitimately should be maintained by both Mamatā and Bṛhaspati.





TEXT 38



mūḍhe bhara dvājam imaṁ

bhara dvājaṁ bṛhaspate

yātau yad uktvā pitarau

bharadvājas tatas tv ayam

SYNONYMS



mūḍhe-O foolish woman; bhara-just maintain; dvājam-although born by an illicit connection between two; imam-this child; bhara-maintain; dvājam-although born by an illicit connection between two; bṛhaspate-O Bṛhaspati; yātau-left; yat-because; uktvā-having said; pitarau-both the father and mother; bharadvājaḥ-by the name Bharadvāja; tataḥ-thereafter; tu-indeed; ayam-this child.





Bṛhaspati said to Mamatā, "You foolish woman, although this child was born from the wife of one man through the semen discharged by another, you should maintain him." Upon hearing this, Mamatā replied, "O Bṛhaspati, you maintain him!" After speaking in this way, Bṛhaspati and Mamatā both left. Thus the child was known as Bharadvāja.





TEXT 39



codyamānā surair evaṁ

matvā vitatham ātmajam

vyasṛjan maruto 'bibhran

datto 'yaṁ vitathe 'nvaye

SYNONYMS



codyamānā-although Mamatā was encouraged (to maintain the child); suraiḥ-by the demigods; evam-in this way; matvā-considering; vitatham-purposeless; ātmajam-her own child; vyasṛjat-rejected; marutaḥ-the demigods known as the Maruts; abibhran-maintained (the child); dattaḥ-the same child was given; ayam-this; vitathe-was disappointed; anvaye-when the dynasty of Mahārāja Bharata.





Although encouraged by the demigods to maintain the child, Mamatā considered him useless because of his illicit birth, and therefore she left him. Consequently, the demigods known as the Maruts maintained the child, and when Mahārāja Bharata was disappointed for want of a child, this child was given to him as his son.





From this verse it is understood that those who are rejected from the higher planetary system are given a chance to take birth in the most exalted families on this planet earth.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Twentieth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasty of Pūru."



Chapter Twenty-one



The Dynasty of Bharata





This Twenty-first Chapter describes the dynasty born from Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta, and it also describes the glories of Rantideva, Ajamīḍha and others.





The son of Bharadvāja was Manyu, and Manyu's sons were Bṛhatkṣatra, Jaya, Mahāvīrya, Nara and Garga. Of these five, Nara had a son named Saṅkṛti, who had two sons, named Guru and Rantideva. As an exalted devotee, Rantideva saw every living entity in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore he completely engaged his mind, his words and his very self in the service of the Supreme Lord and His devotees. Rantideva was so exalted that he would sometimes give away his own food in charity, and he and his family would fast. Once, after Rantideva spent forty-eight days fasting, not even drinking water, excellent food made with ghee was brought to him, but when he was about to eat it a brāhmaṇa guest appeared. Rantideva, therefore, did not eat the food, but instead immediately offered a portion of it to the brāhmaṇa. When the brāhmaṇa left and Rantideva was just about to eat the remnants of the food, a śūdra appeared. Rantideva therefore divided the remnants between the śūdra and himself. Again, when he was just about to eat the remnants of the food, another guest appeared. Rantideva therefore gave the rest of the food to the new guest and was about to content himself with drinking the water to quench his thirst, but this also was precluded, for a thirsty guest came and Rantideva gave him the water. This was all ordained by the Supreme Personality of Godhead just to glorify His devotee and show how tolerant a devotee is in rendering service to the Lord. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, being extremely pleased with Rantideva, entrusted him with very confidential service. The special power to render the most confidential service is entrusted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to a pure devotee, not to ordinary devotees.





Garga, the son of Bharadvāja, had a son named Śini, and Śini's son was Gārgya. Although Gārgya was a kṣatriya by birth, his sons became brāhmaṇas. The son of Mahāvīrya was Duritakṣaya, whose sons were of a kṣatriya king, they also achieved the position of brāhmaṇas. The son of Bṛhatkṣatra constructed the city of Hastināpura and was known as Hastī. His sons were Ajamīḍha, Dvimīḍha and Purumīḍha.





From Ajamīḍha came Priyamedha and other brāhmaṇas and also a son named Bṛhadiṣu. The sons, grandsons and further descendants of Bṛhadiṣu were Bṛhaddhanu, Bṛhatkāya, Jayadratha, Viśada and Syenajit. From Syenajit came four sons-Rucirāśva, Dṛḍhahanu, Kāśya and Vatsa. From Rucirāśva came a son named Pāra, whose sons were Pṛthusena and Nīpa, and from Nīpa came one hundred sons. Another son of Nīpa was Brahmadatta. From Brahmadatta came Viṣvaksena; from Viṣvaksena, Udaksena; and from Udaksena, Bhallāṭa.





The son of Dvimīḍha was Yavīnara, and from Yavīnara came many sons and grandsons, such as Kṛtimān, Satyadhṛti, Dṛḍhanemi, Supārśva, Sumati, Sannatimān, Kṛtī, Nīpa, Udgrāyudha, Kṣemya, Suvīra, Ripuñjaya and Bahuratha. Purumīḍha had no sons, but Ajamīḍha, in addition to his other sons, had a son named Nīla, whose son was Śānti. The descendants of Śānti were Suśānti, Puruja, Arka and Bharmyāśva. Bharmyāśva had five sons, one of whom, Mudgala, begot a dynasty of brāhmaṇas. Mudgala had twins-a son, Divodāsa, and a daughter, Ahalyā. From Ahalyā, by her husband, Gautama, Śatānanda was born. The son of Śatānanda was Satyadhṛti, and his son was Śaradvān. Śaradvān's son was known as Kṛpa, and Śaradvān's daughter, known as Kṛpī, became the wife of Droṇācārya.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

vitathasya sutān manyor

bṛhatkṣatro jayas tataḥ

mahāvīryo naro gargaḥ

saṅkṛtis tu narātmajaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vitathasya-of Vitatha (Bharadvāja), who was accepted in the family of Mahārāja Bharata under special circumstances of disappointment; sutāt-from the son; manyoḥ-named Manyu; bṛhatkṣatraḥ-Bṛhatkṣatra; jayaḥ-Jaya; tataḥ-from him; mahāvīryaḥ-Mahāvīrya; naraḥ-Nara; gargaḥ-Garga; saṅkṛtiḥ-Saṅkṛti; tu-certainly; nara-ātmajaḥ-the son of Nara.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Because Bharadvāja was delivered by the Marut demigods, he was known as Vitatha. The son of Vitatha was Manyu, and from Manyu came five sons-Bṛhatkṣatra, Jaya, Mahāvīrya, Nara and Garga. Of these five, the one known as Nara had a son named Saṅkṛti.





TEXT 2



guruś ca rantidevaś ca

saṅkṛteḥ pāṇḍu-nandana

rantidevasya mahimā

ihāmutra ca gīyate

SYNONYMS



guruḥ-a son named Guru; ca-and; rantidevaḥ ca-and a son named Rantideva; saṅkṛteḥ-from Saṅkṛti; pāṇḍu-nandana-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Pāṇḍu; rantidevasya-of Rantideva; mahimā-the glories; iha-in this world; amutra-and in the next world; ca-also; gīyate-are glorified.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Pāṇḍu, Saṅkṛti had two sons, named Guru and Rantideva. Rantideva is famous in both this world and the next, for he is glorified not only in human society but also in the society of the demigods.





TEXTS 3–5



viyad-vittasya dadato

labdhaṁ labdhaṁ bubhukṣataḥ

niṣkiñcanasya dhīrasya

sakuṭumbasya sīdataḥ

vyatīyur aṣṭa-catvāriṁśad



ahāny apibataḥ kila

ghṛta-pāyasa-saṁyāvaṁ

toyaṁ prātar upasthitam

kṛcchra-prāpta-kuṭumbasya



kṣut-tṛḍbhyāṁ jāta-vepathoḥ

atithir brāhmaṇaḥ kāle

bhoktu-kāmasya cāgamat

SYNONYMS



viyat-vittasya-of Rantideva, who received things sent by providence, just as the cātaka bird receives water from the sky; dadataḥ-who distributed to others; labdham-whatever he got; labdham-such gains; bubhukṣataḥ-he enjoyed; niṣkiñcanasya-always penniless; dhīrasya-yet very sober; sa-kuṭumbasya-even with his family members; sīdataḥ-suffering very much; vyatīyuḥ-passed by; aṣṭa-catvāriṁśat-forty-eight; ahāni-days; apibataḥ-without even drinking water; kila-indeed; ghṛta-pāyasa-food prepared with ghee and milk; saṁyāvam-varieties of food grains; toyam-water; prātaḥ-in the morning; upasthitam-arrived by chance; kṛcchra-prāpta-undergoing suffering; kuṭumbasya-whose family members; kṣut-tṛḍbhyām-by thirst and hunger; jāta-became; vepathoḥ-trembling; atithiḥ-a guest; brāhmaṇaḥ-a brāhmaṇa; kāle-just at that time; bhoktu-kāmasya-of Rantideva, who desired to eat something; ca-also; āgamat-arrived there.





Rantideva never endeavored to earn anything. He would enjoy whatever he got by the arrangement of providence, but when guests came he would give them everything. Thus he underwent considerable suffering, along with the members of his family. Indeed, he and his family members shivered for want of food and water, yet Rantideva always remained sober. Once, after fasting for forty-eight days, in the morning Rantideva received some water and some foodstuffs made with milk and ghee, but when he and his family were about to eat, a brāhmaṇa guest arrived.





TEXT 6



tasmai saṁvyabhajat so 'nnam

ādṛtya śraddhayānvitaḥ

hariṁ sarvatra sampaśyan

sa bhuktvā prayayau dvijaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmai-unto him (the brāhmaṇa); saṁvyabhajat-after dividing, gave his share; saḥ-he (Rantideva); annam-the food; ādṛtya-with great respect; śraddhayā anvitaḥ-and with faith; harim-the Supreme Lord; sarvatra-everywhere, or in the heart of every living being; sampaśyan-conceiving; saḥ-he; bhuktvā-after eating the food; prayayau-left that place; dvijaḥ-the brāhmaṇa.





Because Rantideva perceived the presence of the Supreme Godhead everywhere, and in every living entity, he received the guest with faith and respect and gave him a share of the food. The brāhmaṇa guest ate his share and then went away.





Rantideva perceived the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every living being, but he never thought that because the Supreme Lord is present in every living being, every living being must be God. Nor did he distinguish between one living being and another. He perceived the presence of the Lord both in the brāhmaṇa and in the caṇḍāla. This is the true vision of equality, as confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (5.18):



vidyā-vinaya-sampanne

brāhmaṇe gavi hastini

śuni caiva śva-pāke ca

paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ





"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a learned and gentle brāhmaṇa, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater [outcaste]." A paṇḍita, or learned person, perceives the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every living being. Therefore, although it has now become fashionable to give preference to the so-called daridra-nārāyaṇa, or "poor Nārāyaṇa," Rantideva had no reason to give preference to any one person. The idea that because Nārāyaṇa is present in the heart of one who is daridra, or poor, the poor man should be called daridra-nārāyaṇa is a wrong conception. By such logic, because the Lord is present within the hearts of the dogs and hogs, the dogs and hogs would also be Nārāyaṇa. One should not mistakenly think that Rantideva subscribed to this view. Rather, he saw everyone as part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ). It is not that everyone is the Supreme Godhead. Such a theory, which is propounded by the Māyāvāda philosophy, is always misleading, and Rantideva would never have accepted it.





TEXT 7



athānyo bhokṣyamāṇasya

vibhaktasya mahīpateḥ

vibhaktaṁ vyabhajat tasmai

vṛṣalāya hariṁ smaran

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; anyaḥ-another guest; bhokṣyamāṇasya-who was just about to eat; vibhaktasya-after setting aside the share for the family; mahīpateḥ-of the King; vibhaktam-the food allotted for the family; vyabhajat-he divided and distributed; tasmai-unto him; vṛṣalāya-unto a śūdra; harim-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; smaran-remembering.





Thereafter, having divided the remaining food with his relatives, Rantideva was just about to eat his own share when a śūdra guest arrived. Seeing the śūdra in relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King Rantideva gave him also a share of the food.





Because King Rantideva saw everyone as part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he never distinguished between the brāhmaṇa and the śūdra, the poor and the rich. Such equal vision is called sama-darśinaḥ (paṇḍitāḥ sama-darśinaḥ [Bg. 5.18]). One who has actually realized that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone's heart and that every living being is part of the Lord does not make any distinction between the brāhmaṇa and the śūdra, the poor (daridra) and the rich (dhanī). Such a person sees all living beings equally and treats them equally, without discrimination.





TEXT 8



yāte śūdre tam anyo 'gād

atithiḥ śvabhir āvṛtaḥ

rājan me dīyatām annaṁ

sagaṇāya bubhukṣate

SYNONYMS



yāte-when he went away; śūdre-the śūdra guest; tam-unto the King; anyaḥ-another; agāt-arrived there; atithiḥ-guest; śvabhiḥ āvṛtaḥ-accompanied by dogs; rājan-O King; me-unto me; dīyatām-deliver; annam-eatables; sa-gaṇāya-with my company of dogs; bubhukṣate-hankering for food.





When the śūdra went away, another guest arrived, surrounded by dogs, and said, "O King, I and my company of dogs are very hungry. Please give us something to eat."





TEXT 9



sa ādṛtyāvaśiṣṭaṁ yad

bahu-māna-puraskṛtam

tac ca dattvā namaścakre

śvabhyaḥ śva-pataye vibhuḥ

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (King Rantideva); ādṛtya-after honoring them; avaśiṣṭam-the food that remained after the brāhmaṇa and śūdra were fed; yat-whatever there was; bahu-māna-puraskṛtam-offering him much respect; tat-that; ca-also; dattvā-giving away; namaḥ-cakre-offered obeisances; śvabhyaḥ-unto the dogs; śva-pataye-unto the master of the dogs; vibhuḥ-the all-powerful King.





With great respect, King Rantideva offered the balance of the food to the dogs and the master of the dogs, who had come as guests. The King offered them all respects and obeisances.





TEXT 10



pānīya-mātram uccheṣaṁ

tac caika-paritarpaṇam

pāsyataḥ pulkaso 'bhyāgād

apo dehy aśubhāya me

SYNONYMS



pānīya-mātram-only the drinking water; uccheṣam-what remained of the food; tat ca-that also; eka-for one; paritarpaṇam-satisfying; pāsyataḥ-when the King was about to drink; pulkasaḥ-a caṇḍāla; abhyāgāt-came there; apaḥ-water; dehi-please give; aśubhāya-although I am a lowborn caṇḍāla; me-to me.





Thereafter, only the drinking water remained, and there was only enough to satisfy one person, but when the King was just about to drink it, a caṇḍāla appeared and said, "O King, although I am lowborn, kindly give me some drinking water."





TEXT 11



tasya tāṁ karuṇāṁ vācaṁ

niśamya vipula-śramām

kṛpayā bhṛśa-santapta

idam āhāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (the caṇḍāla); tām-those; karuṇām-pitiable; vācam-words; niśamya-hearing; vipula-very much; śramām-fatigued; kṛpayā-out of compassion; bhṛśa-santaptaḥ-very much aggrieved; idam-these; āha-spoke; amṛtam-very sweet; vacaḥ-words.





Aggrieved at hearing the pitiable words of the poor fatigued caṇḍāla, Mahārāja Rantideva spoke the following nectarean words.





Mahārāja Rantideva's words were like amṛta, or nectar, and therefore, aside from rendering bodily service to an aggrieved person, by his words alone the King could save the life of anyone who might hear him.





TEXT 12



na kāmaye 'haṁ gatim īśvarāt parām

aṣṭarddhi-yuktām apunar-bhavaṁ vā

ārtiṁ prapadye 'khila-deha-bhājām

antaḥ-sthito yena bhavanty aduḥkhāḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; kāmaye-desire; aham-I; gatim-destination; īśvarāt-from the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parām-great; aṣṭa-ṛddhi-yuktām-composed of the eight kinds of mystic perfection; apunaḥ-bhavam-cessation of repeated birth (liberation, salvation); vā-either; ārtim-sufferings; prapadye-I accept; akhila-deha-bhājām-of all living entities; antaḥ-sthitaḥ-staying among them; yena-by which; bhavanti-they become; aduḥkhāḥ-without distress.





I do not pray to the Supreme Personality of Godhead for the eight perfections of mystic yoga, nor for salvation from repeated birth and death. I want only to stay among all the living entities and suffer all distresses on their behalf, so that they may be freed from suffering.





Vāsudeva Datta made a similar statement to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, requesting the Lord to liberate all living entities in His presence. Vāsudeva Datta submitted that if they were unfit to be liberated, he himself would take all their sinful reactions and suffer personally so that the Lord might deliver them. A Vaiṣṇava is therefore described as being para-duḥkha-duḥkhī, very much aggrieved by the sufferings of others. As such, a Vaiṣṇava engages in activities for the real welfare of human society.





TEXT 13



kṣut-tṛṭ-śramo gātra-paribhramaś ca

dainyaṁ klamaḥ śoka-viṣāda-mohāḥ

sarve nivṛttāḥ kṛpaṇasya jantor

jijīviṣor jīva-jalārpaṇān me

SYNONYMS



kṣut-from hunger; tṛṭ-and thirst; śramaḥ-fatigue; gātra-paribhramaḥ-trembling of the body; ca-also; dainyam-poverty; klamaḥ-distress; śoka-lamentation; viṣāda-moroseness; mohāḥ-and bewilderment; sarve-all of them; nivṛttāḥ-finished; kṛpaṇasya-of the poor; jantoḥ-living entity (the caṇḍāla); jijīviṣoḥ-desiring to live; jīva-maintaining life; jala-water; arpaṇāt-by delivering; me-mine.





By offering my water to maintain the life of this poor caṇḍāla, who is struggling to live, I have been freed from all hunger, thirst, fatigue, trembling of the body, moroseness, distress, lamentation and illusion.





TEXT 14



iti prabhāṣya pānīyaṁ

mriyamāṇaḥ pipāsayā

pulkasāyādadād dhīro

nisarga-karuṇo nṛpaḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-thus; prabhāṣya-giving his statement; pānīyam-drinking water; mriyamāṇaḥ-although on the verge of death; pipāsayā-because of thirst; pulkasāya-unto the low-class caṇḍāla; adadāt-delivered; dhīraḥ-sober; nisarga-karuṇaḥ-by nature very kind; nṛpaḥ-the King.





Having spoken thus, King Rantideva, although on the verge of death because of thirst, gave his own portion of water to the caṇḍāla without hesitation, for the King was naturally very kind and sober.





TEXT 15



tasya tribhuvanādhīśāḥ

phaladāḥ phalam icchatām

ātmānaṁ darśayāṁ cakrur

māyā viṣṇu-vinirmitāḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-before him (King Rantideva); tri-bhuvana-adhīśāḥ-the controllers of the three worlds (demigods like Brahmā and Śiva); phaladāḥ-who can bestow all fruitive results; phalam icchatām-of persons who desire material benefit; ātmānam-their own identities; darśayām cakruḥ-manifested; māyāḥ-the illusory energy; viṣṇu-by Lord Viṣṇu; vinirmitāḥ-created.





Demigods like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who can satisfy all materially ambitious men by giving them the rewards they desire, then manifested their own identities before King Rantideva, for it was they who had presented themselves as the brāhmaṇa, śūdra, caṇḍāla and so on.





TEXT 16



sa vai tebhyo namaskṛtya

niḥsaṅgo vigata-spṛhaḥ

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhaktyā cakre manaḥ param

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (King Rantideva); vai-indeed; tebhyaḥ-unto Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the other demigods; namaḥ-kṛtya-offering obeisances; niḥsaṅgaḥ-with no ambition to take any benefit from them; vigata-spṛhaḥ-completely free from desires for material possessions; vāsudeve-unto Lord Vāsudeva; bhagavati-the Supreme Lord; bhaktyā-by devotional service; cakre-fixed; manaḥ-the mind; param-as the ultimate goal of life.





King Rantideva had no ambition to enjoy material benefits from the demigods. He offered them obeisances, but because he was factually attached to Lord Viṣṇu, Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he fixed his mind at Lord Viṣṇu's lotus feet.





Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has sung:



anya devāśraya nāi, tomāre kahinu bhāi,

ei bhakti parama karaṇa

If one wants to become a pure devotee of the Supreme Lord, one should not hanker to take benedictions from the demigods. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.20), kāmais tais tair hṛta jñānāḥ prapadyante 'nya-devatāḥ: those befooled by the illusion of the material energy worship gods other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, although Rantideva was personally able to see Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, he did not hanker to take material benefits from them. Rather, he fixed his mind upon Lord Vāsudeva and rendered devotional service unto Him. This is the sign of a pure devotee, whose heart is not adulterated by material desires.



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

[Madhya 19.167]





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service."





TEXT 17



īśvarālambanaṁ cittaṁ

kurvato 'nanya-rādhasaḥ

māyā guṇa-mayī rājan

svapnavat pratyalīyata

SYNONYMS



īśvara-ālambanam-completely taking shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord; cittam-his consciousness; kurvataḥ-fixing; ananya-rādhasaḥ-for Rantideva, who was undeviating and desired nothing other than to serve the Supreme Lord; māyā-the illusory energy; guṇa-mayī-consisting of the three modes of nature; rājan-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; svapna-vat-like a dream; pratyalīyata-merged.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, because King Rantideva was a pure devotee, always Kṛṣṇa conscious and free from all material desires, the Lord's illusory energy, māyā, could not exhibit herself before him. On the contrary, for him māyā entirely vanished, exactly like a dream.





As it is said:



kṛṣṇa--sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṅ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṅ nāhi māyāra adhikāra





Just as there is no chance that darkness can exist in the sunshine, in a pure Kṛṣṇa conscious person there can be no existence of māyā. The Lord Himself says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14):



daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī

mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante

māyām etāṁ taranti te





"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it." If one wants to be free from the influence of māyā, the illusory energy, one must become Kṛṣṇa conscious and always keep Kṛṣṇa prominent within the core of his heart. In Bhagavad-gītā (9.34) the Lord advises that one always think of Him (man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru). In this way, by always being Kṛṣṇa-minded or Kṛṣṇa conscious, one can surpass the influence of māyā (māyām etāṁ taranti te [Bg. 7.14]). Because Rantideva was Kṛṣṇa conscious, he was not under the influence of the illusory energy. The word svapnavat is significant in this connection. Because in the material world the mind is absorbed in materialistic activities, when one is asleep many contradictory activities appear in one's dreams. When one awakens, however, these activities automatically merge into the mind. Similarly, as long as one is under the influence of the material energy he makes many plans and schemes, but when one is Kṛṣṇa conscious such dreamlike plans automatically disappear.





TEXT 18



tat-prasaṅgānubhāvena

rantidevānuvartinaḥ

abhavan yoginaḥ sarve

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-prasaṅga-anubhāvena-because of associating with King Rantideva (when talking with him about bhakti-yoga); rantideva-anuvartinaḥ-the followers of King Rantideva (that is, his servants, his family members, his friends and others); abhavan-became; yoginaḥ-first-class mystic yogīs, or bhakti-yogīs; sarve-all of them; nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇāḥ-devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa.





All those who followed the principles of King Rantideva were totally favored by his mercy and became pure devotees, attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. Thus they all became the best of yogis.





The best yogīs or mystics are the devotees, as confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all." The best yogī is he who constantly thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the core of the heart. Because Rantideva was the king, the chief executive in the state, all the residents of the state became devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, by the king's transcendental association. This is the influence of a pure devotee. If there is one pure devotee, his association can create hundreds and thousands of pure devotees. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said that a Vaiṣṇava is meritorious in proportion to the number of devotees he has created. A Vaiṣṇava becomes superior not simply by jugglery of words but by the number of devotees he has created for the Lord. Here the word rantidevānuvartinaḥ indicates that Rantideva's officers, friends, relatives and subjects all became first-class Vaiṣṇavas by his association. In other words, Rantideva is confirmed herein to be a first-class devotee, or mahā-bhāgavata. Mahat-sevāṁ dvāram āhur vimukteḥ: [SB 5.5.2] one should render service to such mahātmās, for then one will automatically achieve the goal of liberation. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has also said, chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā nistāra pāyeche kebā: one cannot be liberated by his own effort, but if one becomes subordinate to a pure Vaiṣṇava, the door to liberation is open.





TEXTS 19–20



gargāc chinis tato gārgyaḥ

kṣatrād brahma hy avartata

duritakṣayo mahāvīryāt

tasya trayyāruṇiḥ kaviḥ

puṣkarāruṇir ity atra



ye brāhmaṇa-gatiṁ gatāḥ

bṛhatkṣatrasya putro 'bhūd

dhastī yad-dhastināpuram

SYNONYMS



gargāt-from Garga (another grandson of Bharadvāja); śiniḥ-a son named Śini; tataḥ-from him (Śini); gārgyaḥ-a son named Gārgya; kṣatrāt-although he was a kṣatriya; brahma-the brāhmaṇas; hi-in deed; avartata-became possible; duritakṣayaḥ-a son named Duritakṣaya; mahāvīryāt-from Mahāvīrya (another grandson of Bharadvāja); tasya-his; trayyāruṇiḥ-the son named Trayyāruṇi; kaviḥ-a son named Kavi; puṣkarāruṇiḥ-a son named Puṣkarāruṇi; iti-thus; atra-therein; ye-all of them; brāhmaṇa-gatim-the position of brāhmaṇas; gatāḥ-achieved; bṛhatkṣatrasya-of the grandson of Bharadvāja named Bṛhatkṣatra; putraḥ-the son; abhūt-became; hastī-Hastī; yat-from whom; hastināpuram-the city of Hastināpura (New Delhi) was established.





From Garga came a son named Śini, and his son was Gārgya. Although Gārgya was a kṣatriya, there came from him a generation of brahmaṇas. From Mahāvīrya came a son named Duritakṣaya, whose sons were Trayyāruṇi, Kavi and Puṣkarāruṇi. Although these sons of Duritakṣaya took birth in a dynasty of kṣatriyas, they too attained the position of brāhmaṇas. Bṛhatkṣatra had a son named Hastī, who established the city of Hastināpura [now New Delhi].





TEXT 21



ajamīḍho dvimīḍhaś ca

purumīḍhaś ca hastinaḥ

ajamīḍhasya vaṁśyāḥ syuḥ

priyamedhādayo dvijāḥ

SYNONYMS



ajamīḍhaḥ-Ajamīḍha; dvimīḍhaḥ-Dvimīḍha; ca-also; purumīḍhaḥ-Purumīḍha; ca-also; hastinaḥ-became the sons of Hastī; ajamīḍhasya-of Ajamīḍha; vaṁśyāḥ-descendants; syuḥ-are; priyamedha-ādayaḥ-headed by Priyamedha; dvijāḥ-brāhmaṇas.





From King Hastī came three sons, named Ajamīḍha, Dvimīḍha and Purumīḍha. The descendants of Ajamīḍha, headed by Priyamedha, all achieved the position of brāhmaṇas.





This verse gives evidence confirming the statement of Bhagavad-gītā that the orders of society-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra-are calculated in terms of qualities and activities (guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ). All the descendants of Ajamīḍha, who was a kṣatriya, became brāhmaṇas. This was certainly because of their qualities and activities. Similarly, sometimes the sons of brāhmaṇas or kṣatriyas become vaiśyas (brāhmaṇa-vaiśyatāṁ gatāḥ). When a kṣatriya or brāhmaṇa adopts the occupation or duty of a vaiśya (kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyam [Bg. 18.44]), he is certainly counted as a vaiśya. On the other hand, if one is born a vaiśya, by his activities he can become a brāhmaṇa. This is confirmed by Nārada Muni. Yasya yal-lakṣaṇaṁ proktam. The members of the varṇas, or social orders-brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra-must be ascertained by their symptoms, not by birth. Birth is immaterial; quality is essential.





TEXT 22



ajamīḍhād bṛhadiṣus

tasya putro bṛhaddhanuḥ

bṛhatkāyas tatas tasya

putra āsīj jayadrathaḥ

SYNONYMS



ajamīḍhāt-from Ajamīḍha; bṛhadiṣuḥ-a son named Bṛhadiṣu; tasya-his; putraḥ-son; bṛhaddhanuḥ-Bṛhaddhanu; bṛhatkāyaḥ-Bṛhatkāya; tataḥ-thereafter; tasya-his; putraḥ-son; āsīt-was; jayadrathaḥ-Jayadratha.





From Ajamīḍha came a son named Bṛhadiṣu, from Bṛhadiṣu came a son named Bṛhaddhanu, from Bṛhaddhanu a son named Bṛhatkāya, and from Bṛhatkāya a son named Jayadratha.





TEXT 23



tat-suto viśadas tasya

syenajit samajāyata

rucirāśvo dṛḍhahanuḥ

kāśyo vatsaś ca tat-sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-sutaḥ-the son of Jayadratha; viśadaḥ-Viśada; tasya-the son of Viśada; syenajit-Syenajit; samajāyata-was born; rucirāśvaḥ-Rucirāśva; dṛḍhahanuḥ-Dṛḍhahanu; kāśyaḥ-Kāśya; vatsaḥ-Vatsa; ca-also; tat-sutāḥ-sons of Syenajit.





The son of Jayadratha was Viśada, and his son was Syenajit. The sons of Syenajit were Rucirāśva, Dṛḍhahanu, Kāśya and Vatsa.





TEXT 24



rucirāśva-sutaḥ pāraḥ

pṛthusenas tad-ātmajaḥ

pārasya tanayo nīpas

tasya putra-śataṁ tv abhūt

SYNONYMS



rucirāśva-sutaḥ-the son of Rucirāśva; pāraḥ-Pāra; pṛthusenaḥ-Pṛthusena; tat-his; ātmajaḥ-son; pārasya-from Pāra; tanayaḥ-a son; nīpaḥ-Nīpa; tasya-his; putra-śatam-one hundred sons; tu-indeed; abhūt-generated.





The son of Rucirāśva was Pāra, and the sons of Pāra were Pṛthusena and Nīpa. Nīpa had one hundred sons.





TEXT 25



sa kṛtvyāṁ śuka-kanyāyāṁ

brahmadattam ajījanat

yogī sa gavi bhāryāyāṁ

viṣvaksenam adhāt sutam

SYNONYMS



saḥ-he (King Nīpa); kṛtvyām-in his wife, Kṛtvī; śuka-kanyāyām-who was the daughter of Śuka; brahmadattam-a son named Brahmadatta; ajījanat-begot; yogī-a mystic yogī; saḥ-that Brahmadatta; gavi-by the name Gau or Sarasvatī; bhāryāyām-in the womb of his wife; viṣvaksenam-Viṣvaksena; adhāt-begot; sutam-a son.





King Nīpa begot a son named Brahmadatta through the womb of his wife, Kṛtvī, who was the daughter of Śuka. And Brahmadatta, who was a great yogi, begot a son named Viṣvaksena through the womb of his wife, Sarasvatī.





The Śuka mentioned here is different from the Śukadeva Gosvāmī who spoke Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, is described in great detail in the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa. There it is said that Vyāsadeva maintained the daughter of Jābāli as his wife and that after they performed penances together for many years, he placed his seed in her womb. The child remained in the womb of his mother for twelve years, and when the father asked the son to come out, the son replied that he would not come out unless he were completely liberated from the influence of māyā. Vyāsadeva then assured the child that he would not be influenced by māyā, but the child did not believe his father, for the father was still attached to his wife and children. Vyāsadeva then went to Dvārakā and informed the Personality of Godhead about his problem, and the Personality of Godhead, at Vyāsadeva's request, went to Vyāsadeva's cottage, where He assured the child in the womb that he would not be influenced by māyā. Thus assured, the child came out, but he immediately went away as a parivrājakācārya. When the father, very much aggrieved, began to follow his saintly boy, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the boy created a duplicate Śukadeva, who later entered family life. Therefore, the śuka-kanyā, or daughter of Śukadeva, mentioned in this verse is the daughter of the duplicate or imitation Śukadeva. The original Śukadeva was a lifelong brahmacārī.





TEXT 26



jaigīṣavyopadeśena

yoga-tantraṁ cakāra ha

udaksenas tatas tasmād

bhallāṭo bārhadīṣavāḥ

SYNONYMS



jaigīṣavya-of the great ṛṣi named Jaigīṣavya; upadeśena-by the instruction; yoga-tantram-an elaborate description of the mystic yoga system; cakāra-compiled; ha-in the past; udaksenaḥ-Udaksena; tataḥ-from him (Viṣvaksena); tasmāt-from him (Udaksena); bhallāṭaḥ-a son named Bhallāṭa; bārhadīṣavāḥ-(all of these are known as) descendants of Bṛhadiṣu.





Following the instructions of the great sage Jaigīṣavya, Viṣvaksena compiled an elaborate description of the mystic yoga system. From Viṣvaksena, Udaksena was born, and from Udaksena, Bhallāṭa. All these sons are known as descendants of Bṛhadiṣu.





TEXT 27



yavīnaro dvimīḍhasya

kṛtimāṁs tat-sutaḥ smṛtaḥ

nāmnā satyadhṛtis tasya

dṛḍhanemiḥ supārśvakṛt

SYNONYMS



yavīnaraḥ-Yavīnara; dvimīḍhasya-the son of Dvimīḍha; kṛtimān-Kṛtimān; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Yavīnara; smṛtaḥ-is well known; nāmnā-by name; satyadhṛtiḥ-Satyadhṛti; tasya-of him (Satyadhṛti); dṛḍhanemiḥ-Dṛḍhanemi; supārśva-kṛt-the father of Supārśva.





The son of Dvimīḍha was Yavīnara, whose son was Kṛtimān. The son of Kṛtimān was well known as Satyadhṛti. From Satyadhṛti came a son named Dṛḍhanemi, who became the father of Supārśva.





TEXTS 28–29



supārśvāt sumatis tasya

putraḥ sannatimāṁs tataḥ

kṛtī hiraṇyanābhād yo

yogaṁ prāpya jagau sma ṣaṭ

saṁhitāḥ prācyasāmnāṁ vai



nīpo hy udgrāyudhas tataḥ

tasya kṣemyaḥ suvīro 'tha

suvīrasya ripuñjayaḥ

SYNONYMS



supārśvāt-from Supārśva; sumatiḥ-a son named Sumati; tasya putraḥ-his son (Sumati's son); sannatimān-Sannatimān; tataḥ-from him; kṛtī-a son named Kṛtī; hiraṇyanābhāt-from Lord Brahmā; yaḥ-he who; yogam-mystic power; prāpya-getting; jagau-taught; sma-in the past; ṣaṭ-six; saṁhitāḥ-descriptions; prācyasāmnām-of the Prācyasāma verses of the Sāma Veda; vai-indeed; nīpaḥ-Nīpa; hi-indeed; udgrāyudhaḥ-Udgrāyudha; tataḥ-from him; tasya-his; kṣemyaḥ-Kṣemya; suvīraḥ-Suvīra; atha-thereafter; suvīrasya-of Suvīra; ripuñjayaḥ-a son named Ripuñjaya.





From Supārśva came a son named Sumati, from Sumati came Sannatimān, and from Sannatimān came Kṛtī, who achieved mystic power from Brahmā and taught six saṁhitās of the Prācyasāma verses of the Sāma Veda. The son of Kṛtī was Nīpa; the son of Nīpa, Udgrāyudha; the son of Udgrāyudha, Kṣemya; the son of Kṣemya, Suvīra; and the son of Suvīra, Ripuñjaya.





TEXT 30



tato bahuratho nāma

purumīḍho 'prajo 'bhavat

nalinyām ajamīḍhasya

nīlaḥ śāntis tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from him (Ripuñjaya); bahurathaḥ-Bahuratha; nāma-named; purumīḍhaḥ-Purumīḍha, the younger brother of Dvimīḍha; aprajaḥ-sonless; abhavat-became; nalinyām-through Nalinī; ajamīḍhasya-of Ajamīḍha; nīlaḥ-Nīla; śāntiḥ-Śānti; tu-then; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Nīla.





From Ripuñjaya came a son named Bahuratha. Purumīḍha was sonless. Ajamīḍha had a son named Nīla by his wife known as Nalinī, and the son of Nīla was Śānti.





TEXTS 31–33



śānteḥ suśāntis tat-putraḥ

purujo 'rkas tato 'bhavat

bharmyāśvas tanayas tasya

pañcāsan mudgalādayaḥ

yavīnaro bṛhadviśvaḥ



kāmpillaḥ sañjayaḥ sutāḥ

bharmyāśvaḥ prāha putrā me

pañcānāṁ rakṣaṇāya hi

viṣayāṇām alam ime



iti pañcāla-saṁjñitāḥ

mudgalād brahma-nirvṛttaṁ

gotraṁ maudgalya-saṁjñitam

SYNONYMS



śānteḥ-of Śānti; suśāntiḥ-Suśānti; tat-putraḥ-his son; purujaḥ-Puruja; arkaḥ-Arka; tataḥ-from him; abhavat-generated; bharmyāśvaḥ-Bharmyāśva; tanayaḥ-son; tasya-of him; pañca-five sons; āsan-were; mudgala-ādayaḥ-headed by Mudgala; yavīnaraḥ-Yavīnara; bṛhadviśvaḥ-Bṛhadviśva; kāmpillaḥ-Kāmpilla; sañjayaḥ-Sañjaya; sutāḥ-sons; bharmyāśvaḥ-Bharmyāśva; prāha-said; putrāḥ-sons; me-my; pañcānām-of five; rakṣaṇāya-for protection; hi-indeed; viṣayāṇām-of different states; alam-competent; ime-all of them; iti-thus; pañcāla-Pañcāla; saṁjñitāḥ-designated; mudgalāt-from Mudgala; brahma-nirvṛttam-consisting of brāhmaṇas; gotram-a dynasty; maudgalya-Maudgalya; saṁjñitam-so designated.





The son of Śānti was Suśānti, the son of Suśānti was Puruja, and the son of Puruja was Arka. From Arka came Bharmyāśva, and from Bharmyāśva came five sons-Mudgala, Yavīnara, Bṛhadviśva, Kāmpilla and Sañjaya. Bharmyāśva prayed to his sons, "O my sons, please take charge of my five states, for you are quite competent to do so." Thus his five sons were known as the Pañcālas. From Mudgala came a dynasty of brāhmaṇas known as Maudgalya.





TEXT 34



mithunaṁ mudgalād bhārmyād

divodāsaḥ pumān abhūt

ahalyā kanyakā yasyāṁ

śatānandas tu gautamāt

SYNONYMS



mithunam-twins, one male and one female; mudgalāt-from Mudgala; bhārmyāt-the son of Bharmyāśva; divodāsaḥ-Divodāsa; pumān-the male one; abhūt-generated; ahalyā-Ahalyā; kanyakā-the female; yasyām-through whom; śatānandaḥ-Śatānanda; tu-indeed; gautamāt-generated by her husband, Gautama.





Mudgala, the son of Bharmyāśva, had twin children, one male and the other female. The male child was named Divodāsa, and the female child was named Ahalyā. From the womb of Ahalyā by the semen of her husband, Gautama, came a son named Śatānanda.





TEXT 35



tasya satyadhṛtiḥ putro

dhanur-veda-viśāradaḥ

śaradvāṁs tat-suto yasmād

urvaśī-darśanāt kila

śara-stambe 'patad reto

mithunaṁ tad abhūc chubham

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Śatānanda); satyadhṛtiḥ-Satyadhṛti; putraḥ-a son; dhanuḥ-veda-viśāradaḥ-very expert in the art of archery; śaradvān-Śaradvān; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Satyadhṛti; yasmāt-from whom; urvaśī-darśanāt-simply by seeing the celestial Urvaśī; kila-indeed; śara-stambe-on a clump of śara grass; apatat-fell; retaḥ-semen; mithunam-a male and female; tat abhūt-there were born; śubham-all-auspicious.





The son of Śatānanda was Satyadhṛti, who was expert in archery, and the son of Satyadhṛti was Śaradvān. When Śaradvān met Urvaśī, he discharged semen, which fell on a clump of śara grass. From this semen were born two all-auspicious babies, one male and the other female.





TEXT 36



tad dṛṣṭvā kṛpayāgṛhṇāc

chāntanur mṛgayāṁ caran

kṛpaḥ kumāraḥ kanyā ca

droṇa-patny abhavat kṛpī

SYNONYMS



tat-those twin male and female babies; dṛṣṭvā-seeing; kṛpayā-out of compassion; agṛhṇāt-took; śāntanuḥ-King Śāntanu; mṛgayām-while hunting in the forest; caran-wandering in that way; kṛpaḥ-Kṛpa; kumāraḥ-the male child; kanyā-the female child; ca-also; droṇa-patnī-the wife of Droṇācārya; abhavat-became; kṛpī-named Kṛpī.





While Mahārāja Śāntanu was on a hunting excursion, he saw the male and female children lying in the forest, and out of compassion he took them home. Consequently, the male child was known as Kṛpa, and the female child was named Kṛpī. Kṛpī later became the wife of Droṇācārya.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-first Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasty of Bharata."



Chapter Twenty-two



The Descendants of Ajamīḍha





This chapter describes the descendants of Divodāsa. It also describes Jarāsandha, who belonged to the Ṛkṣa dynasty, as well as Duryodhana, Arjuna and others.





The son of Divodāsa was Mitrāyu, who had four sons, one after another-Cyavana, Sudāsa, Sahadeva and Somaka. Somaka had one hundred sons, of whom the youngest was Pṛṣata, from whom Drupada was born. Drupada's daughter was Draupadī, and his sons were headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna. Dhṛṣṭadyumna's son was Dhṛṣṭaketu.





Another son of Ajamīḍha was named Ṛkṣa. From Ṛkṣa came a son named Saṁvaraṇa, and from Saṁvaraṇa came Kuru, the king of Kurukṣetra. Kuru had four sons-Parīkṣi, Sudhanu, Jahnu and Niṣadha. Among the descendants in the dynasty from Sudhanu were Suhotra, Cyavana, Kṛtī and Uparicara Vasu. The sons of Uparicara Vasu, including Bṛhadratha, Kuśāmba, Matsya, Pratyagra and Cedipa, became kings of the Cedi state. In the dynasty from Bṛhadratha came Kuśāgra, Ṛṣabha, Satyahita, Puṣpavān and Jahu, and from Bṛhadratha through the womb of another wife came Jarāsandha, who was followed by Sahadeva, Somāpi and Śrutaśravā. Parīkṣi, the son of Kuru, had no sons. Among the descendants of Jahnu were Suratha, Vidūratha, Sārvabhauma, Jayasena, Rādhika, Ayutāyu, Akrodhana, Devātithi, Ṛkṣa, Dilīpa and Pratīpa.





The sons of Pratīpa were Devāpi, Śāntanu and Bāhlīka. When Devāpi retired to the forest, his younger brother Śāntanu became the king. Although Śāntanu, being younger, was not eligible to occupy the throne, he disregarded his elder brother. Consequently, there was no rainfall for twelve years. Following the advice of the brāhmaṇas, Śāntanu was ready to return the kingdom to Devāpi, but by the intrigue of Śāntanu's minister, Devāpi became unfit to be king. Therefore Śāntanu resumed charge of the kingdom, and rain fell properly during his regime. By mystic power, Devāpi still lives in the village known as Kalāpa-grāma. In this Kali-yuga, when the descendants of Soma known as the candra-vaṁśa (the lunar dynasty) die out, Devāpi, at the beginning of Satya-yuga, will reestablish the dynasty of the moon. The wife of Śāntanu named Gaṅgā gave birth to Bhīṣma, one of the twelve authorities. Two sons named Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya were also born from the womb of Satyavatī by the semen of Śāntanu, and Vyāsadeva was born from Satyavatī by the semen of Parāśara, Vyāsadeva instructed the history of the Bhāgavatam to his son Śukadeva. Through the womb of the two wives and the maidservant of Vicitravīrya, Vyāsadeva begot Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu and Vidura.





Dhṛtarāṣṭra had one hundred sons, headed by Duryodhana, and one daughter named Duḥśalā. Pāṇḍu had five sons, headed by Yudhiṣṭhira, and each of these five sons had one son from Draupadī. The names of these sons of Draupadī were Prativindhya, Śrutasena, Śrutakīrti, Śatānīka and Śrutakarmā. Besides these five sons, by other wives the Pāṇḍavas had many other sons, such as Devaka, Ghaṭotkaca, Sarvagata, Suhotra, Naramitra, Irāvān, Babhruvāhana and Abhimanyu. From Abhimanyu, Mahārāja Parīkṣit was born, and Mahārāja Parīkṣit had four sons-Janamejaya, Śrutasena, Bhīmasena and Ugrasena.





Next Śukadeva Gosvāmī described the future sons of the Pāṇḍu family. From Janamejaya, he said, would come a son named Śatānīka, and following in the dynasty would be Sahasrānīka, Aśvamedhaja, Asīmakṛṣṇa, Nemicakra, Citraratha, Śuciratha, Vṛṣṭimān, Suṣeṇa, Sunītha, Nṛcakṣu, Sukhīnala, Pariplava, Sunaya, Medhāvī, Nṛpañjaya, Dūrva, Timi, Bṛhadratha, Sudāsa, Śatānīka, Durdamana, Mahīnara, Daṇḍapāṇi, Nimi and Kṣemaka.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī then predicted the kings of the māgadha-vaṁśa, or Māgadha dynasty. Sahadeva, the son of Jarāsandha, would beget Mārjāri, and from him would come Śrutaśravā. Subsequently taking birth in the dynasty will be Yutāyu, Niramitra, Sunakṣatra, Bṛhatsena, Karmajit, Sutañjaya, Vipra, Śuci, Kṣema, Suvrata, Dharmasūtra, Sama, Dyumatsena, Sumati, Subala, Sunītha, Satyajit, Viśvajit and Ripuñjaya.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

mitrāyuś ca divodāsāc

cyavanas tat-suto nṛpa

sudāsaḥ sahadevo 'tha

somako jantu-janmakṛt

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; mitrāyuḥ-Mitrāyu; ca-and; divodāsāt-was born from Divodāsa; cyavanaḥ-Cyavana; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Mitrāyu; nṛpa-O King; sudāsaḥ-Sudāsa; sahadevaḥ-Sahadeva; atha-thereafter; somakaḥ-Somaka; jantu-janma-kṛt-the father of Jantu.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, the son of Divodāsa was Mitrāyu, and from Mitrāyu came four sons, named Cyavana, Sudāsa, Sahadeva and Somaka. Somaka was the father of Jantu.





TEXT 2



tasya putra-śataṁ teṣāṁ

yavīyān pṛṣataḥ sutaḥ

sa tasmād drupado jajñe

sarva-sampat-samanvitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Somaka); putra-śatam-one hundred sons; teṣām-of all of them; yavīyān-the youngest; pṛṣataḥ-Pṛṣata; sutaḥ-the son; saḥ-he; tasmāt-from him (Pṛṣata); drupadaḥ-Drupada; jajñe-was born; sarva-sampat-with all opulences; samanvitaḥ-decorated.





Somaka had one hundred sons, of whom the youngest was Pṛṣata. From Pṛṣata was born King Drupada, who was opulent in all supremacy.





TEXT 3



drupadād draupadī tasya

dhṛṣṭadyumnādayaḥ sutāḥ

dhṛṣṭadyumnād dhṛṣṭaketur

bhārmyāḥ pāñcālakā ime

SYNONYMS



drupadāt-from Drupada; draupadī-Draupadī, the famous wife of the Pāṇḍavas; tasya-of him (Drupada); dhṛṣṭadyumna-ādayaḥ-headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna; sutāḥ-sons; dhṛṣṭadyumnāt-from Dhṛṣṭadyumna; dhṛṣṭaketuḥ-the son named Dhṛṣṭaketu; bhārmyāḥ-all descendants of Bharmyāśva; pāñcālakāḥ-they are known as the Pāñcālakas; ime-all of these.





From Mahārāja Drupada, Draupadī was born. Mahārāja Drupada also had many sons, headed by Dhṛṣṭadyumna. From Dhṛṣṭadyumna came a son named Dhṛṣṭaketu. All these personalities are known as descendants of Bharmyāśva or as the dynasty of Pāñcāla.





TEXTS 4–5



yo 'jamīḍha-suto hy anya

ṛkṣaḥ saṁvaraṇas tataḥ

tapatyāṁ sūrya-kanyāyāṁ

kurukṣetra-patiḥ kuruḥ

parīkṣiḥ sudhanur jahnur



niṣadhaś ca kuroḥ sutāḥ

suhotro 'bhūt sudhanuṣaś

cyavano 'tha tataḥ kṛtī

SYNONYMS



yaḥ-who; ajamīḍha-sutaḥ-was a son born from Ajamīḍha; hi-indeed; anyaḥ-another; ṛkṣaḥ-Ṛkṣa; saṁvaraṇaḥ-Saṁvaraṇa; tataḥ-from him (Ṛkṣa); tapatyām-Tapatī; sūrya-kanyāyām-in the womb of the daughter of the sun-god; kurukṣetra-patiḥ-the King of Kurukṣetra; kuruḥ-Kuru was born; parīkṣiḥ sudhanuḥ jahnuḥ niṣadhaḥ ca-Parīkṣi, Sudhanu, Jahnu and Niṣadha; kuroḥ-of Kuru; sutāḥ-the sons; suhotraḥ-Suhotra; abhūt-was born; sudhanuṣaḥ-from Sudhanu; cyavanaḥ-Cyavana; atha-from Suhotra; tataḥ-from him (Cyavana); kṛtī-a son named Kṛtī.





Another son of Ajamīḍha was known as Ṛkṣa. From Ṛkṣa came a son named Saṁvaraṇa, and from Saṁvaraṇa through the womb of his wife, Tapatī, the daughter of the sun-god, came Kuru, the King of Kurukṣetra. Kuru had four sons-Parīkṣi, Sudhanu, Jahnu and Niṣadha. From Sudhanu, Suhotra was born, and from Suhotra, Cyavana. From Cyavana, Kṛtī was born.





TEXT 6



vasus tasyoparicaro

bṛhadratha-mukhās tataḥ

kuśāmba-matsya-pratyagra-

cedipādyāś ca cedipāḥ

SYNONYMS



vasuḥ-a son named Vasu; tasya-of him (Kṛtī); uparicaraḥ-the surname of Vasu; bṛhadratha-mukhāḥ-headed by Bṛhadratha; tataḥ-from him (Vasu); kuśāmba-Kuśāmba; matsya-Matsya; pratyagra-Pratyagra; cedipa-ādyāḥ-Cedipa and others; ca-also; cedi-pāḥ-all of them became rulers of the Cedi state.





The son of Kṛtī was Uparicara Vasu, and among his sons, headed by Bṛhadratha, were Kuśāmba, Matsya, Pratyagra and Cedipa. All the sons of Uparicara Vasu became rulers of the Cedi state.





TEXT 7



bṛhadrathāt kuśāgro 'bhūd

ṛṣabhas tasya tat-sutaḥ

jajñe satyahito 'patyaṁ

puṣpavāṁs tat-suto jahuḥ

SYNONYMS



bṛhadrathāt-from Bṛhadratha; kuśāgraḥ-Kuśāgra; abhūt-a son was born; ṛṣabhaḥ-Ṛṣabha; tasya-of him (Kuśāgra); tat-sutaḥ-his (Ṛṣabha's) son; jajñe-was born; satyahitaḥ-Satyahita; apatyam-offspring; puṣpavān-Puṣpavān; tat-sutaḥ-his (Puṣpavān's) son; jahuḥ-Jahu.





From Bṛhadratha, Kuśāgra was born; from Kuśāgra, Ṛṣabha; and from Ṛṣabha, Satyahita. The son of Satyahita was Puṣpavān, and the son of Puṣpavān was Jahu.





TEXT 8



anyasyām api bhāryāyāṁ

śakale dve bṛhadrathāt

ye mātrā bahir utsṛṣṭe

jarayā cābhisandhite

jīva jīveti krīḍantyā

jarāsandho 'bhavat sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



anyasyām-in another; api-also; bhāryāyām-wife; śakale-parts; dve-two; bṛhadrathāt-from Bṛhadratha; ye-which two parts; mātrā-by the mother; bahiḥ utsṛṣṭe-because of rejection; jarayā-by the demoness named Jarā; ca-and; abhisandhite-when they were joined together; jīva jīva iti-O living entity, be alive; krīḍantyā-playing like that; jarāsandhaḥ-Jarāsandha; abhavat-was generated; sutaḥ-a son.





Through the womb of another wife, Bṛhadratha begot two halves of a son. When the mother saw those two halves she rejected them, but later a she-demon named Jarā playfully joined them and said, "Come to life, come to life!" Thus the son named Jarāsandha was born.





TEXT 9



tataś ca sahadevo 'bhūt

somāpir yac chrutaśravāḥ

parīkṣir anapatyo 'bhūt

suratho nāma jāhnavaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ ca-and from him (Jarāsandha); sahadevaḥ-Sahadeva; abhūt-was born; somāpiḥ-Somāpi; yat-of him (Somāpi); śrutaśravāḥ-a son named Śrutaśravā; parīkṣiḥ-the son of Kuru named Parīkṣi; anapatyaḥ-without any son; abhūt-became; surathaḥ-Suratha; nāma-named; jāhnavaḥ-was the son of Jahnu.





From Jarāsandha came a son named Sahadeva; from Sahadeva, Somāpi; and from Somāpi, Śrutaśravā. The son of Kuru called Parīkṣi had no sons, but the son of Kuru called Jahnu had a son named Suratha.





TEXT 10



tato vidūrathas tasmāt

sārvabhaumas tato 'bhavat

jayasenas tat-tanayo

rādhiko 'to 'yutāyv abhūt

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from him (Suratha); vidūrathaḥ-a son named Vidūratha; tasmāt-from him (Vidūratha); sārvabhaumaḥ-a son named Sārvabhauma; tataḥ-from him (Sārvabhauma); abhavat-was born; jayasenaḥ-Jayasena; tat-tanayaḥ-the son of Jayasena; rādhikaḥ-Rādhika; ataḥ-and from him (Rādhika); ayutāyuḥ-Ayutāyu; abhūt-was born.





From Suratha came a son named Vidūratha, from whom Sārvabhauma was born. From Sārvabhauma came Jayasena; from Jayasena, Rādhika; and from Rādhika, Ayutāyu.





TEXT 11



tataś cākrodhanas tasmād

devātithir amuṣya ca

ṛkṣas tasya dilīpo 'bhūt

pratīpas tasya cātmajaḥ

SYNONYMS



tataḥ-from him (Ayutāyu); ca-and; akrodhanaḥ-a son named Akrodhana; tasmāt-from him (Akrodhana); devātithiḥ-a son named Devātithi; amuṣya-of him (Devātithi); ca-also; ṛkṣaḥ-Ṛkṣa; tasya-of him (Ṛkṣa); dilīpaḥ-a son named Dilīpa; abhūt-was born; pratīpaḥ-Pratīpa; tasya-of him (Dilīpa); ca-and; ātma-jaḥ-the son.





From Ayutāyu came a son named Akrodhana, and his son was Devātithi. The son of Devātithi was Ṛkṣa, the son of Ṛkṣa was Dilīpa, and the son of Dilīpa was Pratīpa.





TEXTS 12–13



devāpiḥ śāntanus tasya

bāhlīka iti cātmajāḥ

pitṛ-rājyaṁ parityajya

devāpis tu vanaṁ gataḥ

abhavac chāntanū rājā



prāṅ mahābhiṣa-saṁjñitaḥ

yaṁ yaṁ karābhyāṁ spṛśati

jīrṇaṁ yauvanam eti saḥ

SYNONYMS



devāpiḥ-Devāpi; śāntanuḥ-Śāntanu; tasya-of him (Pratīpa); bāhlīkaḥ-Bāhlīka; iti-thus; ca-also; ātma-jāḥ-the sons; pitṛ-rājyam-the father's property, the kingdom; parityajya-rejecting; devāpiḥ-Devāpi, the eldest; tu-indeed; vanam-to the forest; gataḥ-left; abhavat-was; śāntanuḥ-Śāntanu; rājā-the king; prāk-before; mahābhiṣa-Mahābhiṣa; saṁjñitaḥ-most celebrated; yam yam-whomever; karābhyām-with his hands; spṛśati-touched; jīrṇam-although very old; yauvanam-youth; eti-attained; saḥ-he.





The sons of Pratīpa were Devāpi, Śāntanu and Bāhlīka. Devāpi left the kingdom of his father and went to the forest, and therefore Śāntanu became the king. Śāntanu, who in his previous birth was known as Mahābhiṣa, had the ability to transform anyone from old age to youth simply by touching that person with his hands.





TEXTS 14–15



śāntim āpnoti caivāgryāṁ

karmaṇā tena śāntanuḥ

samā dvādaśa tad-rājye

na vavarṣa yadā vibhuḥ

śāntanur brāhmaṇair uktaḥ



parivettāyam agrabhuk

rājyaṁ dehy agrajāyāśu

pura-rāṣṭra-vivṛddhaye

SYNONYMS



śāntim-youthfulness for sense gratification; āpnoti-one gets; ca-also; eva-indeed; agryām-principally; karmaṇā-by the touch of his hand; tena-because of this; śāntanuḥ-known as Śāntanu; samāḥ-years; dvādaśa-twelve; tat-rājye-in his kingdom; na-not; vavarṣa-sent rain; yadā-when; vibhuḥ-the controller of the rain, namely the King of heaven, Indra; śāntanuḥ-Śāntanu; brāhmaṇaiḥ-by the learned brāhmaṇas; uktaḥ-when advised; parivettā-faulty because of being a usurper; ayam-this; agra-bhuk-enjoying in spite of your elder brother's being present; rājyam-the kingdom; dehi-give; agrajāya-to your elder brother; āśu-immediately; pura-rāṣṭra-of your home and the kingdom; vivṛddhaye-for elevation.





Because the King was able to make everyone happy for sense gratification, primarily by the touch of his hand, his name was Śāntanu. Once, when there was no rainfall in the kingdom for twelve years and the King consulted his learned brahminical advisors, they said, "You are faulty for enjoying the property of your elder brother. For the elevation of your kingdom and home, you should return the kingdom to him."





One cannot enjoy sovereignty or perform an agnihotra-yajña in the presence of one's elder brother, or else one becomes a usurper, known as parivettā.





TEXTS 16–17



evam ukto dvijair jyeṣṭhaṁ

chandayām āsa so 'bravīt

tan-mantri-prahitair viprair

vedād vibhraṁśito girā

veda-vādātivādān vai



tadā devo vavarṣa ha

devāpir yogam āsthāya

kalāpa-grāmam āśritaḥ

SYNONYMS



evam-thus (as above mentioned); uktaḥ-being advised; dvijaiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; jyeṣṭham-unto his eldest brother, Devāpi; chandayām āsa-requested to take charge of the kingdom; saḥ-he (Devāpi); abravīt-said; tat-mantri-by Śāntanu's minister; prahitaiḥ-instigated; vipraiḥ-by the brāhmaṇas; vedāt-from the principles of the Vedas; vibhraṁśitaḥ-fallen; girā-by such words; veda-vāda-ativādān-words blaspheming the Vedic injunctions; vai-indeed; tadā-at that time; devaḥ-the demigod; vavarṣa-showered rains; ha-in the past; devāpiḥ-Devāpi; yogam āsthāya-accepting the process of mystic yoga; kalāpa-grāmam-the village known as Kalāpa; āśritaḥ-took shelter of (and is living in even now).





When the brāhmaṇas said this, Mahārāja Śāntanu went to the forest and requested his elder brother Devāpi to take charge of the kingdom, for it is the duty of a king to maintain his subjects. Previously, however, Śāntanu's minister Aśvavāra had instigated some brāhmaṇas to induce Devāpi to transgress the injunctions of the Vedas and thus make himself unfit for the post of ruler. The brāhmaṇas deviated Devāpi from the path of the Vedic principles, and therefore when asked by Śāntanu he did not agree to accept the post of ruler. On the contrary, he blasphemed the Vedic principles and therefore became fallen. Under the circumstances, Śāntanu again became the king, and Indra, being pleased, showered rains. Devāpi later took to the path of mystic yoga to control his mind and senses and went to the village named Kalāpagrāma, where he is still living.





TEXTS 18–19



soma-vaṁśe kalau naṣṭe

kṛtādau sthāpayiṣyati

bāhlīkāt somadatto 'bhūd

bhūrir bhūriśravās tataḥ

śalaś ca śāntanor āsīd



gaṅgāyāṁ bhīṣma ātmavān

sarva-dharma-vidāṁ śreṣṭho

mahā-bhāgavataḥ kaviḥ

SYNONYMS



soma-vaṁśe-when the dynasty of the moon-god; kalau-in this age of Kali; naṣṭe-being lost; kṛta-ādau-at the beginning of the next Satya-yuga; sthāpayiṣyati-will reestablish; bāhlīkāt-from Bāhlīka; somadattaḥ-Somadatta; abhūt-generated; bhūriḥ-Bhūri; bhūri-śravāḥ-Bhūriśravā; tataḥ-thereafter; śalaḥ ca-a son named Śala; śāntanoḥ-from Śāntanu; āsīt-generated; gaṅgāyām-in the womb of Gaṅgā, the wife of Śāntanu; bhīṣmaḥ-a son named Bhīṣma; ātmavān-self-realized; sarva-dharma-vidām-of all religious persons; śreṣṭhaḥ-the best; mahā-bhāgavataḥ-an exalted devotee; kaviḥ-and a learned scholar.





After the dynasty of the moon-god comes to an end in this age of Kali, Devāpi, in the beginning of the next Satya-yuga, will reestablish the Soma dynasty in this world. From Bāhlīka [the brother of Śāntanu] came a son named Somadatta, who had three sons, named Bhūri, Bhūriśravā and Śala. From Śāntanu, through the womb of his wife named Gaṅgā, came Bhīṣma, the exalted, self-realized devotee and learned scholar.





TEXT 20



vīra-yūthāgraṇīr yena

rāmo 'pi yudhi toṣitaḥ

śāntanor dāsa-kanyāyāṁ

jajñe citrāṅgadaḥ sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



vīra-yūtha-agraṇīḥ-Bhīṣmadeva, the foremost of all warriors; yena-by whom; rāmaḥ api-even Paraśurāma, the incarnation of God; yudhi-in a fight; toṣitaḥ-was satisfied (when defeated by Bhīṣmadeva); śāntanoḥ-by Śāntanu; dāsa-kanyāyām-in the womb of Satyavatī, who was known as the daughter of a śūdra; jajñe-was born; citrāṅgadaḥ-Citrāṅgada; sutaḥ-a son.





Bhīṣmadeva was the foremost of all warriors. When he defeated Lord Paraśurāma in a fight, Lord Paraśurāma was very satisfied with him. By the semen of Śāntanu in the womb of Satyavatī, the daughter of a fisherman, Citrāṅgada took birth.





Satyavatī was actually the daughter of Uparicara Vasu by the womb of a fisherwoman known as Matsyagarbhā. Later, Satyavatī was raised by a fisherman.



The fight between Paraśurāma and Bhīṣmadeva concerns three daughters of Kāśīrāja-Ambikā, Ambālikā and Ambā-who were forcibly abducted by Bhīṣmadeva, acting on behalf of his brother Vicitravīrya. Ambā thought that Bhīṣmadeva would marry her and became attached to him, but Bhīṣmadeva refused to marry her, for he had taken the vow of brahmacarya. Ambā therefore approached Bhīṣmadeva's military spiritual master, Paraśurāma, who instructed Bhīṣma to marry her. Bhīṣmadeva refused, and therefore Paraśurāma fought with him to force him to accept the marriage. But Paraśurāma was defeated, and he was pleased with Bhīṣma.





TEXTS 21–24



vicitravīryaś cāvarajo

nāmnā citrāṅgado hataḥ

yasyāṁ parāśarāt sākṣād

avatīrṇo hareḥ kalā

veda-gupto muniḥ kṛṣṇo



yato 'ham idam adhyagām

hitvā sva-śiṣyān pailādīn

bhagavān bādarāyaṇaḥ

mahyaṁ putrāya śāntāya



paraṁ guhyam idaṁ jagau

vicitravīryo 'thovāha

kāśīrāja-sute balāt

svayaṁvarād upānīte



ambikāmbālike ubhe

tayor āsakta-hṛdayo

gṛhīto yakṣmaṇā mṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



vicitravīryaḥ-Vicitravīrya, the son of Śāntanu; ca-and; avarajaḥ-the younger brother; nāmnā-by a Gandharva named Citrāṅgada; citrāṅgadaḥ-Citrāṅgada; hataḥ-was killed; yasyām-in the womb of Satyavatī previous to her marriage to Śāntanu; parāśarāt-by the semen of Parāśara Muni; sākṣāt-directly; avatīrṇaḥ-incarnated; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kalā-expansion; veda-guptaḥ-the protector of the Vedas; muniḥ-the great sage; kṛṣṇaḥ-Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana; yataḥ-from whom; aham-I (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); idam-this (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam); adhyagām-studied thoroughly; hitvā-rejecting; sva-śiṣyān-his disciples; paila-ādīn-headed by Paila; bhagavān-the incarnation of the Lord; bādarāyaṇaḥ-Vyāsadeva; mahyam-unto me; putrāya-a son; śāntāya-who was truly controlled from sense gratification; param-the supreme; guhyam-the most confidential; idam-this Vedic literature (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam); jagau-instructed; vicitravīryaḥ-Vicitravīrya; atha-thereafter; uvāha-married; kāśīrāja-sute-two daughters of Kāśīrāja; balāt-by force; svayaṁvarāt-from the arena of the svayaṁvara; upānīte-being brought; ambikā-ambālike-Ambikā and Ambālikā; ubhe-both of them; tayoḥ-unto them; āsakta-being too attached; hṛdayaḥ-his heart; gṛhītaḥ-being contaminated; yakṣmaṇā-by tuberculosis; mṛtaḥ-he died.





Citrāṅgada, of whom Vicitravīrya was the younger brother, was killed by a Gandharva who was also named Citrāṅgada. Satyavatī, before her marriage to Śāntanu, gave birth to the master authority of the Vedas, Vyāsadeva, known as Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana, who was begotten by Parāśara Muni. From Vyāsadeva, I [Śukadeva Gosvāmī] was born, and from him I studied this great work of literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The incarnation of Godhead Vedavyāsa, rejecting his disciples, headed by Paila, instructed Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to me because I was free from all material desires. After Ambikā and Ambālikā, the two daughters of Kāśīrāja, were taken away by force, Vicitravīrya married them, but because he was too attached to these two wives, he had a heart attack and died of tuberculosis.





TEXT 25



kṣetre 'prajasya vai bhrātur

mātrokto bādarāyaṇaḥ

dhṛtarāṣṭraṁ ca pāṇḍuṁ ca

viduraṁ cāpy ajījanat

SYNONYMS



kṣetre-in the wives and maidservant; aprajasya-of Vicitravīrya, who had no progeny; vai-indeed; bhrātuḥ-of the brother; mātrā uktaḥ-being ordered by the mother; bādarāyaṇaḥ-Vedavyāsa; dhṛtarāṣṭram-a son named Dhṛtarāṣṭra; ca-and; pāṇḍum-a son named Pāṇḍu; ca-also; viduram-a son named Vidura; ca-also; api-indeed; ajījanat-begot.





Bādarāyaṇa, Śrī Vyāsadeva, following the order of his mother, Satyavatī, begot three sons, two by the womb of Ambikā and Ambālikā, the two wives of his brother Vicitravīrya, and the third by Vicitravīrya's maidservant. These sons were Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu and Vidura.





Vicitravīrya died of tuberculosis, and his wives, Ambikā and Ambālikā, had no issue. Therefore, after Vicitravīrya's death, his mother, Satyavatī, who was also the mother of Vyāsadeva, asked Vyāsadeva to beget children through the wives of Vicitravīrya. In those days, the brother of the husband could beget children through the womb of his sister-in-law. This was known as devareṇa sutotpatti. If the husband was somehow unable to beget children, his brother could do so through the womb of his sister-in-law. This devareṇa sutotpatti and the sacrifices of aśvamedha and gomedha are forbidden in the age of Kali.



aśvamedhaṁ gavālambhaṁ

sannyāsaṁ pala-paitṛkam

devareṇa sutotpattiṁ

kalau pañca vivarjayet

[Cc. Ādi 17.164]





"In this age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyāsa, the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, and a man's begetting children in his brother's wife." (Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa).





TEXT 26



gāndhāryāṁ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya

jajñe putra-śataṁ nṛpa

tatra duryodhano jyeṣṭho

duḥśalā cāpi kanyakā

SYNONYMS



gāndhāryām-in the womb of Gāndhārī; dhṛtarāṣṭrasya-of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; jajñe-were born; putra-śatam-one hundred sons; nṛpa-O King Parīkṣit; tatra-among the sons; duryodhanaḥ-the son named Duryodhana; jyeṣṭhaḥ-the eldest; duḥśalā-Duḥśalā; ca api-also; kanyakā-one daughter.





Dhṛtarāṣṭra's wife, Gāndhārī, gave birth to one hundred sons and one daughter, O King. The oldest of the sons was Duryodhana, and the daughter's name was Duḥśalā.





TEXTS 27–28



śāpān maithuna-ruddhasya

pāṇḍoḥ kuntyāṁ mahā-rathāḥ

jātā dharmānilendrebhyo

yudhiṣṭhira-mukhās trayaḥ

nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca



mādryāṁ nāsatya-dasrayoḥ

draupadyāṁ pañca pañcabhyaḥ

putrās te pitaro 'bhavan

SYNONYMS



śāpāt-due to being cursed; maithuna-ruddhasya-who had to restrain sexual life; pāṇḍoḥ-of Pāṇḍu; kuntyām-in the womb of Kuntī; mahā-rathāḥ-great heroes; jātāḥ-took birth; dharma-by Mahārāja Dharma, or Dharmarāja; anila-by the demigod controlling the wind; indrebhyaḥ-and by the demigod Indra, the controller of rain; yudhiṣṭhira-Yudhiṣṭhira; mukhāḥ-headed by; trayaḥ-three sons (Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma and Arjuna); nakulaḥ-Nakula; sahadevaḥ-Sahadeva; ca-also; mādryām-in the womb of Mādrī; nāsatya-dasrayoḥ-by Nāsatya and Dasra, the Aśvinī-kumāras; draupadyām-in the womb of Draupadī; pañca-five; pañcabhyaḥ-from the five brothers (Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva); putrāḥ-sons; te-they; pitaraḥ-uncles; abhavan-became.





Pāṇḍu was restrained from sexual life because of having been cursed by a sage, and therefore his three sons Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma and Arjuna were begotten through the womb of his wife, Kuntī, by Dharmarāja, by the demigod controlling the wind, and by the demigod controlling the rain. Pāṇḍu's second wife, Mādrī, gave birth to Nakula and Sahadeva, who were begotten by the two Aśvinī-kumāras. The five brothers, headed by Yudhiṣṭhira, begot five sons through the womb of Draupadī. These five sons were your uncles.





TEXT 29



yudhiṣṭhirāt prativindhyaḥ

śrutaseno vṛkodarāt

arjunāc chrutakīrtis tu

śatānīkas tu nākuliḥ

SYNONYMS



yudhiṣṭhirāt-from Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; prativindhyaḥ-a son named Prativindhya; śrutasenaḥ-Śrutasena; vṛkodarāt-begotten by Bhīma; arjunāt-from Arjuna; śrutakīrtiḥ-a son named Śrutakīrti; tu-indeed; śatānīkaḥ-a son named Śatānīka; tu-indeed; nākuliḥ-of Nakula.





From Yudhiṣṭhira came a son named Prativindhya, from Bhīma a son named Śrutasena, from Arjuna a son named Śrutakīrti, and from Nakula a son named Śatānīka.





TEXTS 30–31



sahadeva-suto rājañ

chrutakarmā tathāpare

yudhiṣṭhirāt tu pauravyāṁ

devako 'tha ghaṭotkacaḥ

bhīmasenād dhiḍimbāyāṁ



kālyāṁ sarvagatas tataḥ

sahadevāt suhotraṁ tu

vijayāsūta pārvatī

SYNONYMS



sahadeva-sutaḥ-the son of Sahadeva; rājan-O King; śrutakarmā-Śrutakarmā; tathā-as well as; apare-others; yudhiṣṭhirāt-from Yudhiṣṭhira; tu-indeed; pauravyām-in the womb of Pauravī; devakaḥ-a son named Devaka; atha-as well as; ghaṭotkacaḥ-Ghaṭotkaca; bhīmasenāt-from Bhīmasena; hiḍimbāyām-in the womb of Hiḍimbā; kālyām-in the womb of Kālī; sarvagataḥ-Sarvagata; tataḥ-thereafter; sahadevāt-from Sahadeva; suhotram-Suhotra; tu-indeed; vijayā-Vijayā; asūta-gave birth to; pārvatī-the daughter of the Himalayan king.





O King, the son of Sahadeva was Śrutakarmā. Furthermore, Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers begot other sons in other wives. Yudhiṣṭhira begot a son named Devaka through the womb of Pauravī, and Bhīmasena begot a son named Ghaṭotkaca through his wife Hiḍimbā and a son named Sarvagata through his wife Kālī. Similarly, Sahadeva had a son named Suhotra through his wife named Vijayā, who was the daughter of the king of the mountains.





TEXT 32



kareṇumatyāṁ nakulo

naramitraṁ tathārjunaḥ

irāvantam ulupyāṁ vai

sutāyāṁ babhruvāhanam

maṇipura-pateḥ so 'pi

tat-putraḥ putrikā-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



kareṇumatyām-in the wife named Kareṇumatī; nakulaḥ-Nakula; naramitram-a son named Naramitra; tathā-also; arjunaḥ-Arjuna; irāvantam-Irāvān; ulupyām-in the womb of the Nāga-kanyā named Ulupī; vai-indeed; sutāyām-in the daughter; babhruvāhanam-a son named Babhruvāhana; maṇipura-pateḥ-of the king of Maṇipura; saḥ-he; api-although; tat-putraḥ-the son of Arjuna; putrikā-sutaḥ-the son of his maternal grandfather.





Nakula begot a son named Naramitra through his wife named Kareṇumatī. Similarly, Arjuna begot a son named Irāvān through his wife known as Ulupī, the daughter of the Nāgas, and a son named Babhruvāhana by the womb of the princess of Maṇipura. Babhruvāhana became the adopted son of the king of Maṇipura.





It is to be understood that Pārvatī is the daughter of the king of the very, very old mountainous country known as the Maṇipura state. Five thousand years ago, therefore, when the Pāṇḍavas ruled, Maṇipura existed, as did its king. Therefore this kingdom is a very old, aristocratic Vaiṣṇava kingdom. If this kingdom is organized as a Vaiṣṇava state, this revitalization will be a great success because for five thousand years this state has maintained its identity. If the Vaiṣṇava spirit is revived there, it will be a wonderful place, renowned throughout the entire world. Maṇipuri Vaiṣṇavas are very famous in Vaiṣṇava society. In Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa there are many temples constructed by the king of Maṇipura. Some of our devotees belong to the Maṇipura state. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, therefore, can be well spread in the state of Maṇipura by the cooperative efforts of the Kṛṣṇa conscious devotees.





TEXT 33



tava tātaḥ subhadrāyām

abhimanyur ajāyata

sarvātirathajid vīra

uttarāyāṁ tato bhavān

SYNONYMS



tava-your; tātaḥ-father; subhadrāyām-in the womb of Subhadrā; abhimanyuḥ-Abhimanyu; ajāyata-was born; sarva-atiratha-jit-a great fighter who could defeat the atirathas; vīraḥ-a great hero; uttarāyām-in the womb of Uttarā; tataḥ-from Abhimanyu; bhavān-your good self.





My dear King Parīkṣit, your father, Abhimanyu, was born from the womb of Subhadrā as the son of Arjuna. He was the conqueror of all atirathas [those who could fight with one thousand charioteers]. From him, by the womb of Uttarā, the daughter of Virāḍrāja, you were born.





TEXT 34



parikṣīṇeṣu kuruṣu

drauṇer brahmāstra-tejasā

tvaṁ ca kṛṣṇānubhāvena

sajīvo mocito 'ntakāt

SYNONYMS



parikṣīṇeṣu-because of being annihilated in the Kurukṣetra war; kuruṣu-the members of the Kuru dynasty, such as Duryodhana; drauṇeḥ-Aśvatthāmā, the son of Droṇācārya; brahmāstra-tejasā-because of the heat of the brahmāstra nuclear weapon; tvam ca-your good self also; kṛṣṇa-anubhāvena-because of the mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sajīvaḥ-with your life; mocitaḥ-released; antakāt-from death.





After the Kuru dynasty was annihilated in the Battle of Kurukṣetra, you also were about to be destroyed by the brahmāstra atomic weapon released by the son of Droṇācārya, but by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, you were saved from death.





TEXT 35



taveme tanayās tāta

janamejaya-pūrvakāḥ

śrutaseno bhīmasena

ugrasenaś ca vīryavān

SYNONYMS



tava-your; ime-all these; tanayāḥ-sons; tāta-my dear King Parīkṣit; janamejaya-Janamejaya; pūrvakāḥ-headed by; śrutasenaḥ-Śrutasena; bhīmasenaḥ-Bhīmasena; ugrasenaḥ-Ugrasena; ca-also; vīryavān-all very powerful.





My dear King, your four sons-Janamejaya, Śrutasena, Bhīmasena and Ugrasena-are very powerful. Janamejaya is the eldest.





TEXT 36



janamejayas tvāṁ viditvā

takṣakān nidhanaṁ gatam

sarpān vai sarpa-yāgāgnau

sa hoṣyati ruṣānvitaḥ

SYNONYMS



janamejayaḥ-the eldest son; tvām-about you; viditvā-knowing; takṣakāt-by the Takṣaka serpent; nidhanam-death; gatam-undergone; sarpān-the snakes; vai-indeed; sarpa-yāga-agnau-in the fire of the sacrifice for killing all the snakes; saḥ-he (Janamejaya); hoṣyati-will offer as a sacrifice; ruṣā-anvitaḥ-because of being very angry.





Because of your death by the Takṣaka snake, your son Janamejaya will be very angry and will perform a sacrifice to kill all the snakes in the world.





TEXT 37



kālaṣeyaṁ purodhāya

turaṁ turaga-medhaṣāṭ

samantāt pṛthivīṁ sarvāṁ

jitvā yakṣyati cādhvaraiḥ

SYNONYMS



kālaṣeyam-the son of Kalaṣa; purodhāya-accepting as the priest; turam-Tura; turaga-medhaṣāṭ-he will be known as Turaga-medhaṣāṭ (a performer of many horse sacrifices); samantāt-including all parts; pṛthivīm-the world; sarvām-everywhere; jitvā-conquering; yakṣyati-will execute sacrifices; ca-and; adhvaraiḥ-by performing aśvamedha-yajñas.





After conquering throughout the world and after accepting Tura, the son of Kalaṣa, as his priest, Janamejaya will perform aśvamedha-yajñas, for which he will be known as Turaga-medhaṣāṭ.





TEXT 38



tasya putraḥ śatānīko

yājñavalkyāt trayīṁ paṭhan

astra-jñānaṁ kriyā-jñānaṁ

śaunakāt param eṣyati

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Janamejaya; putraḥ-the son; śatānīkaḥ-Śatānīka; yājñavalkyāt-from the great sage known as Yājñavalkya; trayīm-the three Vedas (Sāma, Yajur and Ṛg); paṭhan-studying thoroughly; astra-jñānam-the art of military administration; kriyā-jñānam-the art of performing ritualistic ceremonies; śaunakāt-from Śaunaka Ṛṣi; param-transcendental knowledge; eṣyati-will achieve.





The son of Janamejaya known as Śatānīka will learn from Yājñavalkya the three Vedas and the art of performing ritualistic ceremonies. He will also learn the military art from Kṛpācārya and the transcendental science from the sage Śaunaka.





TEXT 39



sahasrānīkas tat-putras

tataś caivāśvamedhajaḥ

asīmakṛṣṇas tasyāpi

nemicakras tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



sahasrānīkaḥ-Sahasrānīka; tat-putraḥ-the son of Śatānīka; tataḥ-from him (Sahasrānīka); ca-also; eva-indeed; aśvamedhajaḥ-Aśvamedhaja; asīmakṛṣṇaḥ-Asīmakṛṣṇa; tasya-from him (Aśvamedhaja); api-also; nemicakraḥ-Nemicakra; tu-indeed; tat-sutaḥ-his son.





The son of Śatānīka will be Sahasrānīka, and from him will come the son named Aśvamedhaja. From Aśvamedhaja will come Asīmakṛṣṇa, and his son will be Nemicakra.





TEXT 40



gajāhvaye hṛte nadyā

kauśāmbyāṁ sādhu vatsyati

uktas tataś citrarathas

tasmāc chucirathaḥ sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



gajāhvaye-on the town of Hastināpura (New Delhi); hṛte-being inundated; nadyā-by the river; kauśāmbyām-in the place known as Kauśāmbī; sādhu-duly; vatsyati-will live there; uktaḥ-celebrated; tataḥ-thereafter; citrarathaḥ-Citraratha; tasmāt-from him; śucirathaḥ-Śuciratha; sutaḥ-the son.





When the town of Hastināpura [New Delhi] is inundated by the river, Nemicakra will live in the place known as Kauśāmbī. His son will be celebrated as Citraratha, and the son of Citraratha will be Śuciratha.





TEXT 41



tasmāc ca vṛṣṭimāṁs tasya

suṣeṇo 'tha mahīpatiḥ

sunīthas tasya bhavitā

nṛcakṣur yat sukhīnalaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-from him (Śuciratha); ca-also; vṛṣṭimān-the son known as Vṛṣṭimān; tasya-his (son); suṣeṇaḥ-Suṣeṇa; atha-thereafter; mahī-patiḥ-the emperor of the whole world; sunīthaḥ-Sunītha; tasya-his; bhavitā-will be; nṛcakṣuḥ-his son, Nṛcakṣu; yat-from him; sukhīnalaḥ-Sukhīnala.





From Śuciratha will come the son named Vṛṣṭimān, and his son, Suṣeṇa, will be the emperor of the entire world. The son of Suṣeṇa will be Sunītha, his son will be Nṛcakṣu, and from Nṛcakṣu will come a son named Sukhīnala.





TEXT 42



pariplavaḥ sutas tasmān

medhāvī sunayātmajaḥ

nṛpañjayas tato dūrvas

timis tasmāj janiṣyati

SYNONYMS



pariplavaḥ-Pariplava; sutaḥ-the son; tasmāt-from him (Pariplava); medhāvī-Medhāvī; sunaya-ātmajaḥ-the son of Sunaya; nṛpañjayaḥ-Nṛpañjaya; tataḥ-from him; dūrvaḥ-Dūrva; timiḥ-Timi; tasmāt-from him; janiṣyati-will take birth.





The son of Sukhīnala will be Pariplava, and his son will be Sunaya. From Sunaya will come a son named Medhāvī; from Medhāvī, Nṛpañjaya; from Nṛpañjaya, Dūrva; and from Dūrva, Timi.





TEXT 43



timer bṛhadrathas tasmāc

chatānīkaḥ sudāsajaḥ

śatānīkād durdamanas

tasyāpatyaṁ mahīnaraḥ

SYNONYMS



timeḥ-of Timi; bṛhadrathaḥ-Bṛhadratha; tasmāt-from him (Bṛhadratha); śatānīkaḥ-Śatānīka; sudāsa-jaḥ-the son of Sudāsa; śatānīkāt-from Śatānīka; durdamanaḥ-a son named Durdamana; tasya apatyam-his son; mahīnaraḥ-Mahīnara.





From Timi will come Bṛhadratha; from Bṛhadratha, Sudāsa; and from Sudāsa, Śatānīka. From Śatānīka will come Durdamana, and from him will come a son named Mahīnara.





TEXTS 44–45



daṇḍapāṇir nimis tasya

kṣemako bhavitā yataḥ

brahma-kṣatrasya vai yonir

vaṁśo devarṣi-satkṛtaḥ

kṣemakaṁ prāpya rājānaṁ



saṁsthāṁ prāpsyati vai kalau

atha māgadha-rājāno

bhāvino ye vadāmi te

SYNONYMS



daṇḍapāṇiḥ-Daṇḍapāṇi; nimiḥ-Nimi; tasya-from him (Mahīnara); kṣemakaḥ-a son named Kṣemaka; bhavitā-will take birth; yataḥ-from whom (Nimi); brahma-kṣatrasya-of brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas; vai-indeed; yoniḥ-the source; vaṁśaḥ-the dynasty; deva-ṛṣi-satkṛtaḥ-respected by great saintly persons and demigods; kṣemakam-King Kṣemaka; prāpya-up to this point; rājānam-the monarch; saṁsthām-an end to them; prāpsyati-there will be; vai-indeed; kalau-in this Kali-yuga; atha-thereafter; māgadha-rājānaḥ-the kings in the Māgadha dynasty; bhāvinaḥ-the future; ye-all those who; vadāmi-I shall explain; te-unto you.





The son of Mahīnara will be Daṇḍapāṇi, and his son will be Nimi, from whom King Kṣemaka will be born. I have now described to you the moon-god's dynasty, which is the source of brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas and is worshiped by demigods and great saints. In this Kali-yuga, Kṣemaka will be the last monarch. Now I shall describe to you the future of the Māgadha dynasty. Please listen.





TEXTS 46–48



bhavitā sahadevasya

mārjārir yac chrutaśravāḥ

tato yutāyus tasyāpi

niramitro 'tha tat-sutaḥ

sunakṣatraḥ sunakṣatrād



bṛhatseno 'tha karmajit

tataḥ sutañjayād vipraḥ

śucis tasya bhaviṣyati

kṣemo 'tha suvratas tasmād



dharmasūtraḥ samas tataḥ

dyumatseno 'tha sumatiḥ

subalo janitā tataḥ

SYNONYMS



bhavitā-will take birth; sahadevasya-the son of Sahadeva; mārjāriḥ-Mārjāri; yat-his son; śrutaśravāḥ-Śrutaśravā; tataḥ-from him; yutāyuḥ-Yutāyu; tasya-his son; api-also; niramitraḥ-Niramitra; atha-thereafter; tat-sutaḥ-his son; sunakṣatraḥ-Sunakṣatra; sunakṣatrāt-from Sunakṣatra; bṛhatsenaḥ-Bṛhatsena; atha-from him; karmajit-Karmajit; tataḥ-from him; sutañjayāt-from Sutañjaya; vipraḥ-Vipra; śuciḥ-a son named Śuci; tasya-from him; bhaviṣyati-will take birth; kṣemaḥ-a son named Kṣema; atha-thereafter; suvrataḥ-a son named Suvrata; tasmāt-from him; dharmasūtraḥ-Dharmasūtra; samaḥ-Sama; tataḥ-from him; dyumatsenaḥ-Dyumatsena; atha-thereafter; sumatiḥ-Sumati; subalaḥ-Subala; janitā-will take birth; tataḥ-thereafter.





Sahadeva, the son of Jarāsandha, will have a son named Mārjāri. From Mārjāri will come Śrutaśravā; from Śrutaśravā, Yutāyu; and from Yutāyu, Niramitra. The son of Niramitra will be Sunakṣatra, from Sunakṣatra will come Bṛhatsena, and from Bṛhatsena, Karmajit. The son of Karmajit will be Sutañjaya, the son of Sutañjaya will be Vipra, and his son will be Śuci. The son of Śuci will be Kṣema, the son of Kṣema will be Suvrata, and the son of Suvrata will be Dharmasūtra. From Dharmasūtra will come Sama; from Sama, Dyumatsena; from Dyumatsena, Sumati; and from Sumati, Subala.





TEXT 49



sunīthaḥ satyajid atha

viśvajid yad ripuñjayaḥ

bārhadrathāś ca bhūpālā

bhāvyāḥ sāhasra-vatsaram

SYNONYMS



sunīthaḥ-from Subala will come Sunītha; satyajit-Satyajit; atha-from him; viśvajit-from Viśvajit; yat-from whom; ripuñjayaḥ-Ripuñjaya; bārhadrathāḥ-all in the line of Bṛhadratha; ca-also; bhūpālāḥ-all those kings; bhāvyāḥ-will take birth; sāhasra-vatsaram-continuously for one thousand years.





From Subala will come Sunītha; from Sunītha, Satyajit; from Satyajit, Viśvajit; and from Viśvajit, Ripuñjaya. All of these personalities will belong to the dynasty of Bṛhadratha, which will rule the world for one thousand years.





This is the history of a monarchy that began with Jarāsandha and continues for one thousand years as the above-mentioned kings appear on the surface of the globe.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-second Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Descendants of Ajamīḍha."



Chapter Twenty-three



The Dynasties of the Sons of Yayāti





In this Twenty-third Chapter the dynasties of Anu, Druhyu, Turvasu and Yadu, as well as the story of Jyāmagha, are described.





The sons of Yayāti's fourth son, Anu, were Sabhānara, Cakṣu and Pareṣṇu. Of these three, the sons and grandsons of Sabhānara were, in succession, Kālanara, Sṛñjaya, Janamejaya, Mahāśāla and Mahāmanā. The sons of Mahāmanā were Uśīnara and Titikṣu. Uśīnara had four sons, namely Śibi, Vara, Kṛmi and Dakṣa. Śibi also had four sons-Vṛṣādarbha, Sudhīra, Madra and Kekaya. The son of Titikṣu was Ruṣadratha, who begot a son named Homa. From Homa came Sutapā and from Sutapā, Bali. In this way the dynasty continued. Begotten by Dīrghatamā in the womb of the wife of Bali were Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Suhma, Puṇḍra and Oḍra, all of whom became kings.





From Aṅga came Khalapāna, whose dynasty included Diviratha, Dharmaratha and Citraratha, also called Romapāda, one after another. Mahārāja Daśaratha gave in charity one of his daughters, by the name Śāntā, to his friend Romapāda because Romapāda had no sons. Romapāda accepted Śāntā as his daughter, and the great sage Ṛṣyaśṛṅga married her. By the mercy of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, Romapāda had a son named Caturaṅga. The son of Caturaṅga was Pṛthulākṣa, who had three sons-Bṛhadratha, Bṛhatkarmā and Bṛhadbhānu. From Bṛhadratha came a son named Bṛhadmanā, whose sons and grandsons in succession were Jayadratha, Vijaya, Dhṛti, Dhṛtavrata, Satkarmā and Adhiratha. Adhiratha accepted the son rejected by Kuntī, namely Karṇa, and Karṇa's son was Vṛṣasena.





The son of Yayāti's third son, Druhyu, was Babhru, whose son and grandsons were Setu, Ārabdha, Gāndhāra, Dharma, Dhṛta, Durmada and Pracetā.





The son of Yayāti's second son, Turvasu, was Vahni, whose seminal dynasty included Bharga, Bhānumān, Tribhānu, Karandhama and Maruta. The childless Maruta accepted Duṣmanta, who belonged to the Pūru dynasty, as his adopted son. Mahārāja Duṣmanta was anxious to have his kingdom returned, and so he went back to the Pūru-vaṁśa.





Of the four sons of Yadu, Sahasrajit was the eldest. The son of Sahasrajit was named Śatajit. He had three sons, of whom one was Haihaya. The sons and grandsons in the dynasty of Haihaya were Dharma, Netra, Kunti, Sohañji, Mahiṣmān, Bhadrasenaka, Dhanaka, Kṛtavīrya, Arjuna, Jayadhvaja, Tālajaṅgha and Vītihotra.





The son of Vītihotra was Madhu, whose eldest son was Vṛṣṇi. Because of Yadu, Madhu and Vṛṣṇi, their dynasties are known as Yādava, Mādhava and Vṛṣṇi. Another son of Yadu was Kroṣṭā, and from him came Vṛjinavān, Svāhita, Viṣadgu, Citraratha, Śaśabindu, Pṛthuśravā, Dharma, Uśanā and Rucaka. Rucaka had five sons, one of whom was known as Jyāmagha. Jyāmagha was sonless, but by the mercy of the demigods his childless wife gave birth to a son named Vidarbha.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

anoḥ sabhānaraś cakṣuḥ

pareṣṇuś ca trayaḥ sutāḥ

sabhānarāt kālanaraḥ

sṛñjayas tat-sutas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; anoḥ-of Anu, the fourth of the four sons of Yayāti; sabhānaraḥ-Sabhānara; cakṣuḥ-Cakṣu; pareṣṇuḥ-Pareṣṇu; ca-also; trayaḥ-three; sutāḥ-sons; sabhānarāt-from Sabhānara; kālanaraḥ-Kālanara; sṛñjayaḥ-Sṛñjaya; tat-sutaḥ-son of Kālanara; tataḥ-thereafter.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Anu, the fourth son of Yayāti, had three sons, named Sabhānara, Cakṣu and Pareṣṇu. O King, from Sabhānara came a son named Kālanara, and from Kālanara came a son named Sṛñjaya.





TEXT 2



janamejayas tasya putro

mahāśālo mahāmanāḥ

uśīnaras titikṣuś ca

mahāmanasa ātmajau

SYNONYMS



janamejayaḥ-Janamejaya; tasya-of him (Janamejaya); putraḥ-a son; mahāśālaḥ-Mahāśāla; mahāmanāḥ-(from Mahāśāla) a son named Mahāmanā; uśīnaraḥ-Uśīnara; titikṣuḥ-Titikṣu; ca-and; mahāmanasaḥ-from Mahāmanā; ātmajau-two sons.





From Sṛñjaya came a son named Janamejaya. From Janamejaya came Mahāśāla; from Mahāśāla, Mahāmanā; and from Mahāmanā two sons, named Uśīnara and Titikṣu.





TEXTS 3–4



śibir varaḥ kṛmir dakṣaś

catvārośīnarātmajāḥ

vṛṣādarbhaḥ sudhīraś ca

madraḥ kekaya ātmavān

śibeś catvāra evāsaṁs



titikṣoś ca ruṣadrathaḥ

tato homo 'tha sutapā

baliḥ sutapaso 'bhavat

SYNONYMS



śibiḥ-Śibi; varaḥ-Vara; kṛmiḥ-Kṛmi; dakṣaḥ-Dakṣa; catvāraḥ-four; uśīnara-ātmajāḥ-the sons of Uśīnara; vṛṣādarbhaḥ-Vṛṣādarbha; sudhīraḥ ca-as well as Sudhīra; madraḥ-Madra; kekayaḥ-Kekaya; ātmavān-self-realized; śibeḥ-of Śibi; catvāraḥ-four; eva-indeed; āsan-there were; titikṣoḥ-of Titikṣu; ca-also; ruṣadrathaḥ-a son named Ruṣadratha; tataḥ-from him (Ruṣadratha); homaḥ-Homa; atha-from him (Homa); sutapāḥ-Sutapā; baliḥ-Bali; sutapasaḥ-of Sutapā; abhavat-there was.





The four sons of Uśīnara were Śibi, Vara, Kṛmi and Dakṣa, and from Śibi again came four sons, named Vṛṣādarbha, Sudhīra, Madra and ātma-tattva-vit Kekaya. The son of Titikṣu was Ruṣadratha. From Ruṣadratha came Homa; from Homa, Sutapā; and from Sutapā, Bali.





TEXT 5



aṅga-vaṅga-kaliṅgādyāḥ

suhma-puṇḍrauḍra-saṁjñitāḥ

jajñire dīrghatamaso

baleḥ kṣetre mahīkṣitaḥ

SYNONYMS



aṅga-Aṅga; vaṅga-Vaṅga; kaliṅga-Kaliṅga; ādyāḥ-headed by; suhma-Suhma; puṇḍra-Puṇḍra; oḍra-Oḍra; saṁjñitāḥ-known as such; jajñire-were born; dīrghatamasaḥ-by the semen of Dīrghatama; baleḥ-of Bali; kṣetre-in the wife; mahī-kṣitaḥ-of the king of the world.





By the semen of Dīrghatama in the wife of Bali, the emperor of the world, six sons took birth, namely Aṅga, Vaṅga, Kaliṅga, Suhma, Puṇḍra and Oḍra.





TEXT 6



cakruḥ sva-nāmnā viṣayān

ṣaḍ imān prācyakāṁś ca te

khalapāno 'ṅgato jajñe

tasmād divirathas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



cakruḥ-they created; sva-nāmnā-by their own names; viṣayān-different states; ṣaṭ-six; imān-all these; prācyakān ca-on the eastern side (of India); te-those (six kings); khalapānaḥ-Khalapāna; aṅgataḥ-from King Aṅga; jajñe-took birth; tasmāt-from him (Khalapāna); divirathaḥ-Diviratha; tataḥ-thereafter.





These six sons, headed by Aṅga, later became kings of six states in the eastern side of India. These states were known according to the names of their respective kings. From Aṅga came a son named Khalapāna, and from Khalapāna came Diviratha.





TEXTS 7–10



suto dharmaratho yasya

jajñe citraratho 'prajāḥ

romapāda iti khyātas

tasmai daśarathaḥ sakhā

śāntāṁ sva-kanyāṁ prāyacchad



ṛṣyaśṛṅga uvāha yām

deve 'varṣati yaṁ rāmā

āninyur hariṇī-sutam

nāṭya-saṅgīta-vāditrair



vibhramāliṅganārhaṇaiḥ

sa tu rājño 'napatyasya

nirūpyeṣṭiṁ marutvate

prajām adād daśaratho



yena lebhe 'prajāḥ prajāḥ

caturaṅgo romapādāt

pṛthulākṣas tu tat-sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



sutaḥ-a son; dharmarathaḥ-Dharmaratha; yasya-of whom (Diviratha); jajñe-was born; citrarathaḥ-Citraratha; aprajāḥ-without any sons; romapādaḥ-Romapāda; iti-thus; khyātaḥ-celebrated; tasmai-unto him; daśarathaḥ-Daśaratha; sakhā-friend; śāntām-Śāntā; sva-kanyām-Daśaratha's own daughter; prāyacchat-delivered; ṛṣyaśṛṅgaḥ-Ṛṣyaśṛṅga; uvāha-married; yām-unto her (Śāntā); deve-the demigod in charge of rainfall; avarṣati-did not shower any rain; yam-unto whom (Ṛṣyaśṛṅga); rāmāḥ-prostitutes; āninyuḥ-brought; hariṇī-sutam-that Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, who was the son of a doe; nāṭya-saṅgīta-vāditraiḥ-by dancing, by singing and by a musical display; vibhrama-bewildering; āliṅgana-by embracing; arhaṇaiḥ-by worshiping; saḥ-he (Ṛṣyaśṛṅga); tu-indeed; rājñaḥ-from Mahārāja Daśaratha; anapatyasya-who was without issue; nirūpya-after establishing; iṣṭim-a sacrifice; marutvate-of the demigod named Marutvān; prajām-issue; adāt-delivered; daśarathaḥ-Daśaratha; yena-by which (as a result of the yajña); lebhe-achieved; aprajāḥ-although he had no sons; prajāḥ-sons; caturaṅgaḥ-Caturaṅga; romapādāt-from Citraratha; pṛthulākṣaḥ-Pṛthulākṣa; tu-indeed; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Caturaṅga.





From Diviratha came a son named Dharmaratha, and his son was Citraratha, who was celebrated as Romapāda. Romapāda, however, was without issue, and therefore his friend Mahārāja Daśaratha gave him his own daughter, named Śāntā. Romapāda accepted her as his daughter, and thereafter she married Ṛṣyaśṛṅga. When the demigods from the heavenly planets failed to shower rain, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga was appointed the priest for performing a sacrifice, after being brought from the forest by the allurement of prostitutes, who danced, staged theatrical performances accompanied by music, and embraced and worshiped him. After Ṛṣyaśṛṅga came, the rain fell. Thereafter, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga performed a son-giving sacrifice on behalf of Mahārāja Daśaratha, who had no issue, and then Mahārāja Daśaratha had sons. From Romapāda, by the mercy of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, Caturaṅga was born, and from Caturaṅga came Pṛthulākṣa.





TEXT 11



bṛhadratho bṛhatkarmā

bṛhadbhānuś ca tat-sutāḥ

ādyād bṛhanmanās tasmāj

jayadratha udāhṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



bṛhadrathaḥ-Bṛhadratha; bṛhatkarmā-Bṛhatkarmā; bṛhadbhānuḥ-Bṛhadbhānu; ca-also; tat-sutāḥ-the sons of Pṛthulākṣa; ādyāt-from the eldest (Bṛhadratha); bṛhanmanāḥ-Bṛhanmanā was born; tasmāt-from him (Bṛhanmanā); jayadrathaḥ-a son named Jayadratha; udāhṛtaḥ-celebrated as his son.





The sons of Pṛthulākṣa were Bṛhadratha, Bṛhatkarmā and Bṛhadbhānu. From the eldest, Bṛhadratha, came a son named Bṛhanmanā, and from Bṛhanmanā came a son named Jayadratha.





TEXT 12



vijayas tasya sambhūtyāṁ

tato dhṛtir ajāyata

tato dhṛtavratas tasya

satkarmādhirathas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



vijayaḥ-Vijaya; tasya-of him (Jayadratha); sambhūtyām-in the womb of the wife; tataḥ-thereafter (from Vijaya); dhṛtiḥ-Dhṛti; ajāyata-took birth; tataḥ-from him (Dhṛti); dhṛtavrataḥ-a son named Dhṛtavrata; tasya-of him (Dhṛtavrata); satkarmā-Satkarmā; adhirathaḥ-Adhiratha; tataḥ-from him (Satkarmā).





The son of Jayadratha, by the womb of his wife Sambhūti, was Vijaya, and from Vijaya, Dhṛti was born. From Dhṛti came Dhṛtavrata; from Dhṛtavrata, Satkarmā; and from Satkarmā, Adhiratha.





TEXT 13



yo 'sau gaṅgā-taṭe krīḍan

mañjūṣāntargataṁ śiśum

kuntyāpaviddhaṁ kānīnam

anapatyo 'karot sutam

SYNONYMS



yaḥ asau-one who (Adhiratha); gaṅgā-taṭe-on the bank of the Ganges; krīḍan-while playing; mañjūṣa-antaḥgatam-packed in a basket; śiśum-a baby was found; kuntyā apaviddham-this baby had been abandoned by Kuntī; kānīnam-because the baby was born during her maiden state, before her marriage; anapatyaḥ-this Adhiratha, being sonless; akarot-accepted the baby; sutam-as his son.





While playing on the bank of the Ganges, Adhiratha found a baby wrapped up in a basket. The baby had been left by Kuntī because he was born before she was married. Because Adhiratha had no sons, he raised this baby as his own. [This son was later known as Karṇa.]





TEXT 14



vṛṣasenaḥ sutas tasya

karṇasya jagatīpate

druhyoś ca tanayo babhruḥ

setus tasyātmajas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



vṛṣasenaḥ-Vṛṣasena; sutaḥ-a son; tasya karṇasya-of that same Karṇa; jagatī pate-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; druhyoḥ ca-of Druhyu, the third son of Yayāti; tanayaḥ-a son; babhruḥ-Babhru; setuḥ-Setu; tasya-of him (Babhru); ātmajaḥ tataḥ-a son thereafter.





O King, the only son of Karṇa was Vṛṣasena. Druhyu, the third son of Yayāti, had a son named Babhru, and the son of Babhru was known as Setu.





TEXT 15



ārabdhas tasya gāndhāras

tasya dharmas tato dhṛtaḥ

dhṛtasya durmadas tasmāt

pracetāḥ prācetasaḥ śatam

SYNONYMS



ārabdhaḥ-Ārabdha (was the son of Setu); tasya-of him (Ārabdha); gāndhāraḥ-a son named Gāndhāra; tasya-of him (Gāndhāra); dharmaḥ-a son known as Dharma; tataḥ-from him (Dharma); dhṛtaḥ-a son named Dhṛta; dhṛtasya-of Dhṛta; durmadaḥ-a son named Durmada; tasmāt-from him (Durmada); pracetāḥ-a son named Pracetā; prācetasaḥ-of Pracetā; śatam-there were one hundred sons.





The son of Setu was Ārabdha, Ārabdha's son was Gāndhāra, and Gāndhāra's son was Dharma. Dharma's son was Dhṛta, Dhṛta's son was Durmada, and Durmada's son was Pracetā, who had one hundred sons.





TEXT 16



mlecchādhipatayo 'bhūvann

udīcīṁ diśam āśritāḥ

turvasoś ca suto vahnir

vahner bhargo 'tha bhānumān

SYNONYMS



mleccha-of the lands known as Mlecchadeśa (where Vedic civilization was not present); adhipatayaḥ-the kings; abhūvan-became; udīcīm-on the northern side of India; diśam-the direction; āśritāḥ-accepting as the jurisdiction; turvasoḥ ca-of Turvasu, the second son of Mahārāja Yayāti; sutaḥ-the son; vahniḥ-Vahni; vahneḥ-of Vahni; bhargaḥ-the son named Bharga; atha-thereafter, his son; bhānumān-Bhānumān.





The Pracetās [the sons of Pracetā] occupied the northern side of India, which was devoid of Vedic civilization, and became kings there. Yayāti's second son was Turvasu. The son of Turvasu was Vahni; the son of Vahni, Bharga; the son of Bharga, Bhānumān.





TEXT 17



tribhānus tat-suto 'syāpi

karandhama udāra-dhīḥ

marutas tat-suto 'putraḥ

putraṁ pauravam anvabhūt

SYNONYMS



tribhānuḥ-Tribhānu; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Bhānumān; asya-of him (Tribhānu); api-also; karandhamaḥ-Karandhama; udāra-dhīḥ-who was very magnanimous; marutaḥ-Maruta; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Karandhama; aputraḥ-being without issue; putram-as his son; pauravam-a son of the Pūru dynasty, Mahārāja Duṣmanta; anvabhūt-adopted.





The son of Bhānumān was Tribhānu, and his son was the magnanimous Karandhama. Karandhama's son was Maruta, who had no sons and who therefore adopted a son of the Pūru dynasty [Mahārāja Duṣmanta] as his own.





TEXTS 18–19



duṣmantaḥ sa punar bheje

sva-vaṁśaṁ rājya-kāmukaḥ

yayāter jyeṣṭha-putrasya

yador vaṁśaṁ nararṣabha

varṇayāmi mahā-puṇyaṁ



sarva-pāpa-haraṁ nṛṇām

yador vaṁśaṁ naraḥ śrutvā

sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate

SYNONYMS



duṣmantaḥ-Mahārāja Duṣmanta; saḥ-he; punaḥ bheje-again accepted; sva-vaṁśam-his original dynasty (the Pūru dynasty); rājya-kāmukaḥ-because of desiring the royal throne; yayāteḥ-of Mahārāja Yayāti; jyeṣṭha-putrasya-of the first son, Yadu; yadoḥ vaṁśam-the dynasty of Yadu; nara-ṛṣabha-O best of human beings, Mahārāja Parīkṣit; varṇayāmi-I shall describe; mahā-puṇyam-supremely pious; sarva-pāpa-haram-vanquishes the reactions of sinful activities; nṛṇām-of human society; yadoḥ vaṁśam-the description of the dynasty of Yadu; naraḥ-any person; śrutvā-simply by hearing; sarva-pāpaiḥ-from all reactions of sinful activities; pramucyate-is freed.





Mahārāja Duṣmanta, desiring to occupy the throne, returned to his original dynasty [the Pūru dynasty], even though he had accepted Maruta as his father. O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, let me now describe the dynasty of Yadu, the eldest son of Mahārāja Yayāti. This description is supremely pious, and it vanquishes the reactions of sinful activities in human society. Simply by hearing this description, one is freed from all sinful reactions.





TEXTS 20–21



yatrāvatīrṇo bhagavān

paramātmā narākṛtiḥ

yadoḥ sahasrajit kroṣṭā

nalo ripur iti śrutāḥ

catvāraḥ sūnavas tatra



śatajit prathamātmajaḥ

mahāhayo reṇuhayo

haihayaś ceti tat-sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



yatra-wherein, in which dynasty; avatīrṇaḥ-descended; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; paramātmā-who is the Supersoul of all living entities; nara-ākṛtiḥ-a person, exactly resembling a human being; yadoḥ-of Yadu; sahasrajit-Sahasrajit; kroṣṭā-Kroṣṭā; nalaḥ-Nala; ripuḥ-Ripu; iti śrutāḥ-thus they are celebrated; catvāraḥ-four; sūnavaḥ-sons; tatra-therein; śatajit-Śatajit; prathama-ātmajaḥ-of the first sons; mahāhayaḥ-Mahāhaya; reṇuhayaḥ-Reṇuhaya; haihayaḥ-Haihaya; ca-and; iti-thus; tat-sutāḥ-his sons (the sons of Śatajit).





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the Supersoul in the hearts of all living entities, descended in His original form as a human being in the dynasty or family of Yadu. Yadu had four sons, named Sahasrajit, Kroṣṭā, Nala and Ripu. Of these four, the eldest, Sahasrajit, had a son named Śatajit, who had three sons, named Mahāhaya, Reṇuhaya and Haihaya.





As confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11):



vadanti tat tattva-vidas

tattvaṁ yaj jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti

bhagavān iti śabdyate





"Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this nondual substance Brahman, Paramātmā or Bhagavān." The majority of transcendentalists understand only the impersonal Brahman or localized Paramātmā, for the Personality of Godhead is very difficult to understand. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.3):



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ





"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth." The yogīs and jñānīs-that is, the mystic yogīs and the impersonalists-can understand the Absolute Truth as impersonal or localized, but although such realized souls are above ordinary human beings, they cannot understand how the Supreme Absolute Truth can be a person. Therefore it is said that out of many siddhas, the souls who have already realized the Absolute Truth, one may understand Kṛṣṇa, who exactly resembles a human being (narākṛti). This human form was explained by Kṛṣṇa Himself after He manifested the virāṭ-rūpa. The virāṭ-rūpa is not the original form of the Lord; the Lord's original form is Dvibhuja-śyāmasundara, Muralīdhara, the Lord with two hands, playing a flute (yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpam). The Lord's forms are proof of His inconceivable qualities. Although the Lord maintains innumerable universes within the period of His breath, He is dressed with a form exactly like that of a human being. That does not mean, however, that He is a human being. This is His original form, but because He looks like a human being, those with a poor fund of knowledge consider Him an ordinary man. The Lord says:



avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā

mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam

paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto

mama bhūta-maheśvaram





"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be." (Bg. 9.11) By the Lord's paraṁ bhāvam, or transcendental nature, He is the all-pervading Paramātmā living in the core of the hearts of all living entities, yet He looks like a human being. Māyāvāda philosophy says that the Lord is originally impersonal but assumes a human form and many other forms when He descends. Actually, however, He is originally like a human being, and the impersonal Brahman consists of the rays of His body (yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]).





TEXT 22



dharmas tu haihaya-suto

netraḥ kunteḥ pitā tataḥ

sohañjir abhavat kunter

mahiṣmān bhadrasenakaḥ

SYNONYMS



dharmaḥ tu-Dharma, however; haihaya-sutaḥ-became the son of Haihaya; netraḥ-Netra; kunteḥ-of Kunti; pitā-the father; tataḥ-from him (Dharma); sohañjiḥ-Sohañji; abhavat-became; kunteḥ-the son of Kunti; mahiṣmān-Mahiṣmān; bhadrasenakaḥ-Bhadrasenaka.





The son of Haihaya was Dharma, and the son of Dharma was Netra, the father of Kunti. From Kunti came a son named Sohañji, from Sohañji came Mahiṣmān, and from Mahiṣmān, Bhadrasenaka.





TEXT 23



durmado bhadrasenasya

dhanakaḥ kṛtavīryasūḥ

kṛtāgniḥ kṛtavarmā ca

kṛtaujā dhanakātmajāḥ

SYNONYMS



durmadaḥ-Durmada; bhadrasenasya-of Bhadrasena; dhanakaḥ-Dhanaka; kṛtavīrya-sūḥ-giving birth to Kṛtavīrya; kṛtāgniḥ-by the name Kṛtāgni; kṛtavarmā-Kṛtavarmā; ca-also; kṛtaujāḥ-Kṛtaujā; dhanaka-ātmajāḥ-sons of Dhanaka.





The sons of Bhadrasena were known as Durmada and Dhanaka. Dhanaka was the father of Kṛtavīrya and also of Kṛtāgni, Kṛtavarmā and Kṛtaujā.





TEXT 24



arjunaḥ kṛtavīryasya

sapta-dvīpeśvaro 'bhavat

dattātreyād dharer aṁśāt

prāpta-yoga-mahāguṇaḥ

SYNONYMS



arjunaḥ-Arjuna; kṛtavīryasya-of Kṛtavīrya; sapta-dvīpa-of the seven islands (the whole world); īśvaraḥ abhavat-became the emperor; dattātreyāt-from Dattātreya; hareḥ aṁśāt-from he who was the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prāpta-obtained; yoga-mahāguṇaḥ-the quality of mystic power.





The son of Kṛtavīrya was Arjuna. He [Kārtavīryārjuna] became the emperor of the entire world, consisting of seven islands, and received mystic power from Dattātreya, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus he obtained the mystic perfections known as asta-siddhi.





TEXT 25



na nūnaṁ kārtavīryasya

gatiṁ yāsyanti pārthivāḥ

yajña-dāna-tapo-yogaiḥ

śruta-vīrya-dayādibhiḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; nūnam-indeed; kārtavīryasya-of Emperor Kārtavīrya; gatim-the activities; yāsyanti-could understand or achieve; pārthivāḥ-everyone on the earth; yajña-sacrifices; dāna-charity; tapaḥ-austerities; yogaiḥ-mystic powers; śruta-education; vīrya-strength; dayā-mercy; ādibhiḥ-by all these qualities.





No other king in this world could equal Kārtavīryārjuna in sacrifices, charity, austerity, mystic power, education, strength or mercy.





TEXT 26



pañcāśīti sahasrāṇi

hy avyāhata-balaḥ samāḥ

anaṣṭa-vitta-smaraṇo

bubhuje 'kṣayya-ṣaḍ-vasu

SYNONYMS



pañcāśīti-eighty-five; sahasrāṇi-thousands; hi-indeed; avyāhata-inexhaustible; balaḥ-the strength of whom; samāḥ-years; anaṣṭa-without deterioration; vitta-material opulences; smaraṇaḥ-and memory; bubhuje-enjoyed; akṣayya-without deterioration; ṣaṭ-vasu-six kinds of enjoyable material opulence.





For eighty-five thousand years, Kārtavīryārjuna continuously enjoyed material opulences with full bodily strength and unimpaired memory. In other words, he enjoyed inexhaustible material opulences with his six senses.





TEXT 27



tasya putra-sahasreṣu

pañcaivorvaritā mṛdhe

jayadhvajaḥ śūraseno

vṛṣabho madhur ūrjitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-of him (Kārtavīryārjuna); putra-sahasreṣu-among the one thousand sons; pañca-five; eva-only; urvaritāḥ-remained alive; mṛdhe-in a fight (with Paraśurāma); jayadhvajaḥ-Jayadhvaja; śūrasenaḥ-Śūrasena; vṛṣabhaḥ-Vṛṣabha; madhuḥ-Madhu; ūrjitaḥ-and Ūrjita.





Of the one thousand sons of Kārtavīryārjuna, only five remained alive after the fight with Paraśurāma. Their names were Jayadhvaja, Śūrasena, Vṛṣabha, Madhu and Ūrjita.





TEXT 28



jayadhvajāt tālajaṅghas

tasya putra-śataṁ tv abhūt

kṣatraṁ yat tālajaṅghākhyam

aurva-tejopasaṁhṛtam

SYNONYMS



jayadhvajāt-of Jayadhvaja; tālajaṅghaḥ-a son named Tālajaṅgha; tasya-of him (Tālajaṅgha); putra-śatam-one hundred sons; tu-indeed; abhūt-were born; kṣatram-a dynasty of kṣatriyas; yat-which; tālajaṅgha-ākhyam-were known as the Tālajaṅghas; aurva-tejaḥ-being very powerful; upasaṁhṛtam-were killed by Mahārāja Sagara.





Jayadhvaja had a son named Tālajaṅgha, who had one hundred sons. All the kṣatriyas in that dynasty, known as Tālajaṅgha, were annihilated by the great power received by Mahārāja Sagara from Aurva Ṛṣi.





TEXT 29



teṣāṁ jyeṣṭho vītihotro

vṛṣṇiḥ putro madhoḥ smṛtaḥ

tasya putra-śataṁ tv āsīd

vṛṣṇi-jyeṣṭhaṁ yataḥ kulam

SYNONYMS



teṣām-of all of them; jyeṣṭhaḥ-the eldest son; vītihotraḥ-a son named Vītihotra; vṛṣṇiḥ-Vṛṣṇi; putraḥ-the son; madhoḥ-of Madhu; smṛtaḥ-was well known; tasya-of him (Vṛṣṇi); putra-śatam-one hundred sons; tu-indeed; āsīt-there were; vṛṣṇi-Vṛṣṇi; jyeṣṭham-the eldest; yataḥ-from him; kulam-the dynasty.





Of the sons of Tālajaṅgha, Vītihotra was the eldest. The son of Vītihotra named Madhu had a celebrated son named Vṛṣṇi. Madhu had one hundred sons, of whom Vṛṣṇi was the eldest. The dynasties known as Yādava, Mādhava and Vṛṣṇi had their origin from Yadu, Madhu and Vṛṣṇi.





TEXTS 30–31



mādhavā vṛṣṇayo rājan

yādavāś ceti saṁjñitāḥ

yadu-putrasya ca kroṣṭoḥ

putro vṛjinavāṁs tataḥ

svāhito 'to viṣadgur vai



tasya citrarathas tataḥ

śaśabindur mahā-yogī

mahā-bhāgo mahān abhūt

caturdaśa-mahāratnaś

cakravarty aparājitaḥ

SYNONYMS



mādhavāḥ-the dynasty beginning from Madhu; vṛṣṇayaḥ-the dynasty beginning from Vṛṣṇi; rājan-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); yādavāḥ-the dynasty beginning from Yadu; ca-and; iti-thus; saṁjñitāḥ-are so-called because of those different persons; yadu-putrasya-of the son of Yadu; ca-also; kroṣṭoḥ-of Kroṣṭā; putraḥ-the son; vṛjinavān-his name was Vṛjinavān; tataḥ-from him (Vṛjinavān); svāhitaḥ-Svāhita; ataḥ-thereafter; viṣadguḥ-a son named Viṣadgu; vai-indeed; tasya-of him; citrarathaḥ-Citraratha; tataḥ-from him; śaśabinduḥ-Śaśabindu; mahā-yogī-a great mystic; mahā-bhāgaḥ-most fortunate; mahān-a great personality; abhūt-he became; caturdaśa-mahāratnaḥ-fourteen kinds of great opulences; cakravartī-he possessed as the emperor; aparājitaḥ-not defeated by anyone else.





O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, because Yadu, Madhu and Vṛṣṇi each inaugurated a dynasty, their dynasties are known as Yādava, Mādhava and Vṛṣṇi. The son of Yadu named Kroṣṭā had a son named Vṛjinavān. The son of Vṛjinavān was Svāhita; the son of Svāhita, Viṣadgu; the son of Viṣadgu, Citraratha; and the son of Citraratha, Śaśabindu. The greatly fortunate Śaśabindu, who was a great mystic, possessed fourteen opulences and was the owner of fourteen great jewels. Thus he became the emperor of the world.





In the Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa the fourteen kinds of great jewels are described as follows: (1) an elephant, (2) a horse, (3) a chariot, (4) a wife, (5) arrows, (6) a reservoir of wealth, (7) a garland, (8) valuable costumes, (9) trees, (10) a spear, (11) a noose, (12) jewels, (13) an umbrella, and (14) regulative principles. To be the emperor, one must possess all fourteen of these opulences. Śaśabindu possessed them all.





TEXT 32



tasya patnī-sahasrāṇāṁ

daśānāṁ sumahā-yaśāḥ

daśa-lakṣa-sahasrāṇi

putrāṇāṁ tāsv ajījanat

SYNONYMS



tasya-of Śaśabindu; patnī-wives; sahasrāṇām-of thousands; daśānām-ten; su-mahā-yaśāḥ-greatly famous; daśa-ten; lakṣa-lakhs (one lakh equals one hundred thousand); sahasrāṇi-thousands; putrāṇām-of sons; tāsu-in them; ajījanat-he begot.





The famous Śaśabindu had ten thousand wives, and by each he begot a lakh of sons. Therefore the number of his sons was ten thousand lakhs.





TEXT 33



teṣāṁ tu ṣaṭ pradhānānāṁ

pṛthuśravasa ātmajaḥ

dharmo nāmośanā tasya

hayamedha-śatasya yāṭ

SYNONYMS



teṣām-out of so many sons; tu-but; ṣaṭ pradhānānām-of whom there were six foremost sons; pṛthuśravasaḥ-of Pṛthuśravā; ātmajaḥ-the son; dharmaḥ-Dharma; nāma-by the name; uśanā-Uśanā; tasya-his; hayamedha-śatasya-of one hundred aśvamedha sacrifices; yāṭ-he was the performer.





Among these many sons, six were the foremost, such as Pṛthuśravā and Pṛthukīrti. The son of Pṛthuśravā was known as Dharma, and his son was known as Uśanā. Uśanā was the performer of one hundred horse sacrifices.





TEXT 34



tat-suto rucakas tasya

pañcāsann ātmajāḥ śṛṇu

purujid-rukma-rukmeṣu-

pṛthu-jyāmagha-saṁjñitāḥ

SYNONYMS



tat-sutaḥ-the son of Uśanā; rucakaḥ-Rucaka; tasya-of him; pañca-five; āsan-there were; ātmajāḥ-sons; śṛṇu-please hear (their names); purujit-Purujit; rukma-Rukma; rukmeṣu-Rukmeṣu; pṛthu-Pṛthu; jyāmagha-Jyāmagha; saṁjñitāḥ-these five sons were named.





The son of Uśanā was Rucaka, who had five sons-Purujit, Rukma, Rukmeṣu, Pṛthu and Jyāmagha. Please hear of these sons from me.





TEXTS 35–36



jyāmaghas tv aprajo 'py anyāṁ

bhāryāṁ śaibyā-patir bhayāt

nāvindac chatru-bhavanād

bhojyāṁ kanyām ahāraṣīt

ratha-sthāṁ tāṁ nirīkṣyāha

śaibyā patim amarṣitā

keyaṁ kuhaka mat-sthānaṁ



ratham āropiteti vai

snuṣā tavety abhihite

smayantī patim abravīt

SYNONYMS



jyāmaghaḥ-King Jyāmagha; tu-indeed; aprajaḥ api-although issueless; anyām-another; bhāryām-wife; śaibyā-patiḥ-because he was the husband of Śaibyā; bhayāt-out of fear; na avindat-did not accept; śatru-bhavanāt-from the enemy's camp; bhojyām-a prostitute used for sense gratification; kanyām-girl; ahāraṣīt-brought; ratha-sthām-who was seated on the chariot; tām-her; nirīkṣya-seeing; āha-said; śaibyā-Śaibyā, the wife of Jyāmagha; patim-unto her husband; amarṣitā-being very angry; kā iyam-who is this; kuhaka-you cheater; mat-sthānam-my place; ratham-on the chariot; āropitā-has been allowed to sit; iti-thus; vai-indeed; snuṣā-daughter-in-law; tava-your; iti-thus; abhihite-being informed; smayantī-smilingly; patim-unto her husband; abravīt-said.





Jyāmagha had no sons, but because he was fearful of his wife, Śaibyā, he could not accept another wife. Jyāmagha once took from the house of some royal enemy a girl who was a prostitute, but upon seeing her Śaibyā was very angry and said to her husband, "My husband, you cheater, who is this girl sitting upon my seat on the chariot?" Jyāmagha then replied, "This girl will be your daughter-in-law." Upon hearing these joking words, Śaibyā smilingly replied.





TEXT 37



ahaṁ bandhyāsapatnī ca

snuṣā me yujyate katham

janayiṣyasi yaṁ rājñi

tasyeyam upayujyate

SYNONYMS



aham-I am; bandhyā-sterile; asa-patnī-I have no co-wife; ca-also; snuṣā-daughter-in-law; me-my; yujyate-could be; katham-how; janayiṣyasi-you will give birth to; yam-which son; rājñi-O my dear Queen; tasya-for him; iyam-this girl; upayujyate-will be very suitable.





Śaibyā said, "I am sterile and have no co-wife. How can this girl be my daughter-in-law? Please tell me." Jyāmagha replied, "My dear Queen, I shall see that you indeed have a son and that this girl will be your daughter-in-law."





TEXT 38



anvamodanta tad viśve-

devāḥ pitara eva ca

śaibyā garbham adhāt kāle

kumāraṁ suṣuve śubham

sa vidarbha iti prokta

upayeme snuṣāṁ satīm

SYNONYMS



anvamodanta-accepted; tat-that statement predicting the birth of a son; viśvedevāḥ-the Viśvedeva demigods; pitaraḥ-the Pitās or forefathers; eva-indeed; ca-also; śaibyā-the wife of Jyāmagha; garbham-pregnancy; adhāt-conceived; kāle-in due course of time; kumāram-a son; suṣuve-gave birth to; śubham-very auspicious; saḥ-that son; vidarbhaḥ-Vidarbha; iti-thus; proktaḥ-was well known; upayeme-later married; snuṣām-who was accepted as daughter-in-law; satīm-very chaste girl.





Long, long ago, Jyāmagha had satisfied the demigods and Pitās by worshiping them. Now, by their mercy, Jyāmagha's words came true. Although Śaibyā was barren, by the grace of the demigods she became pregnant and in due course of time gave birth to a child named Vidarbha. Before the child's birth, the girl had been accepted as a daughter-in-law, and therefore Vidarbha actually married her when he grew up.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-third Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Dynasties of the Sons of Yayāti."



Chapter Twenty-four



Kṛṣṇa the Supreme Personality of Godhead





Vidarbha had three sons, named Kuśa, Kratha and Romapāda. Of these three, Romapāda expanded his dynasty by the sons and grandsons named Babhru, Kṛti, Uśika, Cedi and Caidya, all of whom later became kings. From the son of Vidarbha named Kratha came a son named Kunti, from whose dynasty came the descendants named Vṛṣṇi, Nirvṛti, Daśārha, Vyoma, Jīmūta, Vikṛti, Bhīmaratha, Navaratha, Daśaratha, Śakuni, Karambhi, Devarāta, Devakṣatra, Madhu, Kuruvaśa, Anu, Puruhotra, Ayu and Sātvata. Sātvata had seven sons. One of them was Devāvṛdha, whose son was Babhru. Another son of Sātvata was Mahābhoja, by whom the Bhoja dynasty was inaugurated. Another was Vṛṣṇi, who had a son named Yudhājit. From Yudhājit came Anamitra and Śini, and from Anamitra came Nighna and another Śini. The descendants in succession from Śini were Satyaka, Yuyudhāna, Jaya, Kuṇi and Yugandhara. Another son of Anamitra was Vṛṣṇi. From Vṛṣṇi came Śvaphalka, by whom Akrūra and twelve other sons were generated. From Akrūra came two sons, named Devavān and Upadeva. The son of Andhaka named Kukura was the origin of the descendants known as Vahni, Vilomā, Kapotaromā, Anu, Andhaka, Dundubhi, Avidyota, Punarvasu and Āhuka. Āhuka had two sons, named Devaka and Ugrasena. The four sons of Devaka were known as Devavān, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devavardhana, and his seven daughters were Dhṛtadevā, Śāntidevā, Upadevā, Śrīdevā, Devarakṣitā, Sahadevā and Devakī. Vasudeva married all seven daughters of Devaka. Ugrasena had nine sons named Kaṁsa, Sunāmā, Nyagrodha, Kaṅka, Śaṅku, Suhū, Rāṣṭrapāla, Dhṛṣṭi and Tuṣṭimān, and he had five daughters named Kaṁsā, Kaṁsavatī, Kaṅkā, Śūrabhū and Rāṣṭrapālikā. The younger brothers of Vasudeva married all the daughters of Ugrasena.





Vidūratha, the son of Citraratha, had a son named Śūra, who had ten other sons, of whom Vasudeva was the chief. Śūra gave one of his five daughters, Pṛthā, to his friend Kunti, and therefore she was also named Kuntī. In her maiden state she gave birth to a child named Karṇa, and later she married Mahārāja Pāṇḍu.





Vṛddhaśarmā married the daughter of Śūra named Śrutadevā, from whose womb Dantavakra was born. Dhṛṣṭaketu married Śūra's daughter named Śrutakīrti, who had five sons. Jayasena married Śūra's daughter named Rājādhidevī. The king of Cedi-deśa, Damaghoṣa, married the daughter of Śūra named Śrutaśravā, from whom Śiśupāla was born.





Devabhāga, through the womb of Kaṁsā, begot Citraketu and Bṛhadbala; and Devaśravā, through the womb of Kaṁsavatī, begot Suvīra and Iṣumān. From Kaṅka, through the womb of Kaṅkā, came Baka, Satyajit and Purujit, and from Sṛñjaya, through the womb of Rāṣṭrapālikā, came Vṛṣa and Durmarṣaṇa. Śyāmaka, through the womb of Śūrabhūmi, begot Harikeśa and Hiraṇyākṣa. Vatsaka, through the womb of Miśrakeśī, begot Vṛka, who begot the sons named Takṣa, Puṣkara and Śāla. From Samīka came Sumitra and Arjunapāla, and from Ānaka came Ṛtadhāmā and Jaya.





Vasudeva had many wives, of whom Devakī and Rohiṇī were the most important. From the womb of Rohiṇī, Baladeva was born, along with Gada, Sāraṇa, Durmada, Vipula, Dhruva, Kṛta and others. Vasudeva had many other sons by his other wives, and the eighth son to appear from the womb of Devakī was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who delivered the entire world from the burden of demons. This chapter ends by glorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead Vāsudeva.





TEXT 1



śrī-śuka uvāca

tasyāṁ vidarbho 'janayat

putrau nāmnā kuśa-krathau

tṛtīyaṁ romapādaṁ ca

vidarbha-kula-nandanam

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasyām-in that girl; vidarbhaḥ-the son born of Śaibyā named Vidarbha; ajanayat-gave birth; putrau-to two sons; nāmnā-by the name; kuśa-krathau-Kuśa and Kratha; tṛtīyam-and a third son; romapādam ca-Romapāda also; vidarbha-kula-nandanam-the favorite in the dynasty of Vidarbha.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: By the womb of the girl brought by his father, Vidarbha begot three sons, named Kuśa, Kratha and Romapāda. Romapāda was the favorite in the dynasty of Vidarbha.





TEXT 2



romapāda-suto babhrur

babhroḥ kṛtir ajāyata

uśikas tat-sutas tasmāc

cediś caidyādayo nṛpāḥ

SYNONYMS



romapāda-sutaḥ-the son of Romapāda; babhruḥ-Babhru; babhroḥ-from Babhru; kṛtiḥ-Kṛti; ajāyata-was born; uśikaḥ-Uśika; tat-sutaḥ-the son of Kṛti; tasmāt-from him (Uśika); cediḥ-Cedi; caidya-Caidya (Damaghoṣa); ādayaḥ-and others; nṛpāḥ-kings.





The son of Romapāda was Babhru, from whom there came a son named Kṛti. The son of Kṛti was Uśika, and the son of Uśika was Cedi. From Cedi was born the king known as Caidya and others.





TEXTS 3–4



krathasya kuntiḥ putro 'bhūd

vṛṣṇis tasyātha nirvṛtiḥ

tato daśārho nāmnābhūt

tasya vyomaḥ sutas tataḥ

jīmūto vikṛtis tasya



yasya bhīmarathaḥ sutaḥ

tato navarathaḥ putro

jāto daśarathas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



krathasya-of Kratha; kuntiḥ-Kunti; putraḥ-a son; abhūt-was born; vṛṣṇiḥ-Vṛṣṇi; tasya-his; atha-then; nirvṛtiḥ-Nirvṛti; tataḥ-from him; daśārhaḥ-Daśārha; nāmnā-by name; abhūt-was born; tasya-of him; vyomaḥ-Vyoma; sutaḥ-a son; tataḥ-from him; jīmūtaḥ-Jīmūta; vikṛtiḥ-Vikṛti; tasya-his (Jīmūta's son); yasya-of whom (Vikṛti); bhīmarathaḥ-Bhīmaratha; sutaḥ-a son; tataḥ-from him (Bhīmaratha); navarathaḥ-Navaratha; putraḥ-a son; jātaḥ-was born; daśarathaḥ-Daśaratha; tataḥ-from him.





The son of Kratha was Kunti; the son of Kunti, Vṛṣṇi; the son of Vṛṣṇi, Nirvṛti; and the son of Nirvṛti, Daśārha. From Daśārha came Vyoma; from Vyoma came Jīmūta; from Jīmūta, Vikṛti; from Vikṛti, Bhīmaratha; from Bhīmaratha, Navaratha; and from Navaratha, Daśaratha.





TEXT 5



karambhiḥ śakuneḥ putro

devarātas tad-ātmajaḥ

devakṣatras tatas tasya

madhuḥ kuruvaśād anuḥ

SYNONYMS



karambhiḥ-Karambhi; śakuneḥ-from Śakuni; putraḥ-a son; devarātaḥ-Devarāta; tat-ātmajaḥ-the son of him (Karambhi); devakṣatraḥ-Devakṣatra; tataḥ-thereafter; tasya-from him (Devakṣatra); madhuḥ-Madhu; kuruvaśāt-from Kuruvaśa, the son of Madhu; anuḥ-Anu.





From Daśaratha came a son named Śakuni and from Śakuni a son named Karambhi. The son of Karambhi was Devarāta, and his son was Devakṣatra. The son of Devakṣatra was Madhu, and his son was Kuruvaśa, from whom there came a son named Anu.





TEXTS 6–8



puruhotras tv anoḥ putras

tasyāyuḥ sātvatas tataḥ

bhajamāno bhajir divyo

vṛṣṇir devāvṛdho 'ndhakaḥ

sātvatasya sutāḥ sapta



mahābhojaś ca māriṣa

bhajamānasya nimlociḥ

kiṅkaṇo dhṛṣṭir eva ca

ekasyām ātmajāḥ patnyām



anyasyāṁ ca trayaḥ sutāḥ

śatājic ca sahasrājid

ayutājid iti prabho

SYNONYMS



puruhotraḥ-Puruhotra; tu-indeed; anoḥ-of Anu; putraḥ-the son; tasya-of him (Puruhotra); ayuḥ-Ayu; sātvataḥ-Sātvata; tataḥ-from him (Ayu); bhajamānaḥ-Bhajamāna; bhajiḥ-Bhaji; divyaḥ-Divya; vṛṣṇiḥ-Vṛṣṇi; devāvṛdhaḥ-Devāvṛdha; andhakaḥ-Andhaka; sātvatasya-of Sātvata; sutāḥ-son s; sapta-seven; mahābhojaḥ ca-as well as Mahābhoja; māriṣa-O great King; bhajamānasya-of Bhajamāna; nimlociḥ-Nimloci; kiṅkaṇaḥ-Kiṅkaṇa; dhṛṣṭiḥ-Dhṛṣṭi; eva-indeed; ca-also; ekasyām-born from one wife; ātmajāḥ-sons; patnyām-by a wife; anyasyām-another; ca-also; trayaḥ-three; sutāḥ-sons; śatājit-Śatājit; ca-also; sahasrājit-Sahasrājit; ayutājit-Ayutājit; iti-thus; prabho-O King.





The son of Anu was Puruhotra, the son of Puruhotra was Ayu, and the son of Ayu was Sātvata. O great Āryan King, Sātvata had seven sons, named Bhajamāna, Bhaji, Divya, Vṛṣṇi, Devāvṛdha, Andhaka and Mahābhoja. From Bhajamāna by one wife came three sons-Nimloci, Kiṅkaṇa and Dhṛṣṭi. And from his other wife came three other sons-Śatājit, Sahasrājit and Ayutājit.





TEXT 9



babhrur devāvṛdha-sutas

tayoḥ ślokau paṭhanty amū

yathaiva śṛṇumo dūrāt

sampaśyāmas tathāntikāt

SYNONYMS



babhruḥ-Babhru; devāvṛdha-of Devāvṛdha; sutaḥ-the son; tayoḥ-of them; ślokau-two verses; paṭhanti-all the members of the old generation recite; amū-those; yathā-as; eva-indeed; śṛṇumaḥ-we have heard; dūrāt-from a distance; sampaśyāmaḥ-are actually seeing; tathā-similarly; antikāt-presently also.





The son of Devāvṛdha was Babhru. Concerning Devāvṛdha and Babhru there are two famous songs of prayer, which were sung by our predecessors and which we have heard from a distance. Even now I hear the same prayers about their qualities [because that which was heard before is still sung continuously].





TEXTS 10–11



babhruḥ śreṣṭho manuṣyāṇāṁ

devair devāvṛdhaḥ samaḥ

puruṣāḥ pañca-ṣaṣṭiś ca

ṣaṭ-sahasrāṇi cāṣṭa ca

ye 'mṛtatvam anuprāptā



babhror devāvṛdhād api

mahābhojo 'tidharmātmā

bhojā āsaṁs tad-anvaye

SYNONYMS



babhruḥ-King Babhru; śreṣṭhaḥ-the best of all kings; manuṣyāṇām-of all human beings; devaiḥ-with the demigods; devāvṛdhaḥ-King Devāvṛdha; samaḥ-equally situated; puruṣāḥ-persons; pañca-ṣaṣṭiḥ-sixty-five; ca-also; ṣaṭ-sahasrāṇi-six thousand; ca-also; aṣṭa-eight thousand; ca-also; ye-all of them who; amṛtatvam-liberation from material bondage; anuprāptāḥ-achieved; babhroḥ-because of association with Babhru; devāvṛdhāt-and because of association with Devāvṛdha; api-indeed; mahābhojaḥ-King Mahābhoja; ati-dharma-ātmā-exceedingly religious; bhojāḥ-the kings known as Bhoja; āsan-existed; tat-anvaye-in the dynasty of him (Mahābhoja).





"It has been decided that among human beings Babhru is the best and that Devāvṛdha is equal to the demigods. Because of the association of Babhru and Devāvṛdha, all of their descendants, numbering 14,065, achieved liberation." In the dynasty of King Mahābhoja, who was exceedingly religious, there appeared the Bhoja kings.





TEXT 12



vṛṣṇeḥ sumitraḥ putro 'bhūd

yudhājic ca parantapa

śinis tasyānamitraś ca

nighno 'bhūd anamitrataḥ

SYNONYMS



vṛṣṇeḥ-of Vṛṣṇi, the son of Sātvata; sumitraḥ-Sumitra; putraḥ-a son; abhūt-appeared; yudhājit-Yudhājit; ca-also; param-tapa-O king who can suppress enemies; śiniḥ-Śini; tasya-his; anamitraḥ-Anamitra; ca-and; nighnaḥ-Nighna; abhūt-appeared; anamitrataḥ-from Anamitra.





O King, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who can suppress your enemies, the sons of Vṛṣṇi were Sumitra and Yudhājit. From Yudhājit came Śini and Anamitra, and from Anamitra came a son named Nighna.





TEXT 13



satrājitaḥ prasenaś ca

nighnasyāthāsatuḥ sutau

anamitra-suto yo 'nyaḥ

śinis tasya ca satyakaḥ

SYNONYMS



satrājitaḥ-Satrājita; prasenaḥ ca-Prasena also; nighnasya-the sons of Nighna; atha-thus; asatuḥ-existed; sutau-two sons; anamitra-sutaḥ-the son of Anamitra; yaḥ-one who; anyaḥ-another; śiniḥ-Śini; tasya-his; ca-also; satyakaḥ-the son named Satyaka.





The two sons of Nighna were Satrājita and Prasena. Another son of Anamitra was another Śini, and his son was Satyaka.





TEXT 14



yuyudhānaḥ sātyakir vai

jayas tasya kuṇis tataḥ

yugandharo 'namitrasya

vṛṣṇiḥ putro 'paras tataḥ

SYNONYMS



yuyudhānaḥ-Yuyudhāna; sātyakiḥ-the son of Satyaka; vai-indeed; jayaḥ-Jaya; tasya-of him (Yuyudhāna); kuṇiḥ-Kuṇi; tataḥ-from him (Jaya); yugandharaḥ-Yugandhara; anamitrasya-a son of Anamitra; vṛṣṇiḥ-Vṛṣṇi; putraḥ-a son; aparaḥ-other; tataḥ-from him.





The son of Satyaka was Yuyudhāna, whose son was Jaya. From Jaya came a son named Kuṇi and from Kuṇi a son named Yugandhara. Another son of Anamitra was Vṛṣṇi.





TEXT 15



śvaphalkaś citrarathaś ca

gāndinyāṁ ca śvaphalkataḥ

akrūra-pramukhā āsan

putrā dvādaśa viśrutāḥ

SYNONYMS



śvaphalkaḥ-Śvaphalka; citrarathaḥ ca-and Citraratha; gāndinyām-through the wife named Gāndinī; ca-and; śvaphalkataḥ-from Śvaphalka; akrūra-Akrūra; pramukhāḥ-headed by; āsan-there were; putrāḥ-sons; dvādaśa-twelve; viśrutāḥ-most celebrated.





From Vṛṣṇi came the sons named Śvaphalka and Citraratha. From Śvaphalka by his wife Gāndinī came Akrūra. Akrūra was the eldest, but there were twelve other sons, all of whom were most celebrated.





TEXTS 16–18



āsaṅgaḥ sārameyaś ca

mṛduro mṛduvid giriḥ

dharmavṛddhaḥ sukarmā ca

kṣetropekṣo 'rimardanaḥ

śatrughno gandhamādaś ca



pratibāhuś ca dvādaśa

teṣāṁ svasā sucārākhyā

dvāv akrūra-sutāv api

devavān upadevaś ca



tathā citrarathātmajāḥ

pṛthur vidūrathādyāś ca

bahavo vṛṣṇi-nandanāḥ

SYNONYMS



āsaṅgaḥ-Āsaṅga; sārameyaḥ-Sārameya; ca-also; mṛduraḥ-Mṛdura; mṛduvit-Mṛduvit; giriḥ-Giri; dharmavṛddhaḥ-Dharmavṛddha; sukarmā-Sukarmā; ca-also; kṣetropekṣaḥ-Kṣetropekṣa; arimardanaḥ-Arimardana; śatrughnaḥ-Śatrughna; gandhamādaḥ-Gandhamāda; ca-and; pratibāhuḥ-Pratibāhu; ca-and; dvādaśa-twelve; teṣām-of them; svasā-sister; sucārā-Sucārā; ākhyā-well known; dvau-two; akrūra-of Akrūra; sutau-sons; api-also; devavān-Devavān; upadevaḥ ca-and Upadeva; tathā-thereafter; citraratha-ātmajāḥ-the sons of Citraratha; pṛthuḥ vidūratha-Pṛthu and Vidūratha; ādyāḥ-beginning with; ca-also; bahavaḥ-many; vṛṣṇi-nandanāḥ-the sons of Vṛṣṇi.





The names of these twelve were Āsaṅga, Sārameya, Mṛdura, Mṛduvit, Giri, Dharmavṛddha, Sukarmā, Kṣetropekṣa, Arimardana, Śatrughna, Gandhamāda and Pratibāhu. These brothers also had a sister named Sucārā. From Akrūra came two sons, named Devavān and Upadeva. Citraratha had many sons, headed by Pṛthu and Vidūratha, all of whom were known as belonging to the dynasty of Vṛṣṇi.





TEXT 19



kukuro bhajamānaś ca

śuciḥ kambalabarhiṣaḥ

kukurasya suto vahnir

vilomā tanayas tataḥ

SYNONYMS



kukuraḥ-Kukura; bhajamānaḥ-Bhajamāna; ca-also; śuciḥ-Śuci; kambalabarhiṣaḥ-Kambalabarhiṣa; kukurasya-of Kukura; sutaḥ-a son; vahniḥ-Vahni; vilomā-Vilomā; tanayaḥ-son; tataḥ-from him (Vahni).





Kukura, Bhajamāna, Śuci and Kambalabarhiṣa were the four sons of Andhaka. The son of Kukura was Vahni, and his son was Vilomā.





TEXT 20



kapotaromā tasyānuḥ

sakhā yasya ca tumburuḥ

andhakād dundubhis tasmād

avidyotaḥ punarvasuḥ

SYNONYMS



kapotaromā-Kapotaromā; tasya-his (son); anuḥ-Anu; sakhā-friend; yasya-whose; ca-also; tumburuḥ-Tumburu; andhakāt-of Andhaka, the son of Anu; dundubhiḥ-a son named Dundubhi; tasmāt-from him (Dundubhi); avidyotaḥ-a son named Avidyota; punarvasuḥ-a son named Punarvasu.





The son of Vilomā was Kapotaromā, and his son was Anu, whose friend was Tumburu. From Anu came Andhaka; from Andhaka, Dundubhi; and from Dundubhi, Avidyota. From Avidyota came a son named Punarvasu.





TEXTS 21–23



tasyāhukaś cāhukī ca

kanyā caivāhukātmajau

devakaś cograsenaś ca

catvāro devakātmajāḥ

devavān upadevaś ca



sudevo devavardhanaḥ

teṣāṁ svasāraḥ saptāsan

dhṛtadevādayo nṛpa

śāntidevopadevā ca



śrīdevā devarakṣitā

sahadevā devakī ca

vasudeva uvāha tāḥ

SYNONYMS



tasya-from him (Punarvasu); āhukaḥ-Āhuka; ca-and; āhukī-Āhukī; ca-also; kanyā-a daughter; ca-also; eva-indeed; āhuka-of Āhuka; ātmajau-two sons; devakaḥ-Devaka; ca-and; ugrasenaḥ-Ugrasena; ca-also; catvāraḥ-four; devaka-ātmajāḥ-sons of Devaka; devavān-Devavān; upadevaḥ-Upadeva; ca-and; sudevaḥ-Sudeva; devavardhanaḥ-Devavardhana; teṣām-of all of them; svasāraḥ-sisters; sapta-seven; āsan-existed; dhṛtadevā-ādayaḥ-headed by Dhṛtadevā; nṛpa-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); śāntidevā-Śāntidevā; upadevā-Upadevā; ca-also; śrīdevā-Śrīdevā; devarakṣitā-Devarakṣitā; sahadevā-Sahadevā; devakī-Devakī; ca-and; vasudevaḥ-Śrī Vasudeva, the father of Kṛṣṇa; uvāha-married; tāḥ-them.





Punarvasu had a son and a daughter, named Āhuka and Āhukī respectively, and Āhuka had two sons, named Devaka and Ugrasena. Devaka had four sons, named Devavān, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devavardhana, and he also had seven daughters, named Śāntidevā, Upadevā, Śrīdevā, Devarakṣitā, Sahadevā, Devakī and Dhṛtadevā. Dhṛtadevā was the eldest. Vasudeva, the father of Kṛṣṇa, married all these sisters.





TEXT 24



kaṁsaḥ sunāmā nyagrodhaḥ

kaṅkaḥ śaṅkuḥ suhūs tathā

rāṣṭrapālo 'tha dhṛṣṭiś ca

tuṣṭimān augrasenayaḥ

SYNONYMS



kaṁsaḥ-Kaṁsa; sunāmā-Sunāmā; nyagrodhaḥ-Nyagrodha; kaṅkaḥ-Kaṅka; śaṅkuḥ-Śaṅku; suhūḥ-Suhū; tathā-as well as; rāṣṭrapālaḥ-Rāṣṭrapāla; atha-thereafter; dhṛṣṭiḥ-Dhṛṣṭi; ca-also; tuṣṭimān-Tuṣṭimān; augrasenayaḥ-the sons of Ugrasena.





Kaṁsa, Sunāmā, Nyagrodha, Kaṅka, Śaṅku, Suhū, Rāṣṭrapāla, Dhṛṣṭi and Tuṣṭimān were the sons of Ugrasena.





TEXT 25



kaṁsā kaṁsavatī kaṅkā

śūrabhū rāṣṭrapālikā

ugrasena-duhitaro

vasudevānuja-striyaḥ

SYNONYMS



kaṁsā-Kaṁsā; kaṁsavatī-Kaṁsavatī; kaṅkā-Kaṅkā; śūrabhū-Śūrabhū; rāṣṭrapālikā-Rāṣṭrapālikā; ugrasena-duhitaraḥ-the daughters of Ugrasena; vasudeva-anuja-of the younger brothers of Vasudeva; striyaḥ-the wives.





Kaṁsā, Kaṁsavatī, Kaṅkā, Śūrabhū and Rāṣṭrapālikā were the daughters of Ugrasena. They became the wives of Vasudeva's younger brothers.





TEXT 26



śūro vidūrathād āsīd

bhajamānas tu tat-sutaḥ

śinis tasmāt svayaṁ bhojo

hṛdikas tat-suto mataḥ

SYNONYMS



śūraḥ-Śūra; vidūrathāt-from Vidūratha, the son of Citraratha; āsīt-was born; bhajamānaḥ-Bhajamāna; tu-and; tat-sutaḥ-the son of him (Śūra); śiniḥ-Śini; tasmāt-from him; svayam-personally; bhojaḥ-the famous King Bhoja; hṛdikaḥ-Hṛdika; tat-sutaḥ-the son of him (Bhoja); mataḥ-is celebrated.





The son of Citraratha was Vidūratha, the son of Vidūratha was Śūra, and his son was Bhajamāna. The son of Bhajamāna was Śini, the son of Śini was Bhoja, and the son of Bhoja was Hṛdika.





TEXT 27



devamīḍhaḥ śatadhanuḥ

kṛtavarmeti tat-sutāḥ

devamīḍhasya śūrasya

māriṣā nāma patny abhūt

SYNONYMS



devamīḍhaḥ-Devamīḍha; śatadhanuḥ-Śatadhanu; kṛtavarmā-Kṛtavarmā; iti-thus; tat-sutāḥ-the sons of him (Hṛdika); devamīḍhasya-of Devamīḍha; śūrasya-of Śūra; māriṣā-Māriṣā; nāma-named; patnī-wife; abhūt-there was.





The three sons of Hṛdika were Devamīḍha, Śatadhanu and Kṛtavarmā. The son of Devamīḍha was Śūra, whose wife was named Māriṣā.





TEXTS 28–31



tasyāṁ sa janayām āsa

daśa putrān akalmaṣān

vasudevaṁ devabhāgaṁ

devaśravasam ānakam

sṛñjayaṁ śyāmakaṁ kaṅkaṁ



śamīkaṁ vatsakaṁ vṛkam

deva-dundubhayo nedur

ānakā yasya janmani

vasudevaṁ hareḥ sthānaṁ



vadanty ānakadundubhim

pṛthā ca śrutadevā ca

śrutakīrtiḥ śrutaśravāḥ

rājādhidevī caiteṣāṁ



bhaginyaḥ pañca kanyakāḥ

kunteḥ sakhyuḥ pitā śūro

hy aputrasya pṛthām adāt

SYNONYMS



tasyām-in her (Māriṣā); saḥ-he (Śūra); janayām āsa-begot; daśa-ten; putrān-sons; akalmaṣān-spotless; vasudevam-Vasudeva; devabhāgam-Devabhāga; devaśravasam-Devaśravā; ānakam-Ānaka; sṛñjayam-Sṛñjaya; śyāmakam-Śyāmaka; kaṅkam-Kaṅkā; śamīkam-Śamīka; vatsakam-Vatsaka; vṛkam-Vṛka; deva-dundubhayaḥ-kettledrums sounded by the demigods; neduḥ-were beaten; ānakāḥ-a kind of kettledrum; yasya-whose; janmani-at the time of birth; vasudevam-unto Vasudeva; hareḥ-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sthānam-that place; vadanti-they call; ānakadundubhim-Ānakadundubhi; pṛthā-Pṛthā; ca-and; śrutadevā-Śrutadevā; ca-also; śrutakīrtiḥ-Śrutakīrti; śrutaśravāḥ-Śrutaśravā; rājādhidevī-Rājādhidevī; ca-also; eteṣām-of all these; bhaginyaḥ-sisters; pañca-five; kanyakāḥ-daughters (of Śūra); kunteḥ-of Kunti; sakhyuḥ-a friend; pitā-father; śūraḥ-Śūra; hi-indeed; aputrasya-(of Kunti) who was sonless; pṛthām-Pṛthā; adāt-delivered.





Through Māriṣā, King Śūra begot Vasudeva, Devabhāga, Devaśravā, Ānaka, Sṛñjaya, Śyāmaka, Kaṅka, Śamīka, Vatsaka and Vṛka. These ten sons were spotlessly pious personalities. When Vasudeva was born, the demigods from the heavenly kingdom sounded kettledrums. Therefore Vasudeva, who provided the proper place for the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, was also known as Ānakadundubhi. The five daughters of King Śūra, named Pṛthā, Śrutadevā, Śrutakīrti, Śrutaśravā and Rājādhidevī, were Vasudeva's sisters. Śūra gave Pṛthā to his friend Kunti, who had no issue, and therefore another name of Pṛthā was Kuntī.





TEXT 32



sāpa durvāsaso vidyāṁ

deva-hūtīṁ pratoṣitāt

tasyā vīrya-parīkṣārtham

ājuhāva raviṁ śuciḥ

SYNONYMS



sā-she (Kuntī, or Pṛthā); āpa-achieved; durvāsasaḥ-from the great sage Durvāsā; vidyām-mystic power; deva-hūtīm-calling any demigod; pratoṣitāt-who was satisfied; tasyāḥ-with that (particular mystic power); vīrya-potency; parīkṣa-artham-just to examine; ājuhāva-called for; ravim-the sun-god; śuciḥ-the pious (Pṛthā).





Once when Durvāsā was a guest at the house of Pṛthā's father, Kunti, Pṛthā satisfied Durvāsā by rendering service. Therefore she received a mystic power by which she could call any demigod. To examine the potency of this mystic power, the pious Kuntī immediately called for the sun-god.





TEXT 33



tadaivopāgataṁ devaṁ

vīkṣya vismita-mānasā

pratyayārthaṁ prayuktā me

yāhi deva kṣamasva me

SYNONYMS



tadā-at that time; eva-indeed; upāgatam-appeared (before her); devam-the sun-god; vīkṣya-seeing; vismita-mānasā-very much surprised; pratyaya-artham-just to see the potency of the mystic power; prayuktā-I have used it; me-me; yāhi-please return; deva-O demigod; kṣamasva-forgive; me-me.





As soon as Kuntī called for the demigod of the sun, he immediately appeared before her, and she was very much surprised. She told the sun-god, "I was simply examining the effectiveness of this mystic power. I am sorry I have called you unnecessarily. Please return and excuse me."





TEXT 34



amoghaṁ deva-sandarśam

ādadhe tvayi cātmajam

yonir yathā na duṣyeta

kartāhaṁ te sumadhyame

SYNONYMS



amogham-without failure; deva-sandarśam-meeting with the demigods; ādadhe-I shall give (my semen); tvayi-unto you; ca-also; ātmajam-a son; yoniḥ-the source of birth; yathā-as; na-not; duṣyeta-becomes polluted; kartā-shall arrange; aham-I; te-unto you; sumadhyame-O beautiful girl.





The sun-god said: O beautiful Pṛthā, your meeting with the demigods cannot be fruitless. Therefore, let me place my seed in your womb so that you may bear a son. I shall arrange to keep your virginity intact, since you are still an unmarried girl.





According to Vedic civilization, if a girl gives birth to a child before she is married, no one will marry her. Therefore although the sun-god, after appearing before Pṛthā, wanted to give her a child, Pṛthā hesitated because she was still unmarried. To keep her virginity undisturbed, the sun-god arranged to give her a child that came from her ear, and therefore the child was known as Karṇa. The custom is that a girl should be married akṣata-yoni, that is, with her virginity undisturbed. A girl should never bear a child before her marriage.





TEXT 35



iti tasyāṁ sa ādhāya

garbhaṁ sūryo divaṁ gataḥ

sadyaḥ kumāraḥ sañjajñe

dvitīya iva bhāskaraḥ

SYNONYMS



iti-in this way; tasyām-unto her (Pṛthā); saḥ-he (the sun-god); ādhāya-discharging semen; garbham-pregnancy; sūryaḥ-the sun-god; divam-in the celestial planets; gataḥ-returned; sadyaḥ-immediately; kumāraḥ-a child; sañjajñe-was born; dvitīyaḥ-second; iva-like; bhāskaraḥ-the sun-god.





After saying this, the sun-god discharged his semen into the womb of Pṛthā and then returned to the celestial kingdom. Immediately thereafter, from Kuntī a child was born, who was like a second sun-god.





TEXT 36



taṁ sātyajan nadī-toye

kṛcchrāl lokasya bibhyatī

prapitāmahas tām uvāha

pāṇḍur vai satya-vikramaḥ

SYNONYMS



tam-that child; sā-she (Kuntī); atyajat-gave up; nadī-toye-in the water of the river; kṛcchrāt-with great repentance; lokasya-of the people in general; bibhyatī-fearing; prapitāmahaḥ-(your) great-grandfather; tām-her (Kuntī); uvāha-married; pāṇḍuḥ-the king known as Pāṇḍu; vai-indeed; satya-vikramaḥ-very pious and chivalrous.





Because Kuntī feared people's criticisms, with great difficulty she had to give up her affection for her child. Unwillingly, she packed the child in a basket and let it float down the waters of the river. O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, your great-grandfather the pious and chivalrous King Pāṇḍu later married Kuntī.





TEXT 37



śrutadevāṁ tu kārūṣo

vṛddhaśarmā samagrahīt

yasyām abhūd dantavakra

ṛṣi-śapto diteḥ sutaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrutadevām-unto Śrutadevā, a sister of Kuntī's; tu-but; kārūṣaḥ-the King of Karūṣa; vṛddhaśarmā-Vṛddhaśarmā; samagrahīt-married; yasyām-through whom; abhūt-was born; dantavakraḥ-Dantavakra; ṛṣi-śaptaḥ-was formerly cursed by the sages Sanaka and Sanātana; diteḥ-of Diti; sutaḥ-son.





Vṛddhaśarmā, the King of Karūṣa, married Kuntī's sister Śrutadevā, and from her womb Dantavakra was born. Having been cursed by the sages headed by Sanaka, Dantavakra had formerly been born as the son of Diti named Hiraṇyākṣa.





TEXT 38



kaikeyo dhṛṣṭaketuś ca

śrutakīrtim avindata

santardanādayas tasyāṁ

pañcāsan kaikayāḥ sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



kaikeyaḥ-the King of Kekaya; dhṛṣṭaketuḥ-Dhṛṣṭaketu; ca-also; śrutakīrtim-a sister of Kuntī's named Śrutakīrti; avindata-married; santardana-ādayaḥ-headed by Santardana; tasyām-through her (Śrutakīrti); pañca-five; āsan-there were; kaikayāḥ-the sons of the King of Kekaya; sutāḥ-sons.





King Dhṛṣṭaketu, the King of Kekaya, married Śrutakīrti, another sister of Kuntī's. Śrutakīrti had five sons, headed by Santardana.





TEXT 39



rājādhidevyām āvantyau

jayaseno 'janiṣṭa ha

damaghoṣaś cedi-rājaḥ

śrutaśravasam agrahīt

SYNONYMS



rājādhidevyām-through Rājādhidevī, another sister of Kuntī's; āvantyau-the sons (named Vinda and Anuvinda); jayasenaḥ-King Jayasena; ajaniṣṭa-gave birth to; ha-in the past; damaghoṣaḥ-Damaghoṣa; cedi-rājaḥ-the king of the state of Cedi; śrutaśravasam-Śrutaśravā, another sister; agrahīt-married.





Through the womb of Rājādhidevī, another sister of Kuntī's, Jayasena begot two sons, named Vinda and Anuvinda. Similarly, the king of the Cedi state married Śrutaśravā. This king's name was Damaghoṣa.





TEXT 40



śiśupālaḥ sutas tasyāḥ

kathitas tasya sambhavaḥ

devabhāgasya kaṁsāyāṁ

citraketu-bṛhadbalau

SYNONYMS



śiśupālaḥ-Śiśupāla; sutaḥ-the son; tasyāḥ-of her (Śrutaśravā); kathitaḥ-already described (in the Seventh Canto); tasya-his; sambhavaḥ-birth; devabhāgasya-from Devabhāga, a brother of Vasudeva's; kaṁsāyām-in the womb of Kaṁsā, his wife; citraketu-Citraketu; bṛhadbalau-and Bṛhadbala.





The son of Śrutaśravā was Śiśupāla, whose birth has already been described [in the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam]. Vasudeva's brother named Devabhāga had two sons born of his wife, Kaṁsā. These two sons were Citraketu and Bṛhadbala.





TEXT 41



kaṁsavatyāṁ devaśravasaḥ

suvīra iṣumāṁs tathā

bakaḥ kaṅkāt tu kaṅkāyāṁ

satyajit purujit tathā

SYNONYMS



kaṁsavatyām-in the womb of Kaṁsavatī; devaśravasaḥ-from Devaśravā, a brother of Vasudeva's; suvīraḥ-Suvīra; iṣumān-Iṣumān; tathā-as well as; bakaḥ-Baka; kaṅkāt-from Kaṅka; tu-indeed; kaṅkāyām-in his wife, named Kaṅkā; satyajit-Satyajit; purujit-Purujit; tathā-as well as.





Vasudeva's brother named Devaśravā married Kaṁsavatī, by whom he begot two sons, named Suvīra and Iṣumān. Kaṅka, by his wife Kaṅkā, begot three sons, named Baka, Satyajit and Purujit.





TEXT 42



sṛñjayo rāṣṭrapālyāṁ ca

vṛṣa-durmarṣaṇādikān

harikeśa-hiraṇyākṣau

śūrabhūmyāṁ ca śyāmakaḥ

SYNONYMS



sṛñjayaḥ-Sṛñjaya; rāṣṭrapālyām-through his wife, Rāṣṭrapālikā; ca-and; vṛṣa-durmarṣaṇa-ādikān-begot sons headed by Vṛṣa and Durmarṣaṇa; harikeśa-Harikeśa; hiraṇyākṣau-and Hiraṇyākṣa; śūrabhūmyām-in the womb of Śūrabhūmi; ca-and; śyāmakaḥ-King Śyāmaka.





King Sṛñjaya, by his wife, Rāṣṭrapālikā, begot sons headed by Vṛṣa and Durmarṣaṇa. King Śyāmaka, by his wife, Śūrabhūmi, begot two sons, named Harikeśa and Hiraṇyākṣa.





TEXT 43



miśrakeśyām apsarasi

vṛkādīn vatsakas tathā

takṣa-puṣkara-śālādīn

durvākṣyāṁ vṛka ādadhe

SYNONYMS



miśrakeśyām-in the womb of Miśrakeśī; apsarasi-who belonged to the Apsarā group; vṛka-ādīn-Vṛka and other sons; vatsakaḥ-Vatsaka; tathā-as well; takṣa-puṣkara-śāla-ādīn-sons headed by Takṣa, Puṣkara and Śāla; durvākṣyām-in the womb of his wife, Durvākṣī; vṛkaḥ-Vṛka; ādadhe-begot.





Thereafter, King Vatsaka, by the womb of his wife, Miśrakeśī, who was an Apsarā, begot sons headed by Vṛka. Vṛka, by his wife, Durvākṣī, begot Takṣa, Puṣkara, Śāla and so on.





TEXT 44



sumitrārjunapālādīn

samīkāt tu sudāmanī

ānakaḥ karṇikāyāṁ vai

ṛtadhāmā-jayāv api

SYNONYMS



sumitra-Sumitra; arjunapāla-Arjunapāla; ādīn-headed by; samīkāt-from King Śamīka; tu-indeed; sudāmanī-in the womb of Sudāmanī, his wife; ānakaḥ-King Ānaka; karṇikāyām-in the womb of his wife Karṇikā; vai-indeed; ṛtadhāmā-Ṛtadhāmā; jayau-and Jaya; api-indeed.





From Śamīka, by the womb of his wife, Sudāmanī, came Sumitra, Arjunapāla and other sons. King Ānaka, by his wife, Karṇikā, begot two sons, namely Ṛtadhāmā and Jaya.





TEXT 45



pauravī rohiṇī bhadrā

madirā rocanā ilā

devakī-pramukhāś cāsan

patnya ānakadundubheḥ

SYNONYMS



pauravī-Pauravī; rohiṇī-Rohiṇī; bhadrā-Bhadrā; madirā-Madirā; rocanā-Rocanā; ilā-Ilā; devakī-Devakī; pramukhāḥ-headed by; ca-and; āsan-existed; patnyaḥ-wives; ānakadundubheḥ-of Vasudeva, who was known as Ānakadundubhi.





Devakī, Pauravī, Rohiṇī, Bhadrā, Madirā, Rocanā, Ilā and others were all wives of Ānakadundubhi [Vasudeva]. Among them all, Devakī was the chief.





TEXT 46



balaṁ gadaṁ sāraṇaṁ ca

durmadaṁ vipulaṁ dhruvam

vasudevas tu rohiṇyāṁ

kṛtādīn udapādayat

SYNONYMS



balam-Bala; gadam-Gada; sāraṇam-Sāraṇa; ca-also; durmadam-Durmada; vipulam-Vipula; dhruvam-Dhruva; vasudevaḥ-Vasudeva (the father of Kṛṣṇa); tu-indeed; rohiṇyām-in the wife named Rohiṇī; kṛta-ādīn-the sons headed by Kṛta; udapādayat-begot.





Vasudeva, by the womb of his wife Rohiṇī, begot sons such as Bala, Gada, Sāraṇa, Durmada, Vipula, Dhruva, Kṛta and others.





TEXTS 47–48



subhadro bhadrabāhuś ca

durmado bhadra eva ca

pauravyās tanayā hy ete

bhūtādyā dvādaśābhavan

nandopananda-kṛtaka-



śūrādyā madirātmajāḥ

kauśalyā keśinaṁ tv ekam

asūta kula-nandanam

SYNONYMS



subhadraḥ-Subhadra; bhadrabāhuḥ-Bhadrabāhu; ca-and; durmadaḥ-Durmada; bhadraḥ-Bhadra; eva-indeed; ca-also; pauravyāḥ-of the wife named Pauravī; tanayāḥ-sons; hi-indeed; ete-all of them; bhūta-ādyāḥ-headed by Bhūta; dvādaśa-twelve; abhavan-were born; nanda-upananda-kṛtaka-śūra-ādyāḥ-Nanda, Upananda, Kṛtaka, Śūra and others; madirā-ātmajāḥ-the sons of Madirā; kauśalyā-Kauśalyā; keśinam-a son named Keśī; tu ekam-only one; asūta-gave birth to; kula-nandanam-a son.





From the womb of Pauravī came twelve sons, including Bhūta, Subhadra, Bhadrabāhu, Durmada and Bhadra. Nanda, Upananda, Kṛtaka, Śūra and others were born from the womb of Madirā. Bhadrā [Kauśalyā] gave birth to only one son, named Keśī.





TEXT 49



rocanāyām ato jātā

hasta-hemāṅgadādayaḥ

ilāyām uruvalkādīn

yadu-mukhyān ajījanat

SYNONYMS



rocanāyām-in another wife, whose name was Rocanā; ataḥ-thereafter; jātāḥ-were born; hasta-Hasta; hemāṅgada-Hemāṅgada; ādayaḥ-and others; ilāyām-in another wife, named Ilā; uruvalka-ādīn-sons headed by Uruvalka; yadu-mukhyān-principal personalities in the Yadu dynasty; ajījanat-he begot.





Vasudeva, by another of his wives, whose name was Rocanā, begot Hasta, Hemāṅgada and other sons. And by his wife named Ilā he begot sons headed by Uruvalka, all of whom were chief personalities in the dynasty of Yadu.





TEXT 50



vipṛṣṭho dhṛtadevāyām

eka ānakadundubheḥ

śāntidevātmajā rājan

praśama-prasitādayaḥ

SYNONYMS



vipṛṣṭhaḥ-Vipṛṣṭha; dhṛtadevāyām-in the womb of the wife named Dhṛtadevā; ekaḥ-one son; ānakadundubheḥ-of Ānakadundubhi, Vasudeva; śāntidevā-ātmajāḥ-the sons of another wife, named Śāntidevā; rājan-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; praśama-prasita-ādayaḥ-Praśama, Prasita and other sons.





From the womb of Dhṛtadevā, one of the wives of Ānakadundubhi [Vasudeva], came a son named Vipṛṣṭha. The sons of Śāntidevā, another wife of Vasudeva, were Praśama, Prasita and others.





TEXT 51



rājanya-kalpa-varṣādyā

upadevā-sutā daśa

vasu-haṁsa-suvaṁśādyāḥ

śrīdevāyās tu ṣaṭ sutāḥ

SYNONYMS



rājanya-Rājanya; kalpa-Kalpa; varṣa-ādyāḥ-Varṣa and others; upadevā-sutāḥ-sons of Upadevā, another wife of Vasudeva's; daśa-ten; vasu-Vasu; haṁsa-Haṁsa; suvaṁśa-Suvaṁśa; ādyāḥ-and others; śrīdevāyāḥ-born of another wife, named Śrīdevā; tu-but; ṣaṭ-six; sutāḥ-sons.





Vasudeva also had a wife named Upadevā, from whom came ten sons, headed by Rājanya, Kalpa and Varṣa. From Śrīdevā, another wife, came six sons, such as Vasu, Haṁsa and Suvaṁśa.





TEXT 52



devarakṣitayā labdhā

nava cātra gadādayaḥ

vasudevaḥ sutān aṣṭāv

ādadhe sahadevayā

SYNONYMS



devarakṣitayā-by the wife named Devarakṣitā; labdhāḥ-achieved; nava-nine; ca-also; atra-here; gadā-ādayaḥ-sons headed by Gadā; vasudevaḥ-Śrīla Vasudeva; sutān-sons; aṣṭau-eight; ādadhe-begot; sahadevayā-in the wife named Sahadevā.





By the semen of Vasudeva in the womb of Devarakṣitā, nine sons were born, headed by Gadā. Vasudeva, who was religion personified, also had a wife named Sahadevā, by whose womb he begot eight sons, headed by Śruta and Pravara.





TEXTS 53–55



pravara-śruta-mukhyāṁś ca

sākṣād dharmo vasūn iva

vasudevas tu devakyām

aṣṭa putrān ajījanat

kīrtimantaṁ suṣeṇaṁ ca



bhadrasenam udāra-dhīḥ

ṛjuṁ sammardanaṁ bhadraṁ

saṅkarṣaṇam ahīśvaram

aṣṭamas tu tayor āsīt



svayam eva hariḥ kila

subhadrā ca mahābhāgā

tava rājan pitāmahī

SYNONYMS



pravara-Pravara (in some readings, Pauvara); śruta-Śruta; mukhyān-headed by; ca-and; sākṣāt-directly; dharmaḥ-religion personified; vasūn iva-exactly like the chief Vasus in the heavenly planets; vasudevaḥ-Śrīla Vasudeva, the father of Kṛṣṇa; tu-indeed; devakyām-in the womb of Devakī; aṣṭa-eight; putrān-sons; ajījanat-begot; kīrtimantam-Kīrtimān; suṣeṇam ca-and Suṣeṇa; bhadrasenam-Bhadrasena; udāra-dhīḥ-all fully qualified; ṛjum-Ṛju; sammardanam-Sammardana; bhadram-Bhadra; saṅkarṣaṇam-Saṅkarṣaṇa; ahi-īśvaram-the supreme controller and serpent incarnation; aṣṭamaḥ-the eighth one; tu-but; tayoḥ-of both (Devakī and Vasudeva); āsīt-appeared; svayam eva-directly, personally; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kila-what to speak of; subhadrā-a sister, Subhadrā; ca-and; mahābhāgā-highly fortunate; tava-your; rājan-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; pitāmahī-grandmother.





The eight sons born of Sahadevā such as Pravara and Śruta, were exact incarnations of the eight Vasus in the heavenly planets. Vasudeva also begot eight highly qualified sons through the womb of Devakī. These included Kīrtimān, Suṣeṇa, Bhadrasena, Ṛju, Sammardana, Bhadra and Saṅkarṣaṇa, the controller and serpent incarnation. The eighth son was the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself-Kṛṣṇa. The highly fortunate Subhadrā, the one daughter, was your grandmother.





The fifty-fifth verse says, svayam eva hariḥ kila, indicating that Kṛṣṇa, the eighth son of Devakī, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇa is not an incarnation. Although there is no difference between the Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari and His incarnation, Kṛṣṇa is the original Supreme Person, the complete Godhead. Incarnations exhibit only a certain percentage of the potencies of Godhead; the complete Godhead is Kṛṣṇa Himself, who appeared as the eighth son of Devakī.





TEXT 56



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

kṣayo vṛddhiś ca pāpmanaḥ

tadā tu bhagavān īśa

ātmānaṁ sṛjate hariḥ

SYNONYMS



yadā-whenever; yadā-when ever; hi-indeed; dharmasya-of the principles of religion; kṣayaḥ-deterioration; vṛddhiḥ-increasing; ca-and; pāpmanaḥ-of sinful activities; tadā-at that time; tu-indeed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśaḥ-the supreme controller; ātmānam-personally; sṛjate-descends; hariḥ-the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Whenever the principles of religion deteriorate and the principles of irreligion increase, the supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead Śrī Hari, appears by His own will.





The principles by which an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends upon earth are explained in this verse. The same principles are also explained in Bhagavad-gītā (4.7) by the Lord Himself:



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham





"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself."



In the present age, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has appeared as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to inaugurate the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement. At the present time, in Kali-yuga, people are extremely sinful and bad (manda). They have no idea of spiritual life and are misusing the benefits of the human form to live like cats and dogs. Under these circumstances Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has inaugurated the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, which is not different from Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one associates with this movement, he directly associates with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. People should take advantage of the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and thus gain relief from all the problems created in this age of Kali.





TEXT 57



na hy asya janmano hetuḥ

karmaṇo vā mahīpate

ātma-māyāṁ vineśasya

parasya draṣṭur ātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



na-not; hi-indeed; asya-of Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); janmanaḥ-of the appearance, or taking birth; hetuḥ-there is any cause; karmaṇaḥ-or for acting; vā-either; mahīpate-O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); ātma-māyām-His supreme compassion for the fallen souls; vinā-without; īśasya-of the supreme controller; parasya-of the Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the material world; draṣṭuḥ-of the Supersoul, who witnesses everyone's activities; ātmanaḥ-of the Supersoul of everyone.





O King, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, but for the Lord's personal desire, there is no cause for His appearance, disappearance or activities. As the Supersoul, He knows everything. Consequently there is no cause that affects Him, not even the results of fruitive activities.





This verse points out the difference between the Supreme Personality of Godhead and an ordinary living being. An ordinary living being receives a particular type of body according to his past activities (karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa jantur dehopapattaye [SB 3.31.1]). A living being is never independent and can never appear independently. Rather, one is forced to accept a body imposed upon him by māyā according to his past karma. As explained in Bhagavad-gītā (18.61), yantrārūḍhāni māyayā. The body is a kind of machine created and offered to the living entity by the material energy under the direction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the living entity must accept a particular type of body awarded to him by māyā, the material energy, according to his karma. One cannot independently say, "Give me a body like this" or "Give me a body like that." One must accept whatever body is offered by the material energy. This is the position of the ordinary living being.



When Kṛṣṇa descends, however, He does so out of His merciful compassion for the fallen souls. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8):



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge





"To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium." The Supreme Lord is not forced to appear. Indeed, no one can subject Him to force, for He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone is under His control, and He is not under the control of anyone else. Foolish people who because of a poor fund of knowledge think that one can equal Kṛṣṇa or become Kṛṣṇa are condemned in every way. No one can equal or surpass Kṛṣṇa, who is therefore described as asamaurdhva. According to the Viśva-kośa dictionary, the word māyā is used in the sense of "false pride" and also in the sense of "compassion." For an ordinary living being, the body in which he appears is his punishment. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (7.14), daivī hy eṣā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā: "This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome." But when Kṛṣṇa comes the word māyā refers to His compassion or mercy upon the devotees and fallen souls. By His potency, the Lord can deliver everyone, whether sinful or pious.





TEXT 58



yan māyā-ceṣṭitaṁ puṁsaḥ

sthity-utpatty-apyayāya hi

anugrahas tan-nivṛtter

ātma-lābhāya ceṣyate

SYNONYMS



yat-whatever; māyā-ceṣṭitam-the laws of material nature enacted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puṁsaḥ-of the living entities; sthiti-duration of life; utpatti-birth; apyayāya-annihilation; hi-indeed; anugrahaḥ-compassion; tat-nivṛtteḥ-the creation and manifestation of cosmic energy to stop the repetition of birth and death; ātma-lābhāya-thus going home, back to Godhead; ca-indeed; iṣyate-for this purpose the creation is there.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead acts through His material energy in the creation, maintenance and annihilation of this cosmic manifestation just to deliver the living entity by His compassion and stop the living entity's birth, death and duration of materialistic life. Thus He enables the living being to return home, back to Godhead.





Materialistic men sometimes ask why God has created the material world for the suffering of the living entities. The material creation is certainly meant for the suffering of the conditioned souls, who are part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7):



mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke

jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ

manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati





"The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses, which include the mind." All the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and are as good as the Lord qualitatively, but quantitatively there is a great difference between them, for the Lord is unlimited whereas the living entities are limited. Thus the Lord possesses unlimited potency for pleasure, and the living entities have a limited pleasure potency. Ānandamayo 'bhyāsāt (Vedānta-sūtra 1.1.12). Both the Lord and the living entity, being qualitatively spirit soul, have the tendency for peaceful enjoyment, but when the part of the Supreme Personality of Godhead unfortunately wants to enjoy independently, without Kṛṣṇa, he is put into the material world, where he begins his life as Brahmā and is gradually degraded to the status of an ant or a worm in stool. This is called manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. There is a great struggle for existence because the living entity conditioned by material nature is under nature's full control (prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ [Bg. 3.27]). Because of his limited knowledge, however, the living entity thinks he is enjoying in this material world. Manaḥ ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛti-sthāni karṣati [Bg. 15.7]. He is actually under the full control of material nature, but still he thinks himself independent (ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate [Bg. 3.27]). Even when he is elevated by speculative knowledge and tries to merge into the existence of Brahman, the same disease continues.



Āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ patanty adhaḥ (Bhāg. 10.2.32). Even having attained that paraṁ padam, having merged into the impersonal Brahman, he falls again to the material world.



In this way, the conditioned soul undergoes a great struggle for existence in this material world, and therefore the Lord, out of compassion for him, appears in this world and instructs him. Thus the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.7):



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham





"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself." The real dharma is to surrender unto Kṛṣṇa, but the rebellious living entity, instead of surrendering to Kṛṣṇa, engages in adharma, in a struggle for existence to become like Kṛṣṇa. Therefore out of compassion Kṛṣṇa creates this material world to give the living entity a chance to understand his real position. Bhagavad-gītā and similar Vedic literatures are presented so that the living being may understand his relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ (Bg. 15.15). All these Vedic literatures are meant to enable the human being to understand what he is, what his actual position is, and what his relationship is with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is called brahma-jijñāsā. Every conditioned soul is struggling, but human life provides the best chance for him to understand his position. Therefore this verse says, anugrahas tan-nivṛtteḥ, indicating that the false life of repeated birth and death must be stopped and the conditioned soul should be educated. This is the purpose of the creation.



The creation does not arise whimsically, as atheistic men think.



asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te

jagad āhur anīśvaram

aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ

kim anyat kāma-haitukam





"They say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and that there is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire and has no cause other than lust." (Bg. 16.8) Atheistic rascals think that there is no God and that the creation has taken place by chance, just as a man and woman meet by chance and the woman becomes pregnant and gives birth to a child. Actually, however, this is not the fact. The fact is that there is a purpose for this creation: to give the conditioned soul a chance to return to his original consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and then return home, back to Godhead, and be completely happy in the spiritual world. In the material world the conditioned soul is given a chance to satisfy his senses, but at the same time he is informed by Vedic knowledge that this material world is not his actual place for happiness. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam (Bg. 13.9). One must stop the repetition of birth and death. Every human being, therefore, should take advantage of this creation by understanding Kṛṣṇa and his relationship with Kṛṣṇa and in this way return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 59



akṣauhiṇīnāṁ patibhir

asurair nṛpa-lāñchanaiḥ

bhuva ākramyamāṇāyā

abhārāya kṛtodyamaḥ

SYNONYMS



akṣauhiṇīnām-of kings possessing great military power; patibhiḥ-by such kings or government; asuraiḥ-actually demons (because they do not need such military power but create it unnecessarily); nṛpa-lāñchanaiḥ-who are actually unfit to be kings (although they have somehow taken possession of the government); bhuvaḥ-on the surface of the earth; ākramyamāṇāyāḥ-aiming at attacking one another; abhārāya-paving the way for diminishing the number of demons on the surface of the earth; kṛta-udyamaḥ-enthusiastic (they spend all the revenue of the state to increase military power).





Although the demons who take possession of the government are dressed like men of government, they do not know the duty of the government. Consequently, by the arrangement of God, such demons, who possess great military strength, fight with one another, and thus the great burden of demons on the surface of the earth is reduced. The demons increase their military power by the will of the Supreme, so that their numbers will be diminished and the devotees will have a chance to advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8), paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām. The sādhus, the devotees of the Lord, are always eager to advance the cause of Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that the conditioned souls may be released from the bondage of birth and death. But the asuras, the demons, impede the advancement of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, and therefore Kṛṣṇa arranges occasional fights between different asuras who are very much interested in increasing their military power. The duty of the government or king is not to increase military power unnecessarily; the real duty of the government is to see that the people of the state advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For this purpose, Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.13), cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ: "According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me." There should be an ideal class of men who are bona fide brāhmaṇas, and they should be given all protection. Namo brahmaṇya-devāya go-brāhmaṇa-hitāya ca. Kṛṣṇa is very fond of brāhmaṇas and cows, The brāhmaṇas promulgate the cause of advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and the cows give enough milk to maintain the body in the mode of goodness. The kṣatriyas and the government should be advised by the brāhmaṇas. Next, the vaiśyas should produce enough foodstuffs, and the śūdras, who cannot do anything beneficial on their own, should serve the three higher classes (the brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas). This is the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead so that the conditioned souls will be released from the material condition and return home, back to Godhead. This is the purpose of Kṛṣṇa's descent on the surface of the earth (paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]).



Everyone must understand Kṛṣṇa's activities (janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]). If one understands the purpose of Kṛṣṇa's coming to this earth and performing His activities, one is immediately liberated. This liberation is the purpose of the creation and Kṛṣṇa's descent upon the surface of the earth. Demons are very much interested in advancing a plan by which people will labor hard like cats, dogs and hogs, but Kṛṣṇa's devotees want to teach Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that people will be satisfied with plain living and Kṛṣṇa conscious advancement. Although demons have created many plans for industry and hard labor so that people will work day and night like animals, this is not the purpose of civilization. Such endeavors are jagato'hitaḥ; that is, they are meant for the misfortune of the people in general. Kṣayāya: such activities lead to annihilation. One who understands the purpose of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, should seriously understand the importance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and seriously take part in it. One should not endeavor for ugra-karma, or unnecessary work for sense gratification. Nūnaṁ pramattaḥ kurute vikarma yad indriya-prītaya āpṛṇoti (Bhāg. 5.5.4). Simply for sense gratification, people make plans for material happiness. Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān (Bhāg. 7.9.43). They do this because they are all vimūḍhas, rascals. For flickering happiness, people waste their human energy, not understanding the importance of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement but instead accusing the simple devotees of brainwashing. Demons may falsely accuse the preachers of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, but Kṛṣṇa will arrange a fight between the demons in which all their military power will be engaged and both parties of demons will be annihilated.





TEXT 60



karmāṇy aparimeyāṇi

manasāpi sureśvaraiḥ

saha-saṅkarṣaṇaś cakre

bhagavān madhusūdanaḥ

SYNONYMS



karmāṇi-activities; aparimeyāṇi-immeasurable, unlimited; manasā api-even by such plans perceived within the mind; sura-īśvaraiḥ-by the controllers of the universe like Brahmā and Śiva; saha-saṅkarṣaṇaḥ-along with Saṅkarṣaṇa (Baladeva); cakre-performed; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; madhu-sūdanaḥ-the killer of the Madhu demon.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, with the cooperation of Saṅkarṣaṇa, Balarāma, performed activities beyond the mental comprehension of even such personalities as Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. [For instance, Kṛṣṇa arranged the Battle of Kurukṣetra to kill many demons for the relief of the entire world.]





TEXT 61



kalau janiṣyamāṇānāṁ

duḥkha-śoka-tamo-nudam

anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ

supuṇyaṁ vyatanod yaśaḥ

SYNONYMS



kalau-in this age of Kali; janiṣyamāṇānām-of the conditioned souls who will take birth in the future; duḥkha-śoka-tamaḥ-nudam-to minimize their unlimited unhappiness and lamentation, which are caused by ignorance; anugrahāya-just to show mercy; bhaktānām-to the devotees; su-puṇyam-very pious, transcendental activities; vyatanot-expanded; yaśaḥ-His glories or reputation.





To show causeless mercy to the devotees who would take birth in the future in this age of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, acted in such a way that simply by remembering Him one will be freed from all the lamentation and unhappiness of material existence. [In other words, He acted so that all future devotees, by accepting the instructions of Kṛṣṇa consciousness stated in Bhagavad-gītā, could be relieved from the pangs of material existence.]





The Lord's activities of saving the devotees and killing the demons (paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]) take place side by side. Kṛṣṇa actually appears for the deliverance of the sādhus, or bhaktas, but by killing the demons He shows them mercy also, for anyone killed by Kṛṣṇa is liberated. Whether the Lord kills or gives protection, He is kind to both the demons and the devotees.





TEXT 62



yasmin sat-karṇa-pīyuṣe

yaśas-tīrtha-vare sakṛt

śrotrāñjalir upaspṛśya

dhunute karma-vāsanām

SYNONYMS



yasmin-in the history of the transcendental activities of Kṛṣṇa upon the surface of the earth; sat-karṇa-pīyuṣe-who pleases the demands of the transcendental, purified ears; yaśaḥ-tīrtha-vare-keeping oneself in the best of holy places by hearing the transcendental activities of the Lord; sakṛt-once only, immediately; śrotra-añjaliḥ-in the form of hearing the transcendental message; upaspṛśya-touching (exactly like the water of the Ganges); dhunute-destroys; karma-vāsanām-the strong desire for fruitive activities.





Simply by receiving the glories of the Lord through purified transcendental ears, the devotees of the Lord are immediately freed from strong material desires and engagement in fruitive activities.





When the devotees aurally receive the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as enacted in Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, they immediately achieve a transcendental vision in which they are no longer interested in materialistic activities. Thus they achieve freedom from the material world. For sense gratification practically everyone is engaged in materialistic activities, which prolong the process of janma-mṛtyu jarā-vyādhi-birth, death, old age and disease-but the devotee, simply by hearing the message of Bhagavad-gītā and further relishing the narrations of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, becomes so pure that he no longer takes interest in materialistic activities. At the moment, devotees in the Western countries are being attracted by Kṛṣṇa consciousness and becoming uninterested in materialistic activities, and therefore people are trying to oppose this movement. But they cannot possibly check this movement or stop the activities of the devotees in Europe and America by their artificial impositions. Here the words śrotrāñjalir upaspṛśya indicate that simply by hearing the transcendental activities of the Lord the devotees become so pure that they are immediately immune to the contamination of materialistic fruitive activities. Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam [Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā





"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service." Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.111.1.11] Materialistic activities are unnecessary for the soul, and therefore the devotees are freed from such activities. The devotees are situated in liberation (brahma-bhūyāya kalpate), and therefore they cannot be called back to their material homes and materialistic activities.





TEXTS 63–64



bhoja-vṛṣṇy-andhaka-madhu-

śūrasena-daśārhakaiḥ

ślāghanīyehitaḥ śaśvat

kuru-sṛñjaya-pāṇḍubhiḥ

snigdha-smitekṣitodārair



vākyair vikrama-līlayā

nṛlokaṁ ramayām āsa

mūrtyā sarvāṅga-ramyayā

SYNONYMS



bhoja-assisted by the Bhoja dynasty; vṛṣṇi-and by the Vṛṣṇis; andhaka-and by the Andhakas; madhu-and by the Madhus; śūrasena-and by the Śūrasenas; daśārhakaiḥ-and by the Daśārhakas; ślāghanīya-by the praiseworthy; īhitaḥ-endeavoring; śaśvat-always; kuru-sṛñjaya-pāṇḍubhiḥ-assisted by the Pāṇḍavas, Kurus and Sṛñjayas; snigdha-affectionate; smita-smiling; īkṣita-being regarded as; udāraiḥ-magnanimous; vākyaiḥ-the instructions; vikrama-līlayā-the pastimes of heroism; nṛ-lokam-human society; ramayām āsa-pleased; mūrtyā-by His personal form; sarva-aṅga-ramyayā-the form that pleases everyone by all parts of the body.





Assisted by the descendants of Bhoja, Vṛṣṇi, Andhaka, Madhu, Śūrasena, Daśārha, Kuru, Sṛñjaya and Pāṇḍu, Lord Kṛṣṇa performed various activities. By His pleasing smiles, His affectionate behavior, His instructions and His uncommon pastimes like raising Govardhana Hill, the Lord, appearing in His transcendental body, pleased all of human society.





The words nṛlokaṁ ramayām āsa mūrtyā sarvāṅga-ramyayā are significant. Kṛṣṇa is the original form. Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is therefore described here by the word mūrtyā. The word mūrti means "form." Kṛṣṇa, or God, is never impersonal; the impersonal feature is but a manifestation of His transcendental body (yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi [Bs. 5.40]). The Lord is narākṛti, exactly resembling the form of a human being, but His form is different from ours. Therefore the word sarvāṅga-ramyayā informs us that every part of His body is pleasing for everyone to see. Apart from His smiling face, every part of His body-His hands, His legs, His chest-is pleasing to the devotees, who cannot at any time stop seeing the beautiful form of the Lord.





TEXT 65



yasyānanaṁ makara-kuṇḍala-cāru-karṇa-

bhrājat-kapola-subhagaṁ savilāsa-hāsam

nityotsavaṁ na tatṛpur dṛśibhiḥ pibantyo

nāryo narāś ca muditāḥ kupitā nimeś ca

SYNONYMS



yasya-whose; ānanam-face; makara-kuṇḍala-cāru-karṇa-decorated by earrings resembling sharks and by beautiful ears; bhrājat-brilliantly decorated; kapola-forehead; subhagam-declaring all opulences; sa-vilāsa-hāsam-with smiles of enjoyment; nitya-utsavam-whenever one sees Him, one feels festive; na tatṛpuḥ-they could not be satisfied; dṛśibhiḥ-by seeing the form of the Lord; pibantyaḥ-as if drinking through the eyes; nāryaḥ-all the women of Vṛndāvana; narāḥ-all the male devotees; ca-also; muditāḥ-fully satisfied; kupitāḥ-angry; nimeḥ-the moment they are disturbed by the blinking of the eyes; ca-also.





Kṛṣṇa's face is decorated with ornaments, such as earrings resembling sharks. His ears are beautiful, His cheeks brilliant, and His smiling attractive to everyone. Whoever sees Lord Kṛṣṇa sees a festival. His face and body are fully satisfying for everyone to see, but the devotees are angry at the creator for the disturbance caused by the momentary blinking of their eyes.





As stated by the Lord Himself in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.3):



manuṣyāṇāṁ sahasreṣu

kaścid yatati siddhaye

yatatām api siddhānāṁ

kaścin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ





"Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth." Unless one is qualified to understand Kṛṣṇa, one cannot appreciate the presence of Kṛṣṇa on earth. Among the Bhojas, Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, Pāṇḍavas and many other kings intimately related with Kṛṣṇa, the intimate relationship between Kṛṣṇa and the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana is especially to be noted. That relationship is described in this verse by the words nityotsavaṁ na tatṛpur dṛśibhiḥ pibantyaḥ. The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana especially, such as the cowherd boys, the cows, the calves, the gopīs and Kṛṣṇa's father and mother, were never fully satisfied, although they saw Kṛṣṇa's beautiful features constantly. Seeing Kṛṣṇa is described here as nitya-utsava, a daily festival. The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana saw Kṛṣṇa almost every moment, but when Kṛṣṇa left the village for the pasturing grounds, where He tended the cows and calves, the gopīs were very much afflicted because they saw Kṛṣṇa walking on the sand and thought that Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, which they dared not place on their breasts because they thought their breasts not soft enough, were being pierced by broken chips of stone. By even thinking of this, the gopīs were affected, and they cried at home. These gopīs, who were therefore the exalted friends of Kṛṣṇa, saw Kṛṣṇa constantly, but because their eyelids disturbed their vision of Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs condemned the creator, Lord Brahmā. Therefore the beauty of Kṛṣṇa, especially the beauty of His face, is described here. At the end of the Ninth Canto, in the Twenty-fourth Chapter, we find a hint of Kṛṣṇa's beauty. Now we are proceeding to the Tenth Canto, which is considered Kṛṣṇa's head. The entire Śrīmad-Bhāgavata Purāṇa is the embodiment of Kṛṣṇa's form, and the Tenth Canto is His face. This verse gives a hint of how beautiful His face is. Kṛṣṇa's smiling face, with His cheeks, His lips, the ornaments in His ears, His chewing of betel nuts-all this was minutely observed by the gopīs, who thus enjoyed transcendental bliss, so much so that they were never fully satisfied to see Kṛṣṇa's face, but instead condemned the creator of the body for making eyelids that obstructed their vision. The beauty of Kṛṣṇa's face was therefore much more appreciated by the gopīs than by His friends the cowherd boys or even by Yaśodā Mātā, who was also interested in decorating the face of Kṛṣṇa.





TEXT 66



jāto gataḥ pitṛ-gṛhād vrajam edhitārtho

hatvā ripūn suta-śatāni kṛtorudāraḥ

utpādya teṣu puruṣaḥ kratubhiḥ samīje

ātmānam ātma-nigamaṁ prathayañ janeṣu

SYNONYMS



jātaḥ-after taking birth as the son of Vasudeva; gataḥ-went away; pitṛ-gṛhāt-from the houses of His father; vrajam-to Vṛndāvana; edhita-arthaḥ-to exalt the position (of Vṛndāvana); hatvā-killing there; ripūn-many demons; suta-śatāni-hundreds of sons; kṛta-urudāraḥ-accepting many thousands of wives, the best of women; utpādya-begot; teṣu-in them; puruṣaḥ-the Supreme Person, who exactly resembles a human being; kratubhiḥ-by many sacrifices; samīje-worshiped; ātmānam-Himself (because He is the person worshiped by all sacrifices); ātma-nigamam-exactly according to the ritualistic ceremonies of the Vedas; prathayan-expanding the Vedic principles; janeṣu-among the people in general.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, known as līlā-puruṣottama, appeared as the son of Vasudeva but immediately left His father's home and went to Vṛndāvana to expand His loving relationship with His confidential devotees. In Vṛndāvana the Lord killed many demons, and afterwards He returned to Dvārakā, where according to Vedic principles He married many wives who were the best of women, begot through them hundreds of sons, and performed sacrifices for His own worship to establish the principles of householder life.





As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15), vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ: by all the Vedas, it is Kṛṣṇa who is to be known. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, setting an example by His own behavior, performed many ritualistic ceremonies described in the Vedas and established the principles of gṛhastha life by marrying many wives and begetting many children just to show people in general how to be happy by living according to Vedic principles. The center of Vedic sacrifice is Kṛṣṇa (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ [Bg. 15.15]). To advance in human life, human society must follow the Vedic principles personally demonstrated by Lord Kṛṣṇa in His householder life. The real purpose of Kṛṣṇa's appearance, however, was to manifest how one can take part in loving affairs with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Reciprocations of loving affairs in ecstasy are possible only in Vṛndāvana. Therefore just after His appearance as the son of Vasudeva, the Lord immediately left for Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, the Lord not only took part in loving affairs with His father and mother, the gopīs and the cowherd boys, but also gave liberation to many demons by killing them. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8), paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām: the Lord appears in order to protect the devotees and kill the demons. This was fully exhibited by His personal behavior. In Bhagavad-gītā the Lord is understood by Arjuna to be puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam-the eternal, transcendental Supreme Person. Here also we find the words utpādya teṣu puruṣaḥ. Therefore it is to be concluded that the Absolute Truth is puruṣa, a person. The impersonal feature is but one of the features of His personality. Ultimately, He is a person; He is not impersonal. And not only is He puruṣa, a person, but He is the līlā-puruṣottama, the best of all persons.





TEXT 67



pṛthvyāḥ sa vai guru-bharaṁ kṣapayan kurūṇām

antaḥ-samuttha-kalinā yudhi bhūpa-camvaḥ

dṛṣṭyā vidhūya vijaye jayam udvighoṣya

procyoddhavāya ca paraṁ samagāt sva-dhāma

SYNONYMS



pṛthvyāḥ-on the earth; saḥ-He (Lord Kṛṣṇa); vai-indeed; guru-bharam-a great burden; kṣapayan-completely finishing; kurūṇām-of the personalities born in the Kuru dynasty; antaḥ-samuttha-kalinā-by creating enmity between the brothers by disagreement; yudhi-in the Battle of Kurukṣetra; bhūpa-camvaḥ-all the demoniac kings; dṛṣṭyā-by His glance; vidhūya-cleansing their sinful activities; vijaye-in victory; jayam-victory; udvighoṣya-declaring (the victory for Arjuna); procya-giving instructions; uddhavāya-unto Uddhava; ca-also; param-transcendental; samagāt-returned; sva-dhāma-to His own place.





Thereafter, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa created a misunderstanding between family members just to diminish the burden of the world. Simply by His glance, He annihilated all the demoniac kings on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra and declared victory for Arjuna. Finally, He instructed Uddhava about transcendental life and devotion and then returned to His abode in His original form.





paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]. The mission of Lord Kṛṣṇa was performed on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, for by the Lord's mercy Arjuna was victorious due to being a great devotee whereas the others were killed simply by the Lord's glance, which cleansed them of all sinful activities and enabled them to attain sārūpya. Finally, Lord Kṛṣṇa instructed Uddhava about the transcendental life of devotional service, and then, in due course of time, He returned to His abode. The Lord's instructions in the form of Bhagavad-gītā are full of jñāna and vairāgya, knowledge and renunciation. In the human form of life, one must learn these two things-how to become detached from the material world and how to acquire full knowledge in spiritual life. This is the Lord's mission (paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām [Bg. 4.8]). After executing His complete mission, the Lord returned to His home, Goloka Vṛndāvana.



Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead"

END OF THE NINTH CANTO





Tenth Canto





SUMMARY OF THE TENTH CANTO



A short description of each chapter of this Tenth Canto is as follows. The First Chapter, which has sixty-nine verses, describes Mahārāja Parīkṣit's eagerness to learn about the incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and it also tells how Kaṁsa killed the six sons of Devakī because of his fear of being killed by her eighth child. The Second Chapter contains forty-two verses, describing the entrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, into the womb of Devakī to fulfill His mission of killing Kaṁsa. When Lord Kṛṣṇa was within Devakī's womb, all the demigods, headed by Brahmā, offered prayers to the Lord. The Third Chapter contains fifty-three verses. This chapter describes the appearance of Lord Kṛṣṇa as He is. The Lord's father and mother, understanding the Lord's appearance, offered prayers. Fearing Kaṁsa, the Lord's father brought the child from Mathurā to Gokula Vṛndāvana. The Fourth Chapter contains forty-six verses, which tell of a prophecy by the goddess Caṇḍikā. After consulting demoniac friends, Kaṁsa began killing all the children born at that time, since he thought this would be to his benefit.



The Fifth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, describing how Nanda Mahārāja performed the birth ceremony of Kṛṣṇa and then went to Mathurā, where he met Vasudeva. The Sixth Chapter contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Nanda Mahārāja, following the advice of his friend Vasudeva, returns to Gokula and on the way sees the dead body of the Pūtanā demoness and is astonished at her having been killed by Kṛṣṇa. The Seventh Chapter, which contains thirty-seven verses, describes Mahārāja Parīkṣit's enthusiasm to hear about the boyhood pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who killed Śakaṭāsura and Tṛṇāvartāsura and showed within His mouth the entire cosmic manifestation. In the Eighth Chapter there are fifty-two verses, which describe Gargamuni's performing the name-giving ceremony of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and how Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma performed playful childish activities, crawling on the ground, trying to walk with Their small legs, and stealing butter and breaking the pots. This chapter also describes the vision of the universal form.



The Ninth Chapter, which has twenty-three verses, describes how Kṛṣṇa disturbed His mother while she was churning butter. Because she left Kṛṣṇa to see to the stove, where the milk was boiling, and did not allow Him to suck her breast, Kṛṣṇa was very angry and broke a pot of yogurt. To chastise her naughty child, mother Yaśodā wanted to bind Him with rope, but every time she tried she failed because of a shortage of rope when the time came to knot it. In the Tenth Chapter there are forty-three verses. This chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa, as Dāmodara, caused the twin Yamalārjuna trees to fall and how the two demigods within the trees were delivered by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa. In the Eleventh Chapter there are fifty-nine verses. This chapter describes how Nanda Mahārāja released Kṛṣṇa from the ropes, how Kṛṣṇa showed His mercy to a fruit seller while exchanging grains for fruit, and how Nanda Mahārāja and others decided to leave Gokula for Vṛndāvana, where Kṛṣṇa killed Vatsāsura and Bakāsura.



Chapter Twelve contains forty-four verses, describing Kṛṣṇa's pastimes with the cowherd boys in the forest and the killing of the demon named Aghāsura. Chapter Thirteen contains sixty-four verses, describing how Brahmā stole Kṛṣṇa's calves and His friends, the cowherd boys. Kṛṣṇa expanded His pastimes for one year, representing Himself as the calves and boys in forms exactly like their own. In this way He bewildered Brahmā, who at last surrendered when his illusion was over. The Fourteenth Chapter contains sixty-one verses. In this chapter, Brahmā offers prayers to Kṛṣṇa after fully understanding Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Fifteenth Chapter contains fifty-two verses. This chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa entered Tālavana Forest with Balarāma, how Balarāma killed Dhenukāsura, and how Kṛṣṇa protected the cowherd boys and cows from the poisonous effects of Kāliya.



The Sixteenth Chapter contains sixty-seven verses. This chapter describes the chastisement of Kāliya by Kṛṣṇa, and it also describes the prayers offered by Kāliya's wives. In the Seventeenth Chapter there are twenty-five verses. This chapter describes why Kāliya entered the River Yamunā after leaving his home, Nāgālaya, one of the dvīpas, which according to some corresponds to the Fiji Islands. This chapter also describes how Garuḍa was cursed by Saubhari Ṛṣi, how the cowherd boys, Kṛṣṇa's friends, were enlivened when Kṛṣṇa emerged from the Yamunā, and how Kṛṣṇa stopped the forest fire and saved the sleeping inhabitants of Vraja.



The Eighteenth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, giving a description of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Their picnics within the forest, the climate of Vṛndāvana in the summer and the spring, and Lord Balarāma's killing of Pralambāsura. Chapter Nineteen contains sixteen verses, describing Kṛṣṇa's entering the forest known as Muñjāraṇya, saving the cowherd boys and cows from the forest fire, and bringing them to Bhāṇḍīravana. Chapter Twenty contains forty-nine verses. This chapter describes the enjoyment of Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa in the forest with the cowherd boys during the rainy season, and it gives various instructions through analogies concerning the rainy season and autumn.



Chapter Twenty-one contains twenty verses, describing how Kṛṣṇa entered the forest of Vṛndāvana in the autumn, playing His flute, and how He attracted the gopīs, who were singing His glories. The Twenty-second Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing how the gopīs prayed to the goddess Kātyāyanī to obtain Kṛṣṇa as their husband and how Kṛṣṇa later stole the garments of the gopīs while the gopīs were bathing in the Yamunā. The Twenty-third Chapter contains fifty-two verses, describing how the cowherd boys, being very hungry, followed Kṛṣṇa's directions by begging some food for Him and themselves from brāhmaṇas engaged in performing yajñas. The brāhmaṇas refused to give food to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, although the boys begged for it, but the wives of the brāhmaṇas agreed, and therefore Kṛṣṇa bestowed His mercy upon them.



The Twenty-fourth Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing how Kṛṣṇa defied King Indra, despite Indra's position of prestige, by stopping the indra-yajña and instead worshiping Govardhana. The Twenty-fifth Chapter contains thirty-three verses. As described in this chapter, because the indra-yajña was stopped, King Indra was very angry, and to kill the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, Vraja, he flooded the entire area with rain. Kṛṣṇa, however, accepted King Indra's challenge by lifting Govardhana Hill as an umbrella to protect Vṛndāvana and all the cows. The Twenty-sixth Chapter contains twenty-five verses, describing how Nanda Mahārāja, seeing the extraordinary activities of Kṛṣṇa, was struck with wonder and how he thus narrated for all the cowherd men the whole story of Kṛṣṇa's opulence, as foretold by Gargamuni. Chapter Twenty-seven, which contains twenty-eight verses, describes how King Indra, upon seeing Kṛṣṇa's unlimited power, worshiped Lord Kṛṣṇa, who was fully washed with milk supplied by the surabhi and who thus became known as Govinda. The Twenty-eighth Chapter contains seventeen verses. In this chapter Kṛṣṇa saves His father, Nanda Mahārāja, from the custody of Varuṇa and shows the cowherd men how Vaikuṇṭhaloka is situated.



The Twenty-ninth Chapter contains forty-eight verses, describing how Kṛṣṇa talked to the gopīs before performing the rāsa-līlā and how, after the beginning of the rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the scene. Chapter Thirty contains forty-four verses, describing how the gopīs, being separated from Kṛṣṇa, went mad and began to wander in the forest in search of Him. The gopīs met Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and they all wandered on the bank of the Yamunā searching for Krishna. Chapter Thirty-one contains nineteen verses, describing how the bereaved gopīs waited in great anxiety to meet Kṛṣṇa. Chapter Thirty-two contains twenty-two verses. In this chapter, Kṛṣṇa appears among the gopīs, who are fully satisfied in ecstatic love for Him. Chapter Thirty-three contains thirty-nine verses. In this chapter Kṛṣṇa appears in multiforms in the midst of the gopīs, with whom He dances in the rāsa dance. Then they all bathe in the River Yamunā. Also in this chapter, Śukadeva mitigates the doubts of Parīkṣit concerning the performance of the rāsa-līlā.



Chapter Thirty-four contains thirty-two verses. This chapter describes how Nanda Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa's father, was swallowed by a big python, who had been a demigod named Vidyādhara but was cursed by Aṅgirā Ṛṣi. Kṛṣṇa rescued His father and saved this demigod simultaneously. Chapter Thirty-five contains twenty-six verses. This chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa went to the pasturing grounds with the cows and how the gopīs sang in separation from Him.



Chapter Thirty-six contains forty verses. This chapter describes Kṛṣṇa's killing of Ariṣṭāsura. It also describes Nārada's disclosure to Kaṁsa that both Rāma and Kṛṣṇa were sons of Vasudeva. Because of this disclosure, Kaṁsa arranged to kill both Rāma and Kṛṣṇa. He sent his assistant Keśī to Vṛndāvana, and later he sent Akrūra to bring Rāma and Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā. Chapter Thirty-seven contains thirty-three verses. In this chapter Kṛṣṇa kills the Keśī demon, Nārada worships Kṛṣṇa by narrating His future activities, and Kṛṣṇa kills the demon named Vyomāsura. Chapter Thirty-eight contains forty-three verses. This chapter describes how Akrūra went to Vṛndāvana and how he was received by Rāma-Kṛṣṇa and Nanda Mahārāja. Chapter Thirty-nine contains fifty-seven verses. This chapter describes how Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, having been invited by Kaṁsa started for Mathurā. While They were ready on the chariot, the gopīs began to cry, and Kṛṣṇa sent His messenger to pacify them. Thus He was able to travel toward Mathurā. On the way, Akrūra was shown the entire Viṣṇuloka within the water of the Yamunā.



Chapter Forty contains thirty verses, in which the prayers of Akrūra are described. Chapter Forty-one, which contains fifty-two verses, describes the entrance of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa into the city of Mathurā, where the ladies were very jubilant to see these two brothers. Kṛṣṇa killed a washerman, glorified Sudāmā and gave Sudāmā His benediction. Chapter Forty-two, which contains thirty-eight verses, describes how Kṛṣṇa delivered Kubjā and how He broke Kaṁsa's gigantic bow and killed its caretakers. Thus Kaṁsa and Kṛṣṇa met. Chapter Forty-three contains forty verses. Outside the sporting arena of Kaṁsa, Kṛṣṇa killed an elephant named Kuvalayāpīḍa. Then He entered the arena and spoke with Cāṇūra. Chapter Forty-four, which contains fifty-one verses, describes how Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma killed the wrestlers named Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika and thereafter killed Kaṁsa and his eight brothers. Kṛṣṇa, however, pacified Kaṁsa's wives and His own father and mother, Vasudeva and Devakī.



Chapter Forty-five contains fifty verses. This chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa pacified His father and mother and celebrated the enthronement of His grandfather Ugrasena. After promising the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana that He would return very soon, Kṛṣṇa underwent ritualistic ceremonies as a kṣatriya. He took the vow of brahmacarya and lived in the guru-kula, where He studied regularly. By killing the demon named Pañcajana, He received a conchshell named Pāñcajanya. Krishna rescued the son of His guru from the custody of Yamarāja and returned him. After thus offering guru-dakṣiṇā to repay His teacher, Lord Kṛṣṇa returned to Mathurā-purī. Chapter Forty-six contains forty-nine verses. As described in this chapter, Kṛṣṇa sent Uddhava to Vṛndāvana to pacify His father and mother, Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā. Chapter Forty-seven contains sixty-nine verses, describing how Uddhava, following Kṛṣṇa's order, went to pacify the gopīs and then returned to Mathurā. Thus Uddhava appreciated the ecstatic love felt for Kṛṣṇa by the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana.



Chapter Forty-eight contains thirty-six verses. This chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa fulfilled the desire of Kubjā by going to her house and enjoying her. Kṛṣṇa then went to the home of Akrūra. Satisfied by Akrūra's prayers, Kṛṣṇa praised him very much and sent him to Hastināpura to gather information about the Pāṇḍavas. Chapter Forty-nine contains thirty-one verses. As described in this chapter, Akrūra, following Kṛṣṇa's orders, went to Hastināpura, where he met Vidura and Kuntī and heard from them about Dhṛtarāṣṭra's mistreatment of the Pāṇḍavas. Informed of the Pāṇḍavas' faith in Kṛṣṇa, Akrūra advised Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and after understanding Dhṛtarāṣṭra's mind, he returned to Mathurā, where he described everything about the situation in Hastināpura.



Chapter Fifty contains fifty-seven verses. In this chapter, Jarāsandha, having heard that his son-in-law Kaṁsa was killed, attacked Mathurā to kill Rāma and Kṛṣṇa but was defeated seventeen times. When Jarāsandha was about to attack for the eighteenth time, Kālayavana, having been advised by Nārada, also attacked Mathurā. Thus the Yādava dynasty entered a fort in the midst of the water and lived there by mystic power. After giving full protection to the Yādava dynasty and conferring with Lord Baladeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa emerged from Dvārakā. Chapter Fifty-one, which contains sixty-three verses, describes how Mucukunda killed Kālayavana simply by glancing upon him.



Chapter Fifty-two contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Mucukunda offers prayers to Kṛṣṇa, and then Kṛṣṇa kills all the soldiers of Kālayavana and returns to Dvārakā with their booty. When Jarāsandha attacked Mathurā again, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, as if afraid of him, fled to the top of a mountain, to which Jarāsandha then set fire. Unseen by Jarāsandha, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma jumped from the mountain and entered Dvārakā, which was surrounded by the sea. Jarāsandha, thinking that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma had been killed, returned with his soldiers to his own country, and Kṛṣṇa continued to live in Dvārakā. Rukmiṇī, the daughter of Vidarbha, was very much attracted to Kṛṣṇa, and she sent Kṛṣṇa a letter through a brāhmaṇa. Chapter Fifty-three contains fifty-seven verses. Following Rukmiṇī's request, Kṛṣṇa went to the city of Vidarbha and kidnapped her in the presence of such enemies as Jarāsandha. Chapter Fifty-four contains sixty verses. As described in this chapter, Kṛṣṇa defeated all the opposing princes and disfigured Rukmiṇī's brother Rukmī. Then Kṛṣṇa returned with Rukmiṇī to Dvārakā, where they were united in a regular marriage. Rukmī, however, remained in a place known as Bhojakaṭa, being angry at his brother-in-law, Kṛṣṇa. Chapter Fifty-five, containing forty verses, describes the birth of Pradyumna, how Pradyumna was kidnapped by Śambarāsura, and how Pradyumna later killed Śambarāsura and returned to Dvārakā with his wife, Ratidevī.



Chapter Fifty-six contains forty-five verses. As described in this chapter, King Satrājit, by the mercy of the sun-god, received a jewel called Syamantaka. Later, when this jewel was stolen, Satrājit unnecessarily became doubtful of Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa, to vindicate His position, retrieved the jewel, along with the daughter of Jāmbavān. Kṛṣṇa later married Satrājit's daughter and received a full dowry. As described in Chapter Fifty-seven, which contains forty-two verses, both Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa went to Hastināpura, having heard about the fire in the shellac house of the Pāṇḍavas. After Satrājit was killed by Śatadhanvā at the instigation of Akrūra and Kṛtavarmā, Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa returned to Dvārakā. Śatadhanvā left the Syamantaka jewel with Akrūra and fled to the forest. Thus although Kṛṣṇa killed Śatadhanvā, He was unable to retrieve the jewel. Finally the jewel was discovered and awarded to Akrūra. Chapter Fifty-eight contains fifty-eight verses. After the Pāṇḍavas finished living incognito in the forest, Kṛṣṇa went to Indraprastha to see them. He then married five wives, headed by Kālindī. After Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna set fire to the Khāṇḍava Forest, Arjuna received the Gāṇḍīva bow. The demon Maya Dānava constructed an assembly house for the Pāṇḍavas, and Duryodhana was very much aggrieved.



Chapter Fifty-nine contains forty-five verses. In this chapter, Kṛṣṇa, at the request of Indra, kills the demon Narakāsura, the son of the earth personified, along with the demon's associates, headed by Mura. The earth personified offers prayers to Kṛṣṇa and returns to Him all the paraphernalia that Narakāsura has stolen. Kṛṣṇa then bestows fearlessness upon the son of Narakāsura and marries the sixteen thousand princesses whom the demon kidnapped. Also in this chapter, Kṛṣṇa takes away the pārijāta plant from the heavenly planets, and the foolishness of Indra and others is described.



Chapter Sixty contains fifty-nine verses. In this chapter, Kṛṣṇa makes Rukmiṇī angry with His joking words. Kṛṣṇa pacifies Rukmiṇī, and there is a lover's quarrel between them. Chapter Sixty-one contains forty verses. This chapter contains a description of the sons and grandsons of Kṛṣṇa. At the time of Aniruddha's marriage, Balarāma kills Rukmī and breaks the teeth of the King of Kaliṅga.



Chapter Sixty-two contains thirty-three verses. This chapter begins the discourse concerning the abduction of Ūṣā, the daughter of Bāṇāsura, and the amorous pastimes between Ūṣā and Aniruddha. It also describes a fight between Aniruddha and Bāṇāsura and how Bāṇāsura seized Aniruddha with a snake-noose. Chapter Sixty-three, which contains fifty-three verses, describes how the strength of Lord Śiva was defeated in a battle between Bāṇāsura and the Yādavas. The Raudra-jvara, having been defeated by the Vaiṣṇava-jvara, offered prayers to Krishna. Kṛṣṇa severed all but four of Bāṇa's one thousand arms and thus showed him mercy. Kṛṣṇa then returned to Dvārakā with Ūṣā and Aniruddha.



Chapter Sixty-four contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Kṛṣṇa liberates King Nṛga, the son of Ikṣvāku, from a curse and instructs all kings by explaining the fault in misappropriating the property of a brāhmaṇa. In connection with the deliverance of King Nṛga, there are instructions for the Yādavas, who were puffed up with pride due to wealth, opulence, enjoyment and so on.



Chapter Sixty-five contains thirty-four verses. As described in this chapter, Lord Baladeva, desiring to see His friends and relatives, went to Gokula. In the months of Caitra and Vaiśākha, in the groves by the Yamunā, Lord Balarāma performed the rāsa-rasotsava and yamunā-karṣaṇa līlās in the association of His gopīs.



As described in Chapter Sixty-six, which contains forty-three verses, Krishna went to Kāśī and then killed Pauṇḍraka, as well as his friend the King of Kāśī, Sudakṣiṇa and others. Chapter Sixty-seven, which contains twenty-eight verses, describes how Lord Baladeva, while enjoying with many young girls on Raivataka Mountain, vanquished the extremely mischievous ape Dvivida, who was the brother of Mainda and a friend of Narakāsura's.



Chapter Sixty-eight has fifty-four verses. As described in this chapter, when Sāmba, the son of Jāmbavatī, kidnapped Lakṣmaṇā, the daughter of Duryodhana, he was captured in a fight with the Kauravas. In order to free him and establish peace, Lord Baladeva went to Hastināpura as a well-wisher. The Kauravas, however, were uncooperative, and upon seeing their arrogance, Lord Baladeva began pulling their city of Hastināpura with His plow. The Kauravas, headed by Duryodhana, offered prayers to Lord Baladeva, who then returned to Dvārakā with Sāmba and Lakṣmaṇā.



Chapter Sixty-nine contains forty-five verses. As described in this chapter, Kṛṣṇa exhibited His householder life with His sixteen thousand wives. Even the great sage Nārada was astonished at how Kṛṣṇa, having expanded Himself into sixteen thousand forms, was conducting His householder life. Thus Nārada offered prayers to Lord Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa was very much pleased with him.



Chapter Seventy, which contains forty-seven verses, describes how Kṛṣṇa exhibited His daily ritualistic ceremonies and how He released the kings arrested by Jarāsandha. While Lord Kṛṣṇa was receiving a messenger sent by these kings, Nārada came to see Kṛṣṇa and told Him news of the Pāṇḍavas. Nārada informed Kṛṣṇa that the Pāṇḍavas desired to perform a rājasūya sacrifice, and Kṛṣṇa agreed to attend it, but He first asked for Uddhava's decision about whether to give preference to killing King Jarāsandha or performing the rājasūya-yajña. Chapter Seventy-one contains forty-five verses, describing the happiness of the Pāṇḍavas when Kṛṣṇa went to Indraprastha. By the inconceivable desire of Kṛṣṇa, Jarāsandha would be killed, and the rājasūya-yajña would be performed by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.



Chapter Seventy-two contains forty-six verses. By agreeing to perform the rājasūya-yajña, Krishna gave Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira great pleasure. This chapter also describes the killing of Jarāsandha, the enthroning of his son, and the release of the kings whom Jarāsandha had arrested. Chapter Seventy-three contains thirty-five verses. After Lord Kṛṣṇa released the kings and restored their royal power, He was worshiped by Sahadeva, the son of Jarāsandha, and then He returned to Indraprastha with Bhīma and Arjuna. Chapter Seventy-four contains fifty-four verses. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira offered prayers to Kṛṣṇa and offered Him the first worship in the rājasūya-yajña. To honor the Lord in this way is the foremost duty of every man, but this was intolerable to Śiśupāla, the King of Cedi. Śiśupāla began to blaspheme Kṛṣṇa, who thus severed the King's head from his body and awarded him the salvation called sārūpya-mukti. After the conclusion of the rājasūya sacrifice, Kṛṣṇa returned to Dvārakā with His queens. Chapter Seventy-five contains forty verses. As described in this chapter, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, after the rājasūya-yajña, performed the final ritualistic bathing ceremonies. Duryodhana was bewildered in the palace constructed by Maya Dānava, and thus he felt insulted.



Chapter Seventy-six contains thirty-three verses, describing how Śālva, one of the kings Kṛṣṇa defeated when He kidnapped Rukmiṇī, decided to rid the entire world of the Yādavas. To defeat the Yādavas, Śālva worshiped Lord Śiva, who rewarded him with an aerial car named Saubha. When Śālva fought with the Vṛṣṇis, Pradyumna smashed the car designed by Maya Dānava, but he was attacked by Śālva's brother, whose name was Dyumān. Beaten unconscious by Dyumān's club, Pradyumna was carried some distance away from the warfield by his charioteer, but later he lamented having been removed from the battlefield. Chapter Seventy-seven contains thirty-seven verses. In this chapter, Pradyumna recovers from his injuries and begins fighting with Śālva. When Kṛṣṇa returned to Dvārakā from Indraprastha, He immediately went to the battlefield where Śālva and Pradyumna were fighting. There He killed Śālva, although Śālva was powerfully equipped with illusory weapons.



Chapter Seventy-eight contains forty verses. As described in this chapter, a friend of Śālva's named Dantavakra and Dantavakra's brother Vidūratha were killed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Instead of taking part in the fighting between the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas, Baladeva, who had been staying at Dvārakā-purī, went touring holy places. Because of the misbehavior of Romaharṣaṇa, Baladeva killed him at Naimiṣāraṇya and appointed his son Ugraśravā, Sūta Gosvāmī, the speaker of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, to continue the discourses on the Purāṇas. Chapter Seventy-nine contains thirty-four verses. This chapter describes how the brāhmaṇas of Naimiṣāraṇya advised Baladeva to atone for the death of Romaharṣaṇa. After killing a demon named Balvala, Baladeva traveled and bathed in holy places until He at last came to the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, where Bhīma and Duryodhana were fighting. Then He returned to Dvārakā and went again to Naimiṣāraṇya, where He instructed the ṛṣis. Then He left with His wife Revatī.



Chapter Eighty, which contains forty-five verses, describes how Sudāmā Vipra, a friend of Kṛṣṇa's, approached Kṛṣṇa for money and was worshiped by Kṛṣṇa, who reminisced with him about their boyhood at the guru-kula. Chapter Eighty-one contains forty-one verses. This chapter describes the friendly talks between Kṛṣṇa and His friend Sudāmā. Kṛṣṇa very gladly accepted a gift of flat rice from Sudāmā Vipra. When Sudāmā Vipra returned home, he saw that everything there was wonderfully opulent, and he praised the friendship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. With the gifts of the Lord, he enjoyed material opulence, and later he was promoted back home, back to Godhead.



Chapter Eighty-two contains forty-eight verses. This chapter describes how the Yādavas went to Kurukṣetra because of a solar eclipse and how other kings spoke to them of Kṛṣṇa. At this meeting, Kṛṣṇa satisfied Nanda Mahārāja and the residents of Vṛndāvana, who had also come there. Chapter Eighty-three contains forty-three verses, describing how the women assembled at Kurukṣetra engaged in topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and how Draupadī asked all Kṛṣṇa's queens about how they had married Him. Chapter Eighty-four contains seventy-one verses. As described in this chapter, when great sages went to see Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra, Kṛṣṇa took this opportunity to praise them. Because Vasudeva desired to perform a great sacrifice on this occasion, the sages advised him regarding worship of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After the yajña was performed, all who were present dispersed to their respective abodes. Chapter Eighty-five contains fifty-nine verses. At the request of His father and mother, Kṛṣṇa, by His mercy, returned their dead sons, all of whom were liberated. Chapter Eighty-six contains fifty-nine verses. This chapter describes how Arjuna kidnapped Subhadrā with a great fight. It also describes how Kṛṣṇa went to Mithilā to favor His devotee Bahulāśva and stay at the house of Śrutadeva and advise them about spiritual advancement.



Chapter Eighty-seven contains fifty verses, describing the prayers offered to Nārāyaṇa by the Vedas. Chapter Eighty-eight contains forty verses. This chapter describes how Vaiṣṇavas become transcendental by worshiping Lord Viṣṇu and then return home, back to Godhead. By worship of demigods, one may get material power, but this chapter describes how an ordinary living being in the material world can be favored by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and it establishes Lord Viṣṇu's supremacy above Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. Chapter Eighty-nine contains sixty-five verses, disclosing who is the best among the material deities. Although Viṣṇu is among the three deities-Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara-He is transcendental and supreme. In this chapter we also find a description of how Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna went to Mahākāla-pura to deliver the son of a Dvārakā brāhmaṇa and how Arjuna was astonished. Chapter Ninety contains fifty verses. This chapter summarizes Kṛṣṇa's līlās and presents the logic of madhureṇa samāpayet, establishing that everything ends well in transcendental bliss.





Chapter One



The Advent of Lord Kṛṣṇa: Introduction





The summary of the First Chapter is as follows. This chapter describes how Kaṁsa, frightened by hearing an omen about his being killed by the eighth son of Devakī, killed Devakī's sons one after another.





When Śukadeva Gosvāmī finished describing the dynasty of Yadu, as well as the dynasties of the moon-god and sun-god, Mahārāja Parīkṣit requested him to describe Lord Kṛṣṇa, who appeared with Baladeva in the Yadu dynasty, and how Kṛṣṇa performed His activities within this world. Kṛṣṇa is transcendental, the King said, and therefore to understand His activities is the occupation of liberated persons. Hearing of kṛṣṇa-līlā is the boat by which to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Except for an animal killer or one who is following a policy of suicide, every intelligent person must strive to understand Kṛṣṇa and His activities.





Kṛṣṇa was the only worshipable Deity for the Pāṇḍavas. When Mahārāja Parīkṣit was in the womb of his mother, Uttarā, Kṛṣṇa saved him from the attack of the brahma-śastra. Now Mahārāja Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī how His Lordship Baladeva, the son of Rohiṇī, could have appeared in the womb of Devakī. Why did Kṛṣṇa transfer Himself from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana, King Parīkṣit asked, and how did He live there with His family members? What did Kṛṣṇa do in Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, and why did He kill His maternal uncle Kaṁsa? For how many years did Kṛṣṇa reside in Dvārakā, and how many queens did He have? Mahārāja Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī all these questions. He also requested Śukadeva Gosvāmī to describe other activities of Kṛṣṇa about which he could not inquire.





When Śukadeva Gosvāmī began to speak about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, Mahārāja Parīkṣit forgot the fatigue brought about by his fasting. Enthusiastic to describe Kṛṣṇa, Śukadeva Gosvāmī said, "Like the waters of the Ganges, descriptions of the activities of Kṛṣṇa can purify the entire universe. The speaker, the inquirer and the audience all become purified."





Once when the entire world was overburdened by the increasing military power of demons in the form of kings, mother earth assumed the shape of a cow and approached Lord Brahmā for relief, Sympathetic to mother earth's lamentation, Brahmā, accompanied by Lord Śiva and other demigods, took the cow-shaped mother earth to the shore of the milk ocean, where he offered prayers to please Lord Viṣṇu, who lay there on an island in transcendental ecstasy. Brahmā thereafter understood the advice of Mahā-Viṣṇu, who informed him that He would appear on the surface of the earth to mitigate the burden created by the demons. The demigods, along with their wives, should appear there as associates of Lord Kṛṣṇa in the family of Yadu to increase the sons and grandsons in that dynasty. By the will of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Anantadeva would appear first, as Balarāma, and Kṛṣṇa's potency, yogamāyā, would also appear. Brahmā informed mother earth about all this, and then he returned to his own abode.





After marrying Devakī, Vasudeva was returning home with her on a chariot driven by Kaṁsa, her brother, when an ominous voice addressed Kaṁsa, warning him that Devakī's eighth son would kill him. Upon hearing this omen, Kaṁsa was immediately ready to kill Devakī, but Vasudeva diplomatically began to instruct him. Vasudeva stressed that it would not be good for Kaṁsa to kill his younger sister, especially at the time of her marriage. Anyone who possesses a material body must die, Vasudeva advised him. Every living entity lives in a body for some time and then transmigrates to another body, but one is unfortunately misled into accepting the body as the soul. If a person under this mistaken conception wants to kill another body, he is condemned as hellish.





Because Kaṁsa was not satisfied by Vasudeva's instructions, Vasudeva devised a plan. He offered to bring Kaṁsa all of Devakī's children so that Kaṁsa could kill them. Why then should Kaṁsa kill Devakī now? Kaṁsa was satisfied by this proposal. In due course of time, when Devakī gave birth to a child, Vasudeva brought the newborn baby to Kaṁsa, who, upon seeing Vasudeva's magnanimity, was struck with wonder. When Vasudeva gave Kaṁsa the child, Kaṁsa, showing some intelligence, said that since he was to be killed by the eighth child, why should he kill the first? Although Vasudeva did not trust him, Kaṁsa requested Vasudeva to take the child back. Later, however, after Nārada approached Kaṁsa and disclosed to him that the demigods were appearing in the Yadu and Vṛṣṇi dynasties and conspiring to kill him, Kaṁsa decided to kill all the children born in these families, and he also decided that any child born from the womb of Devakī must be killed. Thus he arrested and imprisoned both Devakī and Vasudeva and killed six of their sons, one after another. Nārada had also informed Kaṁsa that in his previous birth Kaṁsa was Kālanemi, a demon killed by Viṣṇu. Consequently, Kaṁsa became a great enemy to all the descendants of the yadu-vaṁśa, the Yadu dynasty. He even arrested and imprisoned his own father, Ugrasena, for Kaṁsa wanted to enjoy the kingdom alone.





Kṛṣṇa has threefold pastimes-the Vraja-līlā, Māthura-līlā and Dvārakā-līlā. As already mentioned, in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there are ninety chapters, which describe all these līlās. The first four chapters describe Brahmā's prayers for the relief of the earth's burden, and they also describe the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Chapters Five through Thirty-nine recount Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Vṛndāvana. The Fortieth Chapter describes how Kṛṣṇa enjoyed in the water of the Yamunā and how Akrūra offered prayers. Chapters Forty-one through Fifty-one, eleven chapters, tell of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Māthura, and Chapters Fifty-two through Ninety, thirty-nine chapters, relate Kṛṣṇa's pastimes in Dvārakā.





Chapters Twenty-nine through Thirty-three describe Kṛṣṇa's dancing with the gopīs, known as the rāsa-līlā. Therefore these five chapters are known as rāsa-pañcādhyāya. The Forty-seventh Chapter of the Tenth Canto is a description known as the bhramara-gītā.





TEXT 1



śrī-rājovāca

kathito vaṁśa-vistāro

bhavatā soma-sūryayoḥ

rājñāṁ cobhaya-vaṁśyānāṁ

caritaṁ paramādbhutam

SYNONYMS



śrī-rājā uvāca-King Parīkṣit said; kathitaḥ-has already been described; vaṁśa-vistāraḥ-a broad description of the dynasties; bhavatā-by Your Lordship; soma-sūryayoḥ-of the moon-god and the sun-god; rājñām-of the kings; ca-and; ubhaya-both; vaṁśyānām-of the members of the dynasties; caritam-the character; parama-exalted; adbhutam-and wonderful.





King Parīkṣit said: My dear lord, you have elaborately described the dynasties of both the moon-god and the sun-god, with the exalted and wonderful character of their kings.





At the end of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, Śukadeva Gosvāmī summarized the activities of Kṛṣṇa. He spoke of how Kṛṣṇa had personally appeared to reduce the burden on the earth, how He had manifested His pastimes as a householder, and how, soon after His birth, He had transferred Himself to His Vrajabhūmi-līlā. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, being naturally a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, wanted to hear more about Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, to encourage Śukadeva Gosvāmī to continue speaking about Kṛṣṇa and give further details, he thanked Śukadeva Gosvāmī for having described the activities of Kṛṣṇa in brief. Śukadeva Gosvāmī had said:



jāto gataḥ pitṛ-gṛhād vrajam edhitārtho

hatvā ripūn suta-śatāni kṛtorudāraḥ

utpādya teṣu puruṣaḥ kratubhiḥ samīje

ātmānam ātma-nigamaṁ prathayañ janeṣu





"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, known as līlā-puruṣottama, appeared as the son of Vasudeva but immediately left His father's home and went to Vṛndāvana to expand His loving relationships with His confidential devotees. In Vṛndāvana the Lord killed many demons, and afterward He returned to Dvārakā, where according to Vedic principles He married many wives who were the best of women, begot through them hundreds of sons, and performed sacrifices for His own worship to establish the principles of householder life." (Bhāg. 9.24.66)



The Yadu dynasty belonged to the family descending from Soma, the moon-god. Although the planetary systems are so arranged that the sun comes first, before the moon, Parīkṣit Mahārāja gave more respect to the dynasty of the moon-god, the soma-vaṁśa, because in the Yādava dynasty, descending from the moon, Kṛṣṇa had appeared. There are two different kṣatriya families of the royal order, one descending from the king of the moon planet and the other descending from the king of the sun. Whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, He generally appears in a kṣatriya family because He comes to establish religious principles and the life of righteousness. According to the Vedic system, the kṣatriya family is the protector of the human race. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as Lord Rāmacandra, He appeared in the sūrya-vaṁśa, the family descending from the sun-god, and when He appeared as Lord Kṛṣṇa, He did so in the Yadu dynasty, or yadu-vaṁśa, whose descent was from the moon-god. In the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, there is a long list of the kings of the yadu-vaṁśa. All the kings in both the soma-vaṁśa and sūrya-vaṁśa were great and powerful, and Mahārāja Parīkṣit praised them very highly (rājñāṁ cobhaya-vaṁśyānāṁ caritaṁ paramādbhutam). Nonetheless, he wanted to hear more about the soma-vaṁśa because that was the dynasty in which Kṛṣṇa had appeared.



The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, is described in Brahma-saṁhitā as the abode of cintāmaṇi: cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam [Bs. 5.29]. The Vṛndāvana-dhāma on this earth is a replica of that same abode. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (8.20), in the spiritual sky there is another, eternal nature, transcendental to manifested and unmanifested matter. The manifested world can be seen in the form of many stars and planets such as the sun and moon, but beyond this is the unmanifested, which is imperceptible to those who are embodied. And beyond this unmanifested matter is the spiritual kingdom, which is described in Bhagavad-gītā as supreme and eternal. That kingdom is never annihilated. Although material nature is subject to repeated creation and annihilation, that spiritual nature remains as it is eternally. In the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that spiritual nature, the spiritual world, is described as Vṛndāvana, Goloka Vṛndāvana or Vraja-dhāma. The elaborate description of the above-mentioned śloka from the Ninth Canto-jāto gataḥ pitṛ-gṛhād-will be found here, in the Tenth Canto.





TEXT 2



yadoś ca dharma-śīlasya

nitarāṁ muni-sattama

tatrāṁśenāvatīrṇasya

viṣṇor vīryāṇi śaṁsa naḥ

SYNONYMS



yadoḥ-of Yadu or the Yadu dynasty; ca-also; dharma-śīlasya-who were strictly attached to religious principles; nitarām-highly qualified; muni-sattama-O best of all munis, king of the munis (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); tatra-in that dynasty; aṁśena-with His plenary expansion Baladeva; avatīrṇasya-who appeared as an incarnation; viṣṇoḥ-of Lord Viṣṇu; vīryāṇi-the glorious activities; śaṁsa-kindly describe; naḥ-unto us.





O best of munis, you have also described the descendants of Yadu, who were very pious and strictly adherent to religious principles. Now, if you will, kindly describe the wonderful, glorious activities of Lord Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa, who appeared in that Yadu dynasty with Baladeva, His plenary expansion.





The Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1) explains that Kṛṣṇa is the origin of the viṣṇu-tattva.



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam





"Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no other origin, for He is the prime cause of all causes."



yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-vilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"The Brahmās, the heads of the innumerable universes, live only for the duration of one breath of Mahā-Viṣṇu. I worship Govinda, the original Lord, of whom Mahā-Viṣṇu is but a portion of a plenary portion." (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.48)



Govinda, Kṛṣṇa, is the original Personality of Godhead. Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Even Lord Mahā-Viṣṇu, who by His breathing creates many millions upon millions of universes, is Lord Kṛṣṇa's kalā-viśeṣa, or plenary portion of a plenary portion. Mahā-Viṣṇu is a plenary expansion of Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is a plenary expansion of Nārāyaṇa. Nārāyaṇa is a plenary expansion of the catur-vyūha, and the catur-vyūha are plenary expansions of Baladeva, the first manifestation of Kṛṣṇa. Therefore when Kṛṣṇa appeared with Baladeva, all the viṣṇu-tattvas appeared with Him.



Mahārāja Parīkṣit requested Śukadeva Gosvāmī to describe Kṛṣṇa and His glorious activities. Another meaning may be derived from this verse as follows, Although Śukadeva Gosvāmī was the greatest muni, he could describe Kṛṣṇa only partially (aṁśena), for no one can describe Kṛṣṇa fully. It is said that Anantadeva has thousands of heads, but although He tries to describe Kṛṣṇa with thousands of tongues, His descriptions are still incomplete.





TEXT 3



avatīrya yador vaṁśe

bhagavān bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

kṛtavān yāni viśvātmā

tāni no vada vistarāt

SYNONYMS



avatīrya-after descending; yadoḥ vaṁśe-in the dynasty of Yadu; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ-who is the cause of the cosmic manifestation; kṛtavān-executed; yāni-whatever (activities); viśva-ātmā-the Supersoul of the entire universe; tāni-all of those (activities); naḥ-unto us; vada-kindly say; vistarāt-elaborately.





The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the cause of the cosmic manifestation, appeared in the dynasty of Yadu. Please tell me elaborately about His glorious activities and character, from the beginning to the end of His life.





In this verse the words kṛtavān yāni indicate that all the different activities Kṛṣṇa performed while present on earth are beneficial to human society. If religionists, philosophers and people in general simply hear the activities of Kṛṣṇa, they will be liberated. We have described several times that there are two kinds of kṛṣṇa-kathā, represented by Bhagavad-gītā, spoken personally by Kṛṣṇa about Himself, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, spoken by Śukadeva Gosvāmī about the glories of Kṛṣṇa. Anyone who becomes even slightly interested in kṛṣṇa-kathā is liberated. Kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet (Bhāg. 12.3.51). Simply by chanting or repeating kṛṣṇa-kathā, one is liberated from the contamination of Kali-yuga. Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore advised, yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). This is the mission of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: to hear about Kṛṣṇa and thus be liberated from material bondage.





TEXT 4



nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-'bhirāmāt

ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt

pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt

SYNONYMS



nivṛtta-released from; tarṣaiḥ-lust or material activities; upagīyamānāt-which is described or sung; bhava-auṣadhāt-which is the right medicine for the material disease; śrotra-the process of aural reception; manaḥ-the subject matter of thought for the mind; abhirāmāt-from the pleasing vibrations from such glorification; kaḥ-who; uttamaśloka-of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-anuvādāt-from describing such activities; pumān-a person; virajyeta-can keep himself aloof; vinā-except; paśu-ghnāt-either a butcher or one who is killing his own personal existence.





Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is performed in the paramparā system; that is, it is conveyed from spiritual master to disciple. Such glorification is relished by those no longer interested in the false, temporary glorification of this cosmic manifestation. Descriptions of the Lord are the right medicine for the conditioned soul undergoing repeated birth and death. Therefore, who will cease hearing such glorification of the Lord except a butcher or one who is killing his own self?





In India it is the practice among the general populace to hear about Kṛṣṇa, either from Bhagavad-gītā or from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in order to gain relief from the disease of repeated birth and death. Although India is now fallen, when there is a message that someone will speak about Bhagavad-gītā or Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, thousands of people still gather to hear. This verse indicates, however, that such recitation of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam must be done by persons completely freed from material desires (nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ). Everyone within this material world, beginning from Brahmā down to the insignificant ant, is full of material desires for sense enjoyment, and everyone is busy in sense gratification, but when thus engaged one cannot fully understand the value of kṛṣṇa-kathā, either in the form of Bhagavad-gītā or in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.



If we hear the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from liberated persons, this hearing will certainly free us from the bondage of material activities, but hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam spoken by a professional reciter cannot actually help us achieve liberation. Kṛṣṇa-kathā is very simple. In Bhagavad-gītā it is said that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As He Himself explains, mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya: "O Arjuna, there is no truth superior to Me." (Bg. 7.7) Simply by understanding this fact-that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead-one can become a liberated person. But, especially in this age, because people are interested in hearing Bhagavad-gītā from unscrupulous persons who depart from the simple presentation of Bhagavad-gītā and distort it for their personal satisfaction, they fail to derive the real benefit. There are big scholars, politicians, philosophers and scientists who speak on Bhagavad-gītā in their own polluted way, and people in general hear from them, being uninterested in hearing the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from a devotee. A devotee is one who has no other motive for reciting Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam than to serve the Lord. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has therefore advised us to hear the glories of the Lord from a realized person (bhāgavata paro diya bhāgavata sthane). Unless one is personally a realized soul in the science of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, a neophyte should not approach him to hear about the Lord, for this is strictly forbidden by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, who quotes from the Padma Purāṇa:



avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ

pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam

śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyaṁ

sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ





One should avoid hearing from a person not situated in Vaiṣṇava behavior. A Vaiṣṇava is nivṛtta-tṛṣṇa; that is, he has no material purpose, for his only purpose is to preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness. So-called scholars, philosophers and politicians exploit the importance of Bhagavad-gītā by distorting its meaning for their own purposes. Therefore this verse warns that kṛṣṇa-kathā should be recited by a person who is nivṛtta-tṛṣṇa. Śukadeva Gosvāmī epitomizes the proper reciter for Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and Parīkṣit Mahārāja, who purposefully left his kingdom and family prior to meeting death, epitomizes the person fit to hear it. A qualified reciter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives the right medicine (bhavauṣadhi) for the conditioned souls. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore trying to train qualified preachers to recite Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā throughout the entire world, so that people in general in all parts of the world may take advantage of this movement and thus be relieved of the threefold miseries of material existence.



The instructions of Bhagavad-gītā and the descriptions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are so pleasing that almost anyone suffering from the threefold miseries of material existence will desire to hear the glories of the Lord from these books and thus benefit on the path of liberation. Two classes of men, however, will never be interested in hearing the message of Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam-those who are determined to commit suicide and those determined to kill cows and other animals for the satisfaction of their own tongues. Although such persons may make a show of hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam at a Bhāgavata-saptāha, this is but another creation of the karmīs, who cannot derive any benefit from such a performance. The word paśu-ghnāt is important in this connection. paśu-ghna means "butcher." Persons fond of performing ritualistic ceremonies for elevation to the higher planetary systems must offer sacrifices (yajñas) by killing animals. Lord Buddhadeva therefore rejected the authority of the Vedas because his mission was to stop animal sacrifices, which are recommended in Vedic ritualistic ceremonies.



nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātaṁ

sa-daya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātaṁ

keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare





(Gīta-govinda)



Even though animal sacrifices are sanctioned in Vedic ceremonies, men who kill animals for such ceremonies are considered butchers. Butchers cannot be interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, for they are already materially allured. Their only interest lies in developing comforts for the temporary body.



bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ

tayāpahṛta-cetasām

vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ

samādhau na vidhīyate





"In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place." (Bg. 2.44) Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says:



manuṣya-janama pāiyā, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā,

jāniyā śuniyā viṣa khāinu

Anyone who is not Kṛṣṇa conscious and who therefore does not engage in the service of the Lord is also paśu-ghna, for he is willingly drinking poison. Such a person cannot be interested in kṛṣṇa-kathā because he still has a desire for material sense gratification; he is not nivṛtta-tṛṣṇa. As it is said, traivargikās te puruṣā vimukhā hari-medhasaḥ. Those interested in trivarga-that is, in dharma, artha and kāma-are religious for the sake of achieving a material position with which to gain better facilities for sense gratification. Such persons are killing themselves by willingly keeping themselves in the cycle of birth and death. They cannot be interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



For kṛṣṇa-kathā, topics about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, there must be a speaker and a hearer, both of whom can be interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness if they are no longer interested in material topics. One can actually see how this attitude automatically develops in persons who are Kṛṣṇa conscious. Although the devotees of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement are quite young men, they no longer read materialistic newspapers, magazines and so on, for they are no longer interested in such topics (nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ). They completely give up the bodily understanding of life. For topics concerning Uttamaśloka, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the spiritual master speaks, and the disciple hears with attention. Unless both of them are free from material desires, they cannot be interested in topics of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The spiritual master and disciple do not need to understand anything more than Kṛṣṇa because simply by understanding Kṛṣṇa and talking about Kṛṣṇa, one becomes a perfectly learned person (yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati). The Lord sits within everyone's heart, and by the grace of the Lord the devotee receives instructions directly from the Lord Himself, who says in Bhagavad-gītā (15.15):



sarvasya cāhaṁ hṛdi sanniviṣṭo

mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca

vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedānta-kṛd veda-vid eva cāham





"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known; indeed, I am the compiler of Vedānta, and I am the knower of the Vedas." Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so exalted that one who is perfectly situated in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, under the direction of the spiritual master, is fully satisfied by reading kṛṣṇa-kathā as found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā and similar Vedic literatures. Since merely talking about Kṛṣṇa is so pleasing, we can simply imagine how pleasing it is to render service to Kṛṣṇa.



When discourses on kṛṣṇa-kathā take place between a liberated spiritual master and his disciple, others also sometimes take advantage of hearing these topics and also benefit. These topics are the medicine to stop the repetition of birth and death. The cycle of repeated birth and death, by which one takes on different bodies again and again, is called bhava or bhava-roga. If anyone, willingly or unwillingly, hears kṛṣṇa-kathā, his bhava-roga, the disease of birth and death, will certainly stop. Therefore kṛṣṇa-kathā is called bhavauṣadha, the remedy to stop the repetition of birth and death. Karmīs, or persons attached to material sense enjoyment, generally cannot give up their material desires, but kṛṣṇa-kathā is such a potent medicine that if one is induced to hear kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, he will certainly be freed from this disease. A practical example is Dhruva Mahārāja, who at the end of his tapasya was fully satisfied. When the Lord wanted to give Dhruva a benediction, Dhruva refused it. Svāmin kṛtārtho'smi varaṁ na yāce. "My dear Lord," he said, "I am fully satisfied. I do not ask for any benediction for material sense gratification." We actually see that even young boys and girls in the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement have given up their long practice of bad habits like illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. Because Kṛṣṇa consciousness is so potent that it gives them full satisfaction, they are no longer interested in material sense gratification.





TEXTS 5–7



pitāmahā me samare 'marañjayair

devavratādyātirathais timiṅgilaiḥ

duratyayaṁ kaurava-sainya-sāgaraṁ

kṛtvātaran vatsa-padaṁ sma yat-plavāḥ

drauṇy-astra-vipluṣṭam idaṁ mad-aṅgaṁ



santāna-bījaṁ kuru-pāṇḍavānām

jugopa kukṣiṁ gata ātta-cakro

mātuś ca me yaḥ śaraṇaṁ gatāyāḥ

vīryāṇi tasyākhila-deha-bhājām



antar bahiḥ pūruṣa-kāla-rūpaiḥ

prayacchato mṛtyum utāmṛtaṁ ca

māyā-manuṣyasya vadasva vidvan

SYNONYMS



pitāmahāḥ-my grandfathers, the five Pāṇḍavas (Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva); me-my; samare-on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra; amaram jayaiḥ-with fighters who could gain victory over the demigods on the battlefield; devavrata-ādya-Bhīṣmadeva and others; atirathaiḥ-great commanders in chief; timiṅgilaiḥ-resembling great timiṅgila fish, which can easily eat large sharks; duratyayam-very difficult to cross; kaurava-sainya-sāgaram-the ocean of the assembled soldiers of the Kauravas; kṛtvā-considering such an ocean; ataran-crossed it; vatsa-padam-exactly as one steps over a small hoofprint of a calf; sma-in the past; yat-plavāḥ-the shelter of the boat of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet; drauṇi-of Aśvatthāmā; astra-by the brahmāstra; vipluṣṭam-being attacked and burned; idam-this; mat-aṅgam-my body; santāna-bījam-the only seed left, the last descendant of the family; kuru-pāṇḍavānām-of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas (because no one but me lived after the Battle of Kurukṣetra); jugopa-gave protection; kukṣim-within the womb; gataḥ-being placed; ātta-cakraḥ-taking in hand the disc; mātuḥ-of my mother; ca-also; me-my; yaḥ-the Lord who; śaraṇam-the shelter; gatāyāḥ-who had taken; vīryāṇi-the glorification of the transcendental characteristics; tasya-of Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); akhila-deha-bhājām-of all the materially embodied living entities; antaḥ bahiḥ-inside and outside; pūruṣa-of the Supreme Person; kāla-rūpaiḥ-in the forms of eternal time; prayacchataḥ-who is the giver; mṛtyum-of death; uta-it is so said; amṛtam ca-and eternal life; māyā-manuṣyasya-of the Lord, who appeared as an ordinary human being by His own potency; vadasva-kindly describe; vidvan-O learned speaker (Śukadeva Gosvāmī).





Taking the boat of Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, my grandfather Arjuna and others crossed the ocean of the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, in which such commanders as Bhīṣmadeva resembled great fish that could very easily have swallowed them. By the mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, my grandfathers crossed this ocean, which was very difficult to cross, as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf. Because my mother surrendered unto Lord Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, the Lord, Sudarśana-cakra in hand, entered her womb and saved my body, the body of the last remaining descendant of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas, which was almost destroyed by the fiery weapon of Aśvatthāmā. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, appearing within and outside of all materially embodied living beings by His own potency in the forms of eternal time-that is, as Paramātmā and as virāṭ-rūpa-gave liberation to everyone, either as cruel death or as life. Kindly enlighten me by describing His transcendental characteristics.





As stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.58):



samāśritā ye pada-pallava-plavaṁ

mahat-padaṁ puṇya-yaśo murāreḥ

bhavāmbudhir vatsa-padaṁ paraṁ padaṁ

padaṁ padaṁ yad vipadāṁ na teṣām





"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murāri, or the enemy of the Mura demon, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a calf's hoofprint. His goal is paraṁ padam, or Vaikuṇṭha, the place where there are no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every step."



One who seeks shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa is immediately protected by the Lord. As the Lord promises in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66), ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ: "I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear." By taking shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa, one comes under the safest protection. Thus when the Pāṇḍavas took shelter at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, all of them were on the safe side of the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, therefore, felt obliged to think of Kṛṣṇa in the last days of his life. This is the ideal result of Kṛṣṇa consciousness: ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ. If at the time of death one can remember Kṛṣṇa, one's life is successful. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, therefore, because of his many obligations to Kṛṣṇa, intelligently decided to think of Kṛṣṇa constantly during the last days of his life. Kṛṣṇa had saved the Pāṇḍavas, Mahārāja Parīkṣit's grandfathers, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, and Kṛṣṇa had saved Mahārāja Parīkṣit himself when he was attacked by the brahmāstra of Aśvatthāmā. Kṛṣṇa acted as the friend and worshipable Deity of the Pāṇḍava family. Moreover, apart from Lord Kṛṣṇa's personal contact with the Pāṇḍavas, Kṛṣṇa is the Supersoul of all living entities, and He gives everyone liberation, even if one is not a pure devotee. Kaṁsa, for example, was not at all a devotee, yet Kṛṣṇa, after killing him, gave him salvation. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is beneficial to everyone, whether one is a pure devotee or a nondevotee. This is the glory of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Considering this, who will not take shelter at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is described in this verse as māyā-manuṣya because He descends exactly like a human being. He is not obliged to come here, like karmīs, or ordinary living beings; rather, He appears by His own internal energy (sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā [Bg. 4.6]) just to show favor to the fallen conditioned souls. Kṛṣṇa is always situated in His original position as sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], and anyone who renders service to Him is also situated in his original, spiritual identity (svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ). This is the highest perfection of human life.





TEXT 8



rohiṇyās tanayaḥ prokto

rāmaḥ saṅkarṣaṇas tvayā

devakyā garbha-sambandhaḥ

kuto dehāntaraṁ vinā

SYNONYMS



rohiṇyāḥ-of Rohiṇīdevī, the mother of Baladeva; tanayaḥ-the son; proktaḥ-is well known; rāmaḥ-Balarāma; saṅkarṣaṇaḥ-Balarāma is none other than Saṅkarṣaṇa, the first Deity in the quadruple group (Saṅkarṣaṇa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Vāsudeva); tvayā-by you (it is so said); devakyāḥ-of Devakī, the mother of Kṛṣṇa; garbha-sambandhaḥ-connected with the womb; kutaḥ-how; deha-antaram-transferring bodies; vinā-without.





My dear Śukadeva Gosvāmī, you have already explained that Saṅkarṣaṇa, who belongs to the second quadruple, appeared as the son of Rohiṇī named Balarāma. If Balarāma was not transferred from one body to another, how is it possible that He was first in the womb of Devakī and then in the womb of Rohiṇī? Kindly explain this to me.





Here is a question particularly directed at understanding Balarāma, who is Saṅkarṣaṇa Himself. Balarāma is well known as the son of Rohiṇī, yet it is also known that He was the son of Devakī. Parīkṣit Mahārāja wanted to understand the mystery of Balarāma's being the son of both Devakī and Rohiṇī.





TEXT 9



kasmān mukundo bhagavān

pitur gehād vrajaṁ gataḥ

kva vāsaṁ jñātibhiḥ sārdhaṁ

kṛtavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

SYNONYMS



kasmāt-why; mukundaḥ-Kṛṣṇa, who can award liberation to everyone; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pituḥ-of His father (Vasudeva); gehāt-from the house; vrajam-to Vrajadhāma, Vrajabhūmi; gataḥ-went; kva-where; vāsam-placed Himself to live; jñātibhiḥ-His relatives; sārdham-with; kṛtavān-did so; sātvatām patiḥ-the master of all Vaiṣṇava devotees.





Why did Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, leave the house of His father, Vasudeva, and transfer Himself to the house of Nanda in Vṛndāvana? Where did the Lord, the master of the Yadu dynasty, live with His relatives in Vṛndāvana?





These are inquiries about the itinerary of Kṛṣṇa. Just after His birth in the house of Vasudeva in Mathurā, Kṛṣṇa transferred Himself to Gokula, on the other side of the Yamunā, and after some days He moved with His father, mother and other relatives to Nanda-grāma, Vṛndāvana. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was very much eager to hear about Kṛṣṇa's activities in Vṛndāvana. This entire canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is full of activities performed in Vṛndāvana and Dvārakā. The first forty chapters describe Kṛṣṇa's Vṛndāvana affairs, and the next fifty describe Kṛṣṇa's activities in Dvārakā. Mahārāja Parīkṣit, to fulfill his desire to hear about Kṛṣṇa, requested Śukadeva Gosvāmī to describe these activities in full detail.





TEXT 10



vraje vasan kim akaron

madhupuryāṁ ca keśavaḥ

bhrātaraṁ cāvadhīt kaṁsaṁ

mātur addhātad-arhaṇam

SYNONYMS



vraje-at Vṛndāvana; vasan-while residing; kim akarot-what did He do; madhupuryām-in Mathurā; ca-and; keśavaḥ-Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Keśī; bhrātaram-the brother; ca-and; avadhīt-killed; kaṁsam-Kaṁsa; mātuḥ-of His mother; addhā-directly; a-tat-arhaṇam-which was not at all sanctioned by the śāstras.





Lord Kṛṣṇa lived both in Vṛndāvana and in Mathurā. What did He do there? Why did He kill Kaṁsa, His mother's brother? Such killing is not at all sanctioned in the śāstras.





One's maternal uncle, the brother of one's mother, is on the level of one's father. When a maternal uncle has no son, his nephew legally inherits his property. Therefore, why did Kṛṣṇa directly kill Kaṁsa, the brother of His mother? Mahārāja Parīkṣit was very much inquisitive about the facts in this regard.





TEXT 11



dehaṁ mānuṣam āśritya

kati varṣāṇi vṛṣṇibhiḥ

yadu-puryāṁ sahāvātsīt

patnyaḥ katy abhavan prabhoḥ

SYNONYMS



deham-body; mānuṣam-exactly like a man; āśritya-accepting; kati varṣāṇi-how many years; vṛṣṇibhiḥ-in the company of the Vṛṣṇis, those who were born in the Vṛṣṇi family; yadu-puryām-in Dvārakā, in the residential quarters of the Yadus; saha-with; avātsīt-the Lord lived; patnyaḥ-wives; kati-how many; abhavan-were there; prabhoḥ-of the Lord.





Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material body, yet He appears as a human being. For how many years did He live with the descendants of Vṛṣṇi? How many wives did He marry, and for how many years did He live in Dvārakā?





In many places the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], possessing a spiritual, blissful body. His bodily feature is narākṛti, that is, exactly like that of a human being. Here the same idea is repeated in the words mānuṣam āśritya, which indicate that He accepts a body exactly like that of a man. Everywhere it is confirmed that Kṛṣṇa is never nirākāra, or formless. He has His form, exactly like that of a human being. There is no doubt about this.





TEXT 12



etad anyac ca sarvaṁ me

mune kṛṣṇa-viceṣṭitam

vaktum arhasi sarvajña

śraddadhānāya vistṛtam

SYNONYMS



etat-all these details; anyat ca-and others also; sarvam-everything; me-unto me; mune-O great sage; kṛṣṇa-viceṣṭitam-the activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vaktum-to describe; arhasi-you are able; sarva-jña-because you know everything; śraddadhānāya-because I am not envious but have all faith in Him; vistṛtam-in full detail.





O great sage, who know everything about Kṛṣṇa, please describe in detail all the activities of which I have inquired and also those of which I have not, for I have full faith and am very eager to hear of them.





TEXT 13



naiṣātiduḥsahā kṣun māṁ

tyaktodam api bādhate

pibantaṁ tvan-mukhāmbhoja-

cyutaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam

SYNONYMS



na-not; eṣā-all this; ati-duḥsahā-extremely difficult to bear; kṣut-hunger; mām-unto me; tyakta-udam-even after giving up drinking water; api-also; bādhate-does not hinder; pibantam-while drinking; tvat-mukha-ambhoja-cyutam-emanating from your lotus mouth; hari-kathā-amṛtam-the nectar of topics concerning Kṛṣṇa.





Because of my vow on the verge of death, I have given up even drinking water, yet because I am drinking the nectar of topics about Kṛṣṇa, which is flowing from the lotus mouth of Your Lordship, my hunger and thirst, which are extremely difficult to bear, cannot hinder me.





To prepare to meet death in seven days, Mahārāja Parīkṣit gave up all food and drink. As a human being, he was certainly both hungry and thirsty, and therefore Śukadeva Gosvāmī might have wanted to stop narrating the transcendental topics of Kṛṣṇa; but despite his fast, Mahārāja Parīkṣit was not at all fatigued. "The hunger and thirst from my fast do not disturb me," he said. "Once when I felt very thirsty, I went to the āśrama of Śamīka Muni to drink water, but the muni did not supply it. I therefore wrapped a dead snake over his shoulder, and that is why I was cursed by the brāhmaṇa boy. Now, however, I am quite fit. I am not at all disturbed by my hunger and thirst." This indicates that although on the material platform there are disturbances from hunger and thirst, on the spiritual platform there is no such thing as fatigue.



The entire world is suffering because of spiritual thirst. Every living being is Brahman, or spirit soul, and needs spiritual food to satisfy his hunger and thirst. Unfortunately, however, the world is completely unaware of the nectar of kṛṣṇa-kathā. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore a boon to philosophers, religionists and people in general. There is certainly a charming attraction in Kṛṣṇa and kṛṣṇa-kathā. Therefore the Absolute Truth is called Kṛṣṇa, the most attractive.



The word amṛta is also an important reference to the moon, and the word ambuja means "lotus." The pleasing moonshine and pleasing fragrance of the lotus combined to bring pleasure to everyone hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā from the mouth of Śukadeva Gosvāmī. As it is said:



matir na kṛṣṇe parataḥ svato vā

mitho 'bhipadyeta gṛha-vratānām

adānta-gobhir viśatāṁ tamisraṁ

punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām





"Because of their uncontrolled senses, persons too addicted to materialistic life make progress toward hellish conditions and repeatedly chew that which has already been chewed. Their inclinations toward Kṛṣṇa are never aroused, either by the instructions of others, by their own efforts, or by a combination of both." (Bhāg. 7.5.30) At the present moment, all of human society is engaged in the business of chewing the chewed (punaḥ punaś carvita-carvaṇānām [SB 7.5.30]). People are prepared to undergo mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani, taking birth in one form, dying, accepting another form and dying again. To stop this repetition of birth and death, kṛṣṇa-kathā, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, is absolutely necessary. But unless one hears kṛṣṇa-kathā from a realized soul like Śukadeva Gosvāmī, one cannot relish the nectar of kṛṣṇa-kathā, which puts an end to all material fatigue, and enjoy the blissful life of transcendental existence. In relation to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, we actually see that those who have tasted the nectar of kṛṣṇa-kathā lose all material desires, whereas those who cannot understand Kṛṣṇa or kṛṣṇa-kathā regard the Kṛṣṇa conscious life as "brainwashing" and "mind control." While the devotees enjoy spiritual bliss, the nondevotees are surprised that the devotees have forgotten material hankerings.





TEXT 14



sūta uvāca

evaṁ niśamya bhṛgu-nandana sādhu-vādaṁ

vaiyāsakiḥ sa bhagavān atha viṣṇu-rātam

pratyarcya kṛṣṇa-caritaṁ kali-kalmaṣa-ghnaṁ

vyāhartum ārabhata bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ

SYNONYMS



sūtaḥ uvāca-Sūta Gosvāmī said; evam-thus; niśamya-hearing; bhṛgu-nandana-O son of the Bhṛgu dynasty, Śaunaka; sādhu-vādam-pious questions; vaiyāsakiḥ-Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva; saḥ-he; bhagavān-the most powerful; atha-thus; viṣṇu-rātam-unto Parīkṣit Mahārāja, who was always protected by Viṣṇu; pratyarcya-offering him respectful obeisances; kṛṣṇa-caritam-topics of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kali-kalmaṣa-ghnam-which diminish the troubles of this age of Kali; vyāhartum-to describe; ārabhata-began; bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ-Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the chief among the pure devotees.





Sūta Gosvāmī said: O son of Bhṛgu [Śaunaka Ṛṣi], after Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the most respectable devotee, the son of Vyāsadeva, heard the pious questions of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, he thanked the King with great respect. Then he began to discourse on topics concerning Kṛṣṇa, which are the remedy for all sufferings in this age of Kali.





In this verse the words kṛṣṇa-caritaṁ kali-kalmaṣa-ghnam indicate that the activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa are certainly the greatest panacea for all miseries, especially in this age of Kali. It is said that in Kali-yuga people have only short lives, and they have no culture of spiritual consciousness. If anyone is at all interested in spiritual culture, he is misled by many bogus svāmīs and yogīs who do not refer to kṛṣṇa-kathā. Therefore most people are unfortunate and disturbed by many calamities. Śrīla Vyāsadeva prepared Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam at the request of Nārada Muni in order to give relief to the suffering people of this age (kali-kalmaṣa-ghnam). The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is seriously engaged in enlightening people through the pleasing topics of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. All over the world, the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā is being accepted in all spheres of life, especially in advanced, educated circles.



Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī is described in this verse as bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ, whereas Mahārāja Parīkṣit is described as viṣṇu-rātam. Both words bear the same meaning; that is, Mahārāja Parīkṣit was a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī was also a great saintly person and a great devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Combined together to present kṛṣṇa-kathā, they give great relief to suffering humanity.



anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām





"The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth." (Bhāg. 1.7.6) People in general are unaware that the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam can give all of human society relief from the pangs of Kali-yuga (kali-kalmaṣa-ghnam).





TEXT 15



śrī-śuka uvāca

samyag vyavasitā buddhis

tava rājarṣi-sattama

vāsudeva-kathāyāṁ te

yaj jātā naiṣṭhikī ratiḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; samyak-completely; vyavasitā-fixed; buddhiḥ-intelligence; tava-of Your Majesty; rāja-ṛṣi-sattama-O best of rājarṣis, saintly kings; vāsudeva-kathāyām-in hearing about the topics of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa; te-your; yat-because; jātā-developed; naiṣṭhikī-without cessation; ratiḥ-attraction or ecstatic devotional service.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O Your Majesty, best of all saintly kings, because you are greatly attracted to topics of Vāsudeva, it is certain that your intelligence is firmly fixed in spiritual understanding, which is the only true goal for humanity. Because that attraction is unceasing, it is certainly sublime.





Kṛṣṇa-kathā is compulsory for the rājarṣi, or executive head of government. This is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gītā (imaṁ rājarṣayo viduḥ). Unfortunately, however, in this age the governmental power is gradually being captured by third-class and fourth-class men who have no spiritual understanding, and society is therefore very quickly becoming degraded. Kṛṣṇa-kathā must be understood by the executive heads of government, for otherwise how will people be happy and gain relief from the pangs of materialistic life? One who has fixed his mind in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should be understood to have very sharp intelligence in regard to the value of life. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was rājarṣi-sattama, the best of all saintly kings, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī was muni-sattama, the best of munis. Both of them were elevated because of their common interest in kṛṣṇa-kathā. The exalted position of the speaker and the audience will be explained very nicely in the next verse. Kṛṣṇa-kathā is so enlivening that Mahārāja Parīkṣit forgot everything material, even his personal comfort in relation to food and drink. This is an example of how the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement should spread all over the world to bring both the speaker and the audience to the transcendental platform and back home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 16



vāsudeva-kathā-praśnaḥ

puruṣāṁs trīn punāti hi

vaktāraṁ pracchakaṁ śrotṝṁs

tat-pāda-salilaṁ yathā

SYNONYMS



vāsudeva-kathā-praśnaḥ-questions about the pastimes and characteristics of Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa; puruṣān-persons; trīn-three; punāti-purify; hi-indeed; vaktāram-the speaker, such as Śukadeva Gosvāmī; pracchakam-and an inquisitive hearer like Mahārāja Parīkṣit; śrotṝn-and, between them, the listeners hearing about the topics; tat-pāda-salilam yathā-exactly as the entire world is purified by the Ganges water emanating from the toe of Lord Viṣṇu.





The Ganges, emanating from the toe of Lord Viṣṇu, purifies the three worlds, the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. Similarly, when one asks questions about the pastimes and characteristics of Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, three varieties of men are purified: the speaker or preacher, he who inquires, and the people in general who listen.





It is said, tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam (Bhāg. 11.3.21). Those interested in understanding transcendental subject matters as the goal of life must approach the bona fide spiritual master. Tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta. One must surrender to such a guru, who can give right information about Kṛṣṇa. Herein, Mahārāja Parīkṣit has surrendered to the right personality, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, for enlightenment in vāsudeva-kathā. Vāsudeva is the original Personality of Godhead, who has unlimited spiritual activities. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a record of such activities, and Bhagavad-gītā is the record of Vāsudeva speaking personally. Therefore, since the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is full of vāsudeva-kathā, anyone who hears, anyone who joins the movement and anyone who preaches will be purified.





TEXT 17



bhūmir dṛpta-nṛpa-vyāja-

daityānīka-śatāyutaiḥ

ākrāntā bhūri-bhāreṇa

brahmāṇaṁ śaraṇaṁ yayau

SYNONYMS



bhūmiḥ-mother earth; dṛpta-puffed up; nṛpa-vyāja-posing as kings, or the supreme power personified in the state; daitya-of demons; anīka-of military phalanxes of soldiers; śata-ayutaiḥ-unlimitedly, by many hundreds of thousands; ākrāntā-being overburdened; bhūri-bhāreṇa-by a burden of unnecessary fighting power; brahmāṇam-unto Lord Brahmā; śaraṇam-to take shelter; yayau-went.





Once when mother earth was overburdened by hundreds of thousands of military phalanxes of various conceited demons dressed like kings, she approached Lord Brahmā for relief.





When the world is overburdened by unnecessary military arrangements and when various demoniac kings are the executive heads of state, this burden causes the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.7):



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham





"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I appear Myself." When the residents of this earth become atheistic and godless, they descend to the status of animals like dogs and hogs, and thus their only business is to bark among themselves. This is dharmasya glāni, deviation from the goal of life. Human life is meant for attaining the highest perfection of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but when people are godless and the presidents or kings are unnecessarily puffed up with military power, their business is to fight and increase the military strength of their different states. Nowadays, therefore, it appears that every state is busy manufacturing atomic weapons to prepare for a third world war. Such preparations are certainly unnecessary; they reflect the false pride of the heads of state. The real business of a chief executive is to see to the happiness of the mass of people by training them in Kṛṣṇa consciousness in different divisions of life. Cātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛṣṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ (Bg. 4.13). A leader should train the people as brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras and engage them in various occupational duties, thus helping them progress toward Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Instead, however, rogues and thieves in the guise of protectors arrange for a voting system, and in the name of democracy they come to power by hook or crook and exploit the citizens. Even long, long ago, asuras, persons devoid of God consciousness, became the heads of state, and now this is happening again. The various states of the world are preoccupied with arranging for military strength. Sometimes they spend sixty-five percent of the government's revenue for this purpose. But why should people's hard-earned money be spent in this way? Because of the present world situation, Kṛṣṇa has descended in the form of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. This is quite natural, for without the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement the world cannot be peaceful and happy.





TEXT 18



gaur bhūtvāśru-mukhī khinnā

krandantī karuṇaṁ vibhoḥ

upasthitāntike tasmai

vyasanaṁ samavocata

SYNONYMS



gauḥ-the shape of a cow; bhūtvā-assuming; aśru-mukhī-with tears in the eyes; khinnā-very much distressed; krandantī-weeping; karuṇam-piteously; vibhoḥ-of Lord Brahmā; upasthitā-appeared; antike-in front; tasmai-unto him (Lord Brahmā); vyasanam-her distress; samavocata-submitted.





Mother earth assumed the form of a cow. Very much distressed, with tears in her eyes, she appeared before Lord Brahmā and told him about her misfortune.





TEXT 19



brahmā tad-upadhāryātha

saha devais tayā saha

jagāma sa-tri-nayanas

tīraṁ kṣīra-payo-nidheḥ

SYNONYMS



brahmā-Lord Brahmā; tat-upadhārya-understanding everything rightly; atha-thereafter; saha-with; devaiḥ-the demigods; tayā saha-with mother earth; jagāma-approached; sa-tri-nayanaḥ-with Lord Śiva, who has three eyes; tīram-the shore; kṣīra-payaḥ-nidheḥ-of the ocean of milk.





Thereafter, having heard of the distress of mother earth, Lord Brahmā, with mother earth, Lord Śiva and all the other demigods, approached the shore of the ocean of milk.





After Lord Brahmā understood the precarious condition of the earth, he first visited the demigods headed by Lord Indra, who are in charge of the various affairs of this universe, and Lord Śiva, who is responsible for annihilation. Both maintenance and annihilation go on perpetually, under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8), paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām. Those who are obedient to the laws of God are protected by different servants and demigods, whereas those who are undesirable are vanquished by Lord Śiva. Lord Brahmā first met all the demigods, including Lord Śiva. Then, along with mother earth, they went to the shore of the ocean of milk, where Lord Viṣṇu lies on a white island, Śvetadvīpa.





TEXT 20



tatra gatvā jagannāthaṁ

deva-devaṁ vṛṣākapim

puruṣaṁ puruṣa-sūktena

upatasthe samāhitaḥ

SYNONYMS



tatra-there (on the shore of the ocean of milk); gatvā-after going; jagannātham-unto the master of the entire universe, the Supreme Being; deva-devam-the Supreme God of all gods; vṛṣākapim-the Supreme Person, Viṣṇu, who provides for everyone and diminishes everyone's suffering; puruṣam-the Supreme Person; puruṣa-sūktena-with the Vedic mantra known as puruṣa-sūkta; upatasthe-worshiped; samāhitaḥ-with full attention.





After reaching the shore of the ocean of milk, the demigods worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, the master of the whole universe, the supreme God of all gods, who provides for everyone and diminishes everyone's suffering. With great attention, they worshiped Lord Viṣṇu, who lies on the ocean of milk, by reciting the Vedic mantras known as the Puruṣa-sūkta.





The demigods, such as Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, King Indra, Candra and Sūrya, are all subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aside from the demigods, even in human society there are many influential personalities supervising various businesses or establishments. Lord Viṣṇu, however, is the God of gods (parameśvara). He is parama-puruṣa, the Supreme Being, Paramātmā. As confirmed in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1), īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ: "Kṛṣṇa, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has an eternal, blissful, spiritual body." No one is equal to or greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore He is described here by many words: jagannātha, deva-deva, vṛṣākapi and puruṣa. The supremacy of Lord Viṣṇu is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (10.12) in this statement by Arjuna:



paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma

pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān

puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam

ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum





"You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty." Kṛṣṇa is ādi-puruṣa, the original Personality of Godhead (govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi **). Viṣṇu is a plenary expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and all the viṣṇu-tattvas are parameśvara, deva-deva.





TEXT 21



giraṁ samādhau gagane samīritāṁ

niśamya vedhās tridaśān uvāca ha

gāṁ pauruṣīṁ me śṛṇutāmarāḥ punar

vidhīyatām āśu tathaiva mā ciram

SYNONYMS



giram-a vibration of words; samādhau-in trance; gagane-in the sky; samīritām-vibrated; niśamya-hearing; vedhāḥ-Lord Brahmā; tridaśān-unto the demigods; uvāca-said; ha-oh; gām-the order; pauruṣīm-received from the Supreme Person; me-from me; śṛṇuta-just hear; amarāḥ-O demigods; punaḥ-again; vidhīyatām-execute; āśu-immediately; tathā eva-just so; mā-do not; ciram-delay.





While in trance, Lord Brahmā heard the words of Lord Viṣṇu vibrating in the sky. Thus he told the demigods: O demigods, hear from me the order of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, the Supreme Person, and execute it attentively without delay.





It appears that the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be heard in trance by competent persons. Modern science gives us telephones, by which one can hear sound vibrations from a distant place. Similarly, although other persons cannot hear the words of Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Brahmā is able to hear the Lord's words within himself. This is confirmed in the beginning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.1): tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye. Ādi-kavi is Lord Brahmā. In the beginning of the creation, Lord Brahmā received the instructions of Vedic knowledge from Lord Viṣṇu through the medium of the heart (hṛdā). The same principle is confirmed herewith. While Brahmā was in trance, he was able to hear the words of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and he carried the Lord's message to the demigods. Similarly, in the beginning, Brahmā first received the Vedic knowledge from the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the core of the heart. In both instances the same process was used in transmitting the message to Lord Brahmā. In other words, although Lord Viṣṇu was invisible even to Lord Brahmā, Lord Brahmā could hear Lord Viṣṇu's words through the heart. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is invisible even to Lord Brahmā, yet He descends on this earth and becomes visible to people in general. This is certainly an act of His causeless mercy, but fools and nondevotees think that Kṛṣṇa is an ordinary historical person. Because they think that the Lord is an ordinary person like them, they are described as mūḍha (avajānanti māṁ mūḍhāḥ). The causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is neglected by such demoniac persons, who cannot understand the instructions of Bhagavad-gītā and who therefore misinterpret them.





TEXT 22



puraiva puṁsāvadhṛto dharā-jvaro

bhavadbhir aṁśair yaduṣūpajanyatām

sa yāvad urvyā bharam īśvareśvaraḥ

sva-kāla-śaktyā kṣapayaṁś cared bhuvi

SYNONYMS



purā-even before this; eva-indeed; puṁsā-by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; avadhṛtaḥ-was certainly known; dharā-jvaraḥ-the distress on the earth; bhavadbhiḥ-by your good selves; aṁśaiḥ-expanding as plenary portions; yaduṣu-in the family of King Yadu; upajanyatām-take your birth and appear there; saḥ-He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); yāvat-as long as; urvyāḥ-of the earth; bharam-the burden; īśvara-īśvaraḥ-the Lord of lords; sva-kāla-śaktyā-by His own potency the time factor; kṣapayan-diminishing; caret-should move; bhuvi-on the surface of the earth.





Lord Brahmā informed the demigods: Before we submitted our petition to the Lord, He was already aware of the distress on earth. Consequently, for as long as the Lord moves on earth to diminish its burden by His own potency in the form of time, all of you demigods should appear through plenary portions as sons and grandsons in the family of the Yadus.





As stated in the Brahma-saṁhitā (5.39):



rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi





"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is always situated in various incarnations such as Rāma, Nṛsiṁha and many sub-incarnations as well, but who is the original personality of Godhead, known as Kṛṣṇa, and who incarnates personally also."



In this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we find the words puraiva puṁsāvadhṛto dharā jvaraḥ. The word puṁsā refers to Kṛṣṇa, who was already aware of how the whole world was suffering because of the increase of demons. Without reference to the supreme power of the Personality of Godhead, demons assert themselves to be independent kings and presidents, and thus they create a disturbance by increasing their military power. When such disturbances are very prominent, Kṛṣṇa appears. At present also, various demoniac states all over the world are increasing their military power in many ways, and the whole situation has become distressful. Therefore Kṛṣṇa has appeared by His name, in the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, which will certainly diminish the burden of the world. Philosophers, religionists, and people in general must take to this movement very seriously, for man-made plans and devices will not help bring peace on earth. The transcendental sound Hare Kṛṣṇa is not different from the person Kṛṣṇa.



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ





(Padma Purāṇa)



There is no difference between the sound Hare Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa the person.





TEXT 23



vasudeva-gṛhe sākṣād

bhagavān puruṣaḥ paraḥ

janiṣyate tat-priyārthaṁ

sambhavantu sura-striyaḥ

SYNONYMS



vasudeva-gṛhe-in the house of Vasudeva (who would be the father of Kṛṣṇa when the Lord appeared); sākṣāt-personally; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has full potency; puruṣaḥ-the original person; paraḥ-who is transcendental; janiṣyate-will appear; tat-priya-artham-and for His satisfaction; sambhavantu-should take birth; sura-striyaḥ-all the wives of the demigods.





The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who has full potency, will personally appear as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore all the wives of the demigods should also appear in order to satisfy Him.





In Bhagavad-gītā (4.9) the Lord says, tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti: [Bg. 4.9] after giving up the material body, the devotee of the Lord returns home, back to Godhead. This means that the devotee is first transferred to the particular universe where the Lord is at that time staying to exhibit His pastimes. There are innumerable universes, and the Lord is appearing in one of these universes at every moment. Therefore His pastimes are called nitya-līlā, eternal pastimes. The Lord's appearance as a child in the house of Devakī takes place continuously in one universe after another. Therefore, the devotee is first transferred to that particular universe where the pastimes of the Lord are current. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, even if a devotee does not complete the course of devotional service, he enjoys the happiness of the heavenly planets, where the most pious people dwell, and then takes birth in the house of a śuci or śrīmān, a pious brāhmaṇa or a wealthy vaiśya (śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate). Thus a pure devotee, even if unable to execute devotional service completely, is transferred to the upper planetary system, where pious people reside. From there, if his devotional service is complete, such a devotee is transferred to the place where the Lord's pastimes are going on. Herein it is said, sambhavantu sura-striyaḥ. Sura-strī, the women of the heavenly planets, were thus ordered to appear in the Yadu dynasty in Vṛndāvana to enrich the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa. These sura-strī, when further trained to live with Kṛṣṇa, would be transferred to the original Goloka Vṛndāvana. During Lord Kṛṣṇa's pastimes within this world, the sura-strī were to appear in different ways in different families to give pleasure to the Lord, just so that they would be fully trained before going to the eternal Goloka Vṛndāvana. With the association of Lord Kṛṣṇa, either at Dvārakā-purī, Mathurā-purī or Vṛndāvana, they would certainly return home, back to Godhead. Among the sura-strī, the women of the heavenly planets, there are many devotees, such as the mother of the Upendra incarnation of Kṛṣṇa. It was such devoted women who were called for in this connection.





TEXT 24



vāsudeva-kalānantaḥ

sahasra-vadanaḥ svarāṭ

agrato bhavitā devo

hareḥ priya-cikīrṣayā

SYNONYMS



vāsudeva-kalā anantaḥ-the plenary expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa known as Anantadeva or Saṅkarṣaṇa Ananta, the all-pervasive incarnation of the Supreme Lord; sahasra-vadanaḥ-having thousands of hoods; svarāṭ-fully independent; agrataḥ-previously; bhavitā-will appear; devaḥ-the Lord; hareḥ-of Lord Kṛṣṇa; priya-cikīrṣayā-with the desire to act for the pleasure.





The foremost manifestation of Kṛṣṇa is Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is known as Ananta. He is the origin of all incarnations within this material world. Previous to the appearance of Lord Kṛṣṇa, this original Saṅkarṣaṇa will appear as Baladeva, just to please the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa in His transcendental pastimes.





Śrī Baladeva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. He is equal in supremacy to the Supreme Godhead, yet wherever Kṛṣṇa appears, Śrī Baladeva appears as His brother, sometimes elder and sometimes younger. When Kṛṣṇa appears, all His plenary expansions and other incarnations appear with Him. This is elaborately explained in Caitanya-caritāmṛta. This time, Baladeva would appear before Kṛṣṇa as Kṛṣṇa's elder brother.





TEXT 25



viṣṇor māyā bhagavatī

yayā sammohitaṁ jagat

ādiṣṭā prabhuṇāṁśena

kāryārthe sambhaviṣyati

SYNONYMS



viṣṇoḥ māyā-the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; bhagavatī-as good as Bhagavān and therefore known as Bhagavatī; yayā-by whom; sammohitam-captivated; jagat-all the worlds, both material and spiritual; ādiṣṭā-being ordered; prabhuṇā-by the master; aṁśena-with her different potential factors; kārya-arthe-for executing business; sambhaviṣyati-would also appear.





The potency of the Lord, known as viṣṇu-māyā, who is as good as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will also appear with Lord Kṛṣṇa. This potency, acting in different capacities, captivates all the worlds, both material and spiritual. At the request of her master, she will appear with her different potencies in order to execute the work of the Lord.





Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8). In the Vedas it is said that the potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are called by different names, such as yogamāyā and mahāmāyā. Ultimately, however, the Lord's potency is one, exactly as electric potency is one although it can act both to cool and to heat. The Lord's potency acts in both the spiritual and material worlds. In the spiritual world the Lord's potency works as yogamāyā, and in the material world the same potency works as mahāmāyā, exactly as electricity works in both a heater and a cooler. In the material world, this potency, working as mahāmāyā, acts upon the conditioned souls to deprive them more and more of devotional service. It is said, yayā sammohito jīva ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam. In the material world the conditioned soul thinks of himself as a product of tri-guṇa, the three modes of material nature. This is the bodily conception of life. Because of associating with the three guṇas of the material potency, everyone identifies himself with his body. Someone is thinking he is a brāhmaṇa, someone a kṣatriya, and someone a vaiśya or śūdra. Actually, however, one is neither a brāhmaṇa, a kṣatriya, a vaiśya nor a śūdra; one is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord (mamaivāṁśaḥ), but because of being covered by the material energy, mahāmāyā, one identifies himself in these different ways. When the conditioned soul becomes liberated, however, he thinks himself an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Jīvera 'svarūpa' haya-kṛṣṇera 'nitya-dāsa.' [Cc. Madhya 20.108]. When he comes to that position, the same potency, acting as yogamāyā, increasingly helps him become purified and devote his energy to the service of the Lord.



In either case, whether the soul is conditioned or liberated, the Lord is supreme. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā (9.10), mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram: it is by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the material energy, mahāmāyā, works upon the conditioned soul.



prakṛteḥ kriyamāṇāni

guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśaḥ

ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā

kartāham iti manyate





"The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are in actuality carried out by nature." (Bg. 3.27) Within conditioned life, no one has freedom, but because one is bewildered, being subject to the rule of mahāmāyā, one foolishly thinks himself independent (ahaṅkāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate [Bg. 3.27]). But when the conditioned soul becomes liberated by executing devotional service, he is given a greater and greater chance to relish a relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in different transcendental statuses, such as dāsya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vātsalya-rasa and mādhurya-rasa.



Thus the Lord's potency, viṣṇu-māyā, has two features-āvaraṇikā and unmukha. When the Lord appeared, His potency came with Him and acted in different ways. She acted as yogamāyā with Yaśodā, Devakī and other intimate relations of the Lord, and she acted in a different way with Kaṁsa, Śālva and other asuras. By the order of Lord Kṛṣṇa, His potency yogamāyā came with Him and exhibited different activities according to the time and circumstances. Kāryārthe sambhaviṣyati. Yogamāyā acted differently to execute different purposes desired by the Lord. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.13), mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ. The mahātmās, who fully surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord, are directed by yogamāyā, whereas the durātmās, those who are devoid of devotional service, are directed by mahāmāyā.





TEXT 26



śrī-śuka uvāca

ity ādiśyāmara-gaṇān

prajāpati-patir vibhuḥ

āśvāsya ca mahīṁ gīrbhiḥ

sva-dhāma paramaṁ yayau

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti-thus; ādiśya-after informing; amara-gaṇān-all the demigods; prajāpati-patiḥ-Lord Brahmā, the master of the Prajāpatis; vibhuḥ-all-powerful; āśvāsya-after pacifying; ca-also; mahīm-mother earth; gīrbhiḥ-by sweet words; sva-dhāma-his own planet, known as Brahmaloka; paramam-the best (within the universe); yayau-returned.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After thus advising the demigods and pacifying mother earth, the very powerful Lord Brahmā, who is the master of all other Prajāpatis and is therefore known as Prajāpati-pati, returned to his own abode, Brahmaloka.





TEXT 27



śūraseno yadupatir

mathurām āvasan purīm

māthurāñ chūrasenāṁś ca

viṣayān bubhuje purā

SYNONYMS



śūrasenaḥ-King Śūrasena; yadu-patiḥ-the chief of the Yadu dynasty; mathurām-at the place known as Mathurā; āvasan-went to live; purīm-in that city; māthurān-at the place known as the Māthura district; śūrasenān ca-and the place known as Śūrasena; viṣayān-such kingdoms; bubhuje-enjoyed; purā-formerly.





Formerly, Śūrasena, the chief of the Yadu dynasty, had gone to live in the city of Mathurā. There he enjoyed the places known as Māthura and Śūrasena.





TEXT 28



rājadhānī tataḥ sābhūt

sarva-yādava-bhūbhujām

mathurā bhagavān yatra

nityaṁ sannihito hariḥ

SYNONYMS



rājadhānī-the capital; tataḥ-from that time; sā-the country and the city known as Mathurā; abhūt-became; sarva-yādava-bhūbhujām-of all the kings who appeared in the Yadu dynasty; mathurā-the place known as Mathurā; bhagavān-the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yatra-wherein; nityam-eternally; sannihitaḥ-intimately connected, living eternally; hariḥ-the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.





Since that time, the city of Mathurā had been the capital of all the kings of the Yadu dynasty. The city and district of Mathurā are very intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa, for Lord Kṛṣṇa lives there eternally.





It is understood that Mathurā City is the transcendental abode of Lord Kṛṣṇa; it is not an ordinary material city, for it is eternally connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vṛndāvana is within the jurisdiction of Mathurā, and it still continues to exist. Because Mathurā and Vṛndāvana are intimately connected with Kṛṣṇa eternally, it is said that Lord Kṛṣṇa never leaves Vṛndāvana (vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya padam ekaṁ na gacchati). At present, the place known as Vṛndāvana, in the district of Mathurā, continues its position as a transcendental place, and certainly anyone who goes there becomes transcendentally purified. Navadvīpa-dhāma is also intimately connected with Vrajabhūmi. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura therefore says:



śrī gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi, yebā jāne cintāmaṇi,

tā'ra haya vrajabhūme vāsa

"Vrajabhūmi" refers to Mathurā-Vṛndāvana, and Gauḍa-maṇḍala-bhūmi includes Navadvīpa. These two places are nondifferent. Therefore, anyone living in Navadvīpa-dhāma, knowing Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to be the same personality, lives in Vrajabhūmi, Mathurā-Vṛndāvana. The Lord has made it convenient for the conditioned soul to live in Mathurā, Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa and thus be directly connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Simply by living in these places, one can immediately come in contact with the Lord. There are many devotees who vow never to leave Vṛndāvana and Mathurā. This is undoubtedly a good vow, but if one leaves Vṛndāvana, Mathurā or Navadvīpa-dhāma for the service of the Lord, he is not disconnected from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At any rate, we must understand the transcendental importance of Mathurā-Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa-dhāma. Anyone who executes devotional service in these places certainly goes back home, back to Godhead, after giving up his body. Thus the words mathurā bhagavān yatra nityaṁ sannihito hariḥ are particularly important. A devotee should fully utilize this instruction to the best of his ability. Whenever the Supreme Lord personally appears, He appears in Mathurā because of His intimate connection with this place. Therefore although Mathurā and Vṛndāvana are situated on this planet earth, they are transcendental abodes of the Lord.





TEXT 29



tasyāṁ tu karhicic chaurir

vasudevaḥ kṛtodvahaḥ

devakyā sūryayā sārdhaṁ

prayāṇe ratham āruhat

SYNONYMS



tasyām-in that place known as Mathurā; tu-indeed; karhicit-some time ago; śauriḥ-the demigod, descendant of Śūra; vasudevaḥ-who appeared as Vasudeva; kṛta-udvahaḥ-after being married; devakyā-Devakī; sūryayā-his newly married wife; sārdham-along with; prayāṇe-for returning home; ratham-the chariot; āruhat-mounted.





Some time ago, Vasudeva, who belonged to the demigod family [or to the Śūra dynasty], married Devakī. After the marriage, he mounted his chariot to return home with his newly married wife.





TEXT 30



ugrasena-sutaḥ kaṁsaḥ

svasuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā

raśmīn hayānāṁ jagrāha

raukmai ratha-śatair vṛtaḥ

SYNONYMS



ugrasena-sutaḥ-the son of Ugrasena; kaṁsaḥ-by the name Kaṁsa; svasuḥ-of his own sister Devakī; priya-cikīrṣayā-to please her on the occasion of her marriage; raśmīn-the reins; hayānām-of the horses; jagrāha-took; raukmaiḥ-made of gold; ratha-śataiḥ-by hundreds of chariots; vṛtaḥ-surrounded.





Kaṁsa, the son of King Ugrasena, in order to please his sister Devakī on the occasion of her marriage, took charge of the reins of the horses and became the chariot driver. He was surrounded by hundreds of golden chariots.





TEXTS 31–32



catuḥ-śataṁ pāribarhaṁ

gajānāṁ hema-mālinām

aśvānām ayutaṁ sārdhaṁ

rathānāṁ ca tri-ṣaṭ-śatam

dāsīnāṁ sukumārīṇāṁ



dve śate samalaṅkṛte

duhitre devakaḥ prādād

yāne duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ

SYNONYMS



catuḥ-śatam-four hundred; pāribarham-dowry; gajānām-of elephants; hema-mālinām-decorated with garlands of gold; aśvānām-of horses; ayutam-ten thousand; sārdham-along with; rathānām-of chariots; ca-and; tri-ṣaṭ-śatam-three times six hundred (eighteen hundred); dāsīnām-of maidservants; su-kumārīṇām-very young and beautiful unmarried girls; dve-two; śate-hundred; samalaṅkṛte-fully decorated with ornaments; duhitre-unto his daughter; devakaḥ-King Devaka; prādāt-gave as a gift; yāne-while going away; duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ-who was very fond of his daughter Devakī.





Devakī's father, King Devaka, was very much affectionate to his daughter. Therefore, while she and her husband were leaving home, he gave her a dowry of four hundred elephants nicely decorated with golden garlands. He also gave ten thousand horses, eighteen hundred chariots, and two hundred very beautiful young maidservants, fully decorated with ornaments.





The system of giving a dowry to one's daughter has existed in Vedic civilization for a very long time. Even today, following the same system, a father who has money will give his daughter an opulent dowry. A daughter would never inherit the property of her father, and therefore an affectionate father, during the marriage of his daughter, would give her as much as possible. A dowry, therefore, is never illegal according to the Vedic system. Here, of course, the gift offered as a dowry by Devaka to Devakī was not ordinary. Because Devaka was a king, he gave a dowry quite suitable to his royal position. Even an ordinary man, especially a high-class brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya or vaiśya, is supposed to give his daughter a liberal dowry. Immediately after the marriage, the daughter goes to her husband's house, and it is also a custom for the brother of the bride to accompany his sister and brother-in-law to exhibit affection for her. This system was followed by Kaṁsa. These are all old customs in the society of varṇāśrama-dharma, which is now wrongly designated as Hindu. These long-standing customs are nicely described here.





TEXT 33



śaṅkha-tūrya-mṛdaṅgāś ca

nedur dundubhayaḥ samam

prayāṇa-prakrame tāta

vara-vadhvoḥ sumaṅgalam

SYNONYMS



śaṅkha-conchshells; tūrya-bugles; mṛdaṅgāḥ-drums; ca-also; neduḥ-vibrated; dundubhayaḥ-kettledrums; samam-in concert; prayāṇa-prakrame-at the time of departure; tāta-O beloved son; vara-vadhvoḥ-of the bridegroom and the bride; su-maṅgalam-for the purpose of their auspicious departure.





O beloved son, Mahārāja Parīkṣit, when the bride and bridegroom were ready to start, conchshells, bugles, drums and kettledrums all vibrated in concert for their auspicious departure.





TEXT 34



pathi pragrahiṇaṁ kaṁsam

ābhāṣyāhāśarīra-vāk

asyās tvām aṣṭamo garbho

hantā yāṁ vahase 'budha

SYNONYMS



pathi-on the way; pragrahiṇam-who was managing the reins of the horses; kaṁsam-unto Kaṁsa; ābhāṣya-addressing; āha-said; a-śarīra-vāk-a voice coming from someone whose body was invisible; asyāḥ-of this girl (Devakī); tvām-you; aṣṭamaḥ-the eighth; garbhaḥ-pregnancy; hantā-killer; yām-her whom; vahase-you are carrying; abudha-you foolish rascal.





While Kaṁsa, controlling the reins of the horses, was driving the chariot along the way, an unembodied voice addressed him, "You foolish rascal, the eighth child of the woman you are carrying will kill you!"





The omen spoke of aṣṭamo garbhaḥ, referring to the eighth pregnancy, but did not clearly say whether the child was to be a son or a daughter. Even if Kaṁsa were to see that the eighth child of Devakī was a daughter, he should have no doubt that the eighth child was to kill him. According to the Viśva-kośa dictionary, the word garbha means "embryo" and also arbhaka, or "child." Kaṁsa was affectionate toward his sister, and therefore he had become the chariot driver to carry her and his brother-in-law to their home. The demigods, however, did not want Kaṁsa to be affectionate toward Devakī, and therefore, from an unseen position, they encouraged Kaṁsa to offend her. Moreover, the six sons of Marīci had been cursed to take birth from the womb of Devakī, and upon being killed by Kaṁsa they would be delivered. When Devakī understood that Kaṁsa would be killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who would appear from her womb, she felt great joy. The word vahase is also significant because it indicates that the ominous vibration condemned Kaṁsa for acting just like a beast of burden by carrying his enemy's mother.





TEXT 35



ity uktaḥ sa khalaḥ pāpo

bhojānāṁ kula-pāṁsanaḥ

bhaginīṁ hantum ārabdhaṁ

khaḍga-pāṇiḥ kace 'grahīt

SYNONYMS



iti uktaḥ-thus being addressed; saḥ-he (Kaṁsa); khalaḥ-envious; pāpaḥ-sinful; bhojānām-of the Bhoja dynasty; kula-pāṁsanaḥ-one who can degrade the reputation of his family; bhaginīm-unto his sister; hantum ārabdham-being inclined to kill; khaḍga-pāṇiḥ-taking a sword in his hand; kace-hair; agrahīt-took up.





Kaṁsa was a condemned personality in the Bhoja dynasty because he was envious and sinful. Therefore, upon hearing this omen from the sky, he caught hold of his sister's hair with his left hand and took up his sword with his right hand to sever her head from her body.





Kaṁsa was driving the chariot and controlling the reins with his left hand, but as soon as he heard the omen that his sister's eighth child would kill him, he gave up the reins, caught hold of his sister's hair, and with his right hand took up a sword to kill her. Before, he had been so affectionate that he was acting as his sister's chariot driver, but as soon as he heard that his self-interest or his life was at risk, he forgot all affection for her and immediately became a great enemy. This is the nature of demons. No one should trust a demon, despite any amount of affection. Aside from this, a king, a politician or a woman cannot be trusted, since they can do anything abominable for their personal interest. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita therefore says, viśvāso naiva kartavyaḥ strīṣu rāja-kuleṣu ca.





TEXT 36



taṁ jugupsita-karmāṇaṁ

nṛśaṁsaṁ nirapatrapam

vasudevo mahā-bhāga

uvāca parisāntvayan

SYNONYMS



tam-unto him (Kaṁsa); jugupsita-karmāṇam-who was ready to commit such an offensive act; nṛśaṁsam-very cruel; nirapatrapam-shameless; vasudevaḥ-Vasudeva; mahā-bhāgaḥ-the greatly fortunate father of Vāsudeva; uvāca-said; parisāntvayan-pacifying.





Wanting to pacify Kaṁsa, who was so cruel and envious that he was shamelessly ready to kill his sister, the great soul Vasudeva, who was to be the father of Kṛṣṇa, spoke to him in the following words.





Vasudeva, who was to be the father of Kṛṣṇa, is described here as mahā-bhāga, a very upright and sober personality, because although Kaṁsa was ready to kill Vasudeva's wife, Vasudeva remained sober and unagitated. In a peaceful attitude, Vasudeva began to address Kaṁsa by putting forward reasonable arguments. Vasudeva was a great personality because he knew how to pacify a cruel person and how to forgive even the bitterest enemy. One who is fortunate is never caught, even by tigers or snakes.





TEXT 37



śrī-vasudeva uvāca

ślāghanīya-guṇaḥ śūrair

bhavān bhoja-yaśaskaraḥ

sa kathaṁ bhaginīṁ hanyāt

striyam udvāha-parvaṇi

SYNONYMS



śrī-vasudevaḥ uvāca-the great personality Vasudeva said; ślāghanīya-guṇaḥ-a person who possesses praiseworthy qualities; śūraiḥ-by great heroes; bhavān-your good self; bhoja-yaśaḥ-karaḥ-a brilliant star in the Bhoja dynasty; saḥ-one such as your good self; katham-how; bhaginīm-your sister; hanyāt-can kill; striyam-especially a woman; udvāha-parvaṇi-at the time of the marriage ceremony.





Vasudeva said: My dear brother-in-law Kaṁsa, you are the pride of your family, the Bhoja dynasty, and great heroes praise your qualities. How could such a qualified person as you kill a woman, your own sister, especially on the occasion of her marriage?





According to Vedic principles, a brāhmaṇa, an old man, a woman, a child or a cow cannot be killed under any circumstances. Vasudeva stressed that Devakī was not only a woman but a member of Kaṁsa s family. Because she was now married to Vasudeva, she was para-strī, another man's wife, and if such a woman were killed, not only would Kaṁsa be implicated in sinful activities, but his reputation as king of the Bhoja dynasty would be damaged. Thus Vasudeva tried in many ways to convince Kaṁsa in order to stop him from killing Devakī.





TEXT 38



mṛtyur janmavatāṁ vīra

dehena saha jāyate

adya vābda-śatānte vā

mṛtyur vai prāṇināṁ dhruvaḥ

SYNONYMS



mṛtyuḥ-death; janma-vatām-of the living entities who have taken birth; vīra-O great hero; dehena saha-along with the body; jāyate-is born (one who has taken birth is sure to die); adya-today; vā-either; abda-śata-of hundreds of years; ante-at the end; vā-or; mṛtyuḥ-death; vai-indeed; prāṇinām-for every living entity; dhruvaḥ-is assured.





O great hero, one who takes birth is sure to die, for death is born with the body. One may die today or after hundreds of years, but death is sure for every living entity.





Vasudeva wanted to impress upon Kaṁsa that although Kaṁsa feared dying and therefore wanted to kill even a woman, he could not avoid death. Death is sure. Why then should Kaṁsa do something that would be detrimental to his reputation and that of his family? As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (2.27):



jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur

dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca

tasmād aparihārye 'rthe

na tvaṁ śocitum arhasi





"For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you should not lament." One should not fear death. Rather, one should prepare oneself for the next birth. One should utilize one's time in this human form to end the process of birth and death. It is not that to save oneself from death one should entangle oneself in sinful activities. This is not good.





TEXT 39



dehe pañcatvam āpanne

dehī karmānugo 'vaśaḥ

dehāntaram anuprāpya

prāktanaṁ tyajate vapuḥ

SYNONYMS



dehe-when the body; pañcatvam āpanne-turns into five elements; dehī-the proprietor of the body, the living being; karma-anugaḥ-following the reactions of his own fruitive activities; avaśaḥ-spontaneously, automatically; deha-antaram-another body (made of material elements); anuprāpya-receiving as a result; prāktanam-the former; tyajate-gives up; vapuḥ-body.





When the present body turns to dust and is again reduced to five elements-earth, water, fire, air and ether-the proprietor of the body, the living being, automatically receives another body of material elements according to his fruitive activities. When the next body is obtained, he gives up the present body.





This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā, which presents the beginning of spiritual understanding.



dehino 'smin yathā dehe

kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā

tathā dehāntara-prāptir

dhīras tatra na muhyati





"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) A person or an animal is not the material body; rather, the material body is the covering of the living being. Bhagavad-gītā compares the body to a dress and elaborately explains how one changes dresses one after another. The same Vedic knowledge is confirmed here. The living being, the soul, is constantly changing bodies one after another. Even in the present life, the body changes from childhood to boyhood, from boyhood to youth, and from youth to old age; similarly, when the body is too old to continue, the living being gives up this body and, by the laws of nature, automatically gets another body according to his fruitive activities, desires and ambitions. The laws of nature control this sequence, and therefore as long as the living entity is under the control of the external, material energy, the process of bodily change takes place automatically, according to one's fruitive activities. Vasudeva therefore wanted to impress upon Kaṁsa that if he committed this sinful act of killing a woman, in his next life he would certainly get a material body still more conditioned to the sufferings of material existence. Thus Vasudeva advised Kaṁsa not to commit sinful activities.



One who commits sinful activities because of ignorance, tamo-guṇa, obtains a lower body. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22). There are hundreds and thousands of different species of life. Why are there higher and lower bodies? One receives these bodies according to the contaminations of material nature. If in this life one is contaminated by the mode of ignorance and sinful activities (duṣkṛtī), in the next life, by the laws of nature, one will certainly get a body full of suffering. The laws of nature are not subservient to the whimsical desires of the conditioned soul. Our endeavor, therefore, should be to associate always with sattva-guṇa and not indulge in rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa (rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ). Lusty desires and greed keep the living entity perpetually in ignorance and prevent him from being elevated to the platform of sattva-guṇa or śuddha-sattva-guṇa. One is advised to be situated in śuddha-sattva-guṇa, devotional service, for thus one is immune to the reactions of the three modes of material nature.





TEXT 40



vrajaṁs tiṣṭhan padaikena

yathaivaikena gacchati

yathā tṛṇa-jalaukaivaṁ

dehī karma-gatiṁ gataḥ

SYNONYMS



vrajan-a person, while traveling on the road; tiṣṭhan-while standing; padā ekena-on one foot; yathā-as; eva-indeed; ekena-by another foot; gacchati-goes; yathā-as; tṛṇa-jalaukā-a worm on a vegetable; evam-in this way; dehī-the living entity; karma-gatim-the reactions of fruitive activities; gataḥ-undergoes.





Just as a person traveling on the road rests one foot on the ground and then lifts the other, or as a worm on a vegetable transfers itself to one leaf and then gives up the previous one, the conditioned soul takes shelter of another body and then gives up the one he had before.





This is the process of the soul's transmigration from one body to another. At the time of death, according to his mental condition, the living being is carried by the subtle body, consisting of mind, intelligence and ego, to another gross body. When higher authorities have decided what kind of gross body the living entity will have, he is forced to enter such a body, and thus he automatically gives up his previous body. Dull-minded persons who do not have the intelligence to understand this process of transmigration take for granted that when the gross body is finished, one's life is finished forever. Such persons have no brains with which to understand the process of transmigration. At the present moment there is great opposition to the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement, which is being called a "brainwashing" movement. But actually the so-called scientists, philosophers and other leaders in the Western countries have no brains at all. The Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is trying to elevate such foolish persons by enlightening their intelligence so that they will take advantage of the human body. Unfortunately, because of gross ignorance, they regard the Hare Kṛṣṇa movement as a brainwashing movement. They do not know that without God consciousness one is forced to continue transmigrating from one body to another. Because of their devilish brains, they will next be forced to accept an abominable life and practically never be able to liberate themselves from the conditional life of material existence. How this transmigration of the soul takes place is very clearly explained in this verse.





TEXT 41



svapne yathā paśyati deham īdṛśaṁ

manorathenābhiniviṣṭa-cetanaḥ

dṛṣṭa-śrutābhyāṁ manasānucintayan

prapadyate tat kim api hy apasmṛtiḥ

SYNONYMS



svapne-in a dream; yathā-as; paśyati-one sees; deham-the kind of body; īdṛśam-similarly; manorathena-by mental speculation; abhiniviṣṭa-is fully absorbed; cetanaḥ-he whose consciousness; dṛṣṭa-by whatever has been experienced by seeing with the eyes; śrutābhyām-and by hearing a description of something else; manasā-by the mind; anucintayan-thinking, feeling and willing; prapadyate-surrenders; tat-to that situation; kim api-what to speak of; hi-indeed; apasmṛtiḥ-experiencing forgetfulness of the present body.





Having experienced a situation by seeing or hearing about it, one contemplates and speculates about that situation, and thus one surrenders to it, not considering his present body. Similarly, by mental adjustments one dreams at night of living under different circumstances, in different bodies, and forgets his actual position. Under this same process, one gives up his present body and accepts another [tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ].





Transmigration of the soul is very clearly explained in this verse. One sometimes forgets his present body and thinks of his childhood body, a body of the past, and of how one was playing, jumping, talking and so on. When the material body is no long workable, it becomes dust: "For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return." But when the body again mixes with the five material elements-earth, water, fire, air and ether-the mind continues to work. The mind is the subtle substance in which the body is created, as we actually experience in our dreams and also when we are awake in contemplation. One must understand that the process of mental speculation develops a new type of body that does not actually exist. If one can understand the nature of the mind (manorathena) and its thinking, feeling and willing, one can very easily understand how from the mind different types of bodies develop.



The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, therefore, offers a process of transcendental activities wherein the mind is fully absorbed in affairs pertaining to Kṛṣṇa. The presence of the soul is perceived by consciousness, and one must purify his consciousness from material to spiritual, or, in other words, to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. That which is spiritual is eternal, and that which is material is temporary. Without Kṛṣṇa consciousness, one's consciousness is always absorbed in temporary things. For everyone, therefore, Kṛṣṇa recommends in Bhagavad-gītā (9.34), man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru. One should always be absorbed in thought of Kṛṣṇa, one should become His devotee, one should always engage in His service and worship Him as the supreme great, and one should always offer Him obeisances. In the material world one is always a servant of a greater person, and in the spiritual world our constitutional position is to serve the Supreme, the greatest, paraṁ brahma. This is the instruction of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Jīvera 'svarūpa' haya-kṛṣṇera 'nitya-dāsa' (Cc. Madhya 20.108).



To act in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the perfection of life and the highest perfection of yoga. As Lord Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):



yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ





"Of all yogīs, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all."



The condition of the mind, which flickers between saṅkalpa and vikalpa, accepting something and rejecting it, is very important in transferring the soul to another material body at the time of death.



yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram

taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ





"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state he will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6) Therefore one must train the mind in the system of bhakti-yoga, as did Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, who kept himself always in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. One must fix the mind at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours a day. If the mind is fixed upon Kṛṣṇa's lotus feet, the activities of the other senses will be engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate: [Cc. Madhya 19.170] to serve Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses, with purified senses is called bhakti. Those who constantly engage in devotional service are situated in a transcendental state, above the material modes of nature. As Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (14.26):



māṁ ca yo 'vyabhicāreṇa

bhakti-yogena sevate

sa guṇān samatītyaitān

brahma-bhūyāya kalpate





"One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman." One must learn the secret of success from the Vedic literatures, especially when the cream of Vedic knowledge is presented by Bhagavad-gītā as it is.



Because the mind is ultimately controlled by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the word apasmṛtiḥ is significant. Forgetfulness of one's own identity is called apasmṛtiḥ. This apasmṛtiḥ can be controlled by the Supreme Lord, for the Lord says, mattaḥ smṛtir jñānam apohanaṁ ca: [Bg. 15.15] "From Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Instead of allowing one to forget one's real position, Kṛṣṇa can revive one's original identity at the time of one's death, even though the mind may be flickering. Although the mind may work imperfectly at the time of death, Kṛṣṇa gives a devotee shelter at His lotus feet. Therefore when a devotee gives up his body, the mind does not take him to another material body (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti [Bg. 4.9]); rather, Kṛṣṇa takes the devotee to that place where He is engaged in His pastimes (mām eti), as we have already discussed in previous verses. One's consciousness, therefore, must always be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, and then one's life will be successful. Otherwise the mind will carry the soul to another material body. The soul will be placed in the semen of a father and discharged into the womb of a mother. The semen and ovum create a particular type of body according to the form of the father and mother, and when the body is mature, the soul emerges in that body and begins a new life. This is the process of transmigration of the soul from one body to another (tathā dehāntara-prāptiḥ). Unfortunately, those who are less intelligent think that when the body disappears, everything is finished. The entire world is being misled by such fools and rascals. But as stated in Bhagavad-gītā (2.20), na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre. The soul does not die when the body is destroyed. Rather, the soul takes on another body.





TEXT 42



yato yato dhāvati daiva-coditaṁ

mano vikārātmakam āpa pañcasu

guṇeṣu māyā-rociteṣu dehy asau

prapadyamānaḥ saha tena jāyate

SYNONYMS



yataḥ yataḥ-from one place to another or from one position to another; dhāvati-speculates; daiva-coditam-impelled by accident or deliberation; manaḥ-the mind; vikāra-ātmakam-changing from one type of thinking, feeling and willing to another; āpa-at the end, he obtains (a mentality); pañcasu-at the time of death (when the material body turns totally into matter); guṇeṣu-(the mind, not being liberated, becomes attached) to the material qualities; māyā-rociteṣu-where the material energy creates a similar body; dehī-the spirit soul who accepts such a body; asau-he; prapadyamānaḥ-being surrendered (to such a condition); saha-with; tena-a similar body; jāyate-takes birth.





At the time of death, according to the thinking, feeling and willing of the mind, which is involved in fruitive activities, one receives a particular body. In other words, the body develops according to the activities of the mind. Changes of body are due to the flickering of the mind, for otherwise the soul could remain in its original, spiritual body.





One can very easily understand that the mind is constantly flickering, changing in the quality of its thinking, feeling and willing. This is explained by Arjuna in Bhagavad-gītā (6.34):



cañcalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛṣṇa

pramāthi balavad dṛḍham

tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye

vāyor iva suduṣkaram





The mind is cañcala, flickering, and it changes very strongly. Therefore Arjuna admitted that controlling the mind is not at all possible; this would be as difficult as controlling the wind. For example, if one were in a boat moving according to the wind on a river or the sea, and the wind were uncontrollable, the tilting boat would be very much disturbed and extremely difficult to control. It might even capsize. Therefore, in the bhava-samudra, the ocean of mental speculation and transmigration to different types of bodies, one must first control the mind.



By regulative practice one can control the mind, and this is the purpose of the yoga system (abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena [Bg. 8.8]). But there is a chance of failure with the yoga system, especially in this age of Kali, because the yoga system uses artificial means. If the mind is engaged in bhakti-yoga, however, by the grace of Kṛṣṇa one can very easily control it. Therefore Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has recommended, harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam [Adi 17.21]. One should chant the holy name of the Lord constantly, for the holy name of the Lord is nondifferent from Hari, the Supreme Person.



By chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra constantly, one can fix the mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa (sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ) and in this way achieve the perfection of yoga. Otherwise, the flickering mind will hover on the platform of mental speculation for sense enjoyment, and one will have to transmigrate from one type of body to another because the mind is trained only in relation to the material elements, or, in other words, to sense gratification, which is false. Māyā-sukhāya bharam udvahato vimūḍhān (Bhāg. 7.9.43). Rascals (vimūḍhān), being controlled by mental speculation, make huge arrangements by which to enjoy life temporarily, but they must give up the body at the time of death, when everything is taken away by Kṛṣṇa's external energy (mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham). At that time, whatever one has created in this life is lost, and one must automatically accept a new body by the force of material nature. In this life one may have constructed a very tall skyscraper, but in the next life, because of one's mentality, one may have to accept a body like that of a cat, a dog, a tree or perhaps a demigod. Thus the body is offered by the laws of material nature. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22). The spirit soul takes birth in higher and lower species of life only because of his association with the three qualities of material nature.



ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā

madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ

jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā

adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ





"Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds." (Bg. 14.18)



In conclusion, the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement offers the topmost welfare activity for human society. The saner section of human society must therefore take this movement very seriously for the benefit of all humanity. To save oneself from the repetition of birth and death, one must purify his consciousness. Sarvopādhi-vinirmuktaṁ tat-paratvena nirmalam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. One must be freed from all designations-"I am American," "I am Indian," "I am this," "I am that"-and come to the platform of understanding that Kṛṣṇa is the original master and we are His eternal servants. When the senses are purified and engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service, one achieves the highest perfection. Hṛṣīkeṇa hṛṣīkeśa-sevanaṁ bhaktir ucyate [Cc. Madhya 19.170]. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is a movement of bhakti-yoga. Vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga [Cc. Madya 6.254]. By following the principles of this movement, one becomes disassociated from material mental concoctions and is established on the original platform of the eternal relationship between the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead as servant and master. This, in summary, is the purpose of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.





TEXT 43



jyotir yathaivodaka-pārthiveṣv adaḥ

samīra-vegānugataṁ vibhāvyate

evaṁ sva-māyā-raciteṣv asau pumān

guṇeṣu rāgānugato vimuhyati

SYNONYMS



jyotiḥ-the luminaries in the sky, such as the sun, the moon and the stars; yathā-as; eva-indeed; udaka-in water; pārthiveṣu-or in other liquids, like oil; adaḥ-directly; samīra-vega-anugatam-being forced by the movements of the wind; vibhāvyate-appear in different shapes; evam-in this way; sva-māyā-raciteṣu-in the situation created by one's mental concoctions; asau-the living entity; pumān-person; guṇeṣu-in the material world, manifested by the modes of nature; rāga-anugataḥ-according to his attachment; vimuhyati-becomes bewildered by identification.





When the luminaries in the sky, such as the moon, the sun and the stars, are reflected in liquids like oil or water, they appear to be of different shapes-sometimes round, sometimes long, and so on-because of the movements of the wind. Similarly, when the living entity, the soul, is absorbed in materialistic thoughts, he accepts various manifestations as his own identity because of ignorance. In other words, one is bewildered by mental concoctions because of agitation from the material modes of nature.





This verse gives a very good example by which to understand the different positions of the eternal spiritual soul in the material world and how the soul takes on different bodies (dehāntara-prāptiḥ). The moon is stationary and is one, but when it is reflected in water or oil, it appears to take different shapes because of the movements of the wind. Similarly, the soul is the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when put into the material modes of nature, it takes different bodies, sometimes as a demigod, sometimes a man, a dog, a tree and so on. By the influence of māyā, the illusory potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity thinks that he is this person, that person, American, Indian, cat, dog, tree or whatever. This is called māyā. When one is freed from this bewilderment and understands that the soul does not belong to any shape of this material world, one is situated on the spiritual platform (brahma-bhūta).



This realization is sometimes explained as nirākāra, or formlessness. This formlessness, however, does not mean that the soul has no form. The soul has form, but the external, agitating form he has acquired because of material contamination is false. Similarly, God is also described as nirākāra, which means that God has no material form but is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. The living entity is part and parcel of the supreme sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha, but his material forms are temporary, or illusory. Both the living entity and the Supreme Lord have original, spiritual forms (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha), but the Lord, the Supreme, does not change His form. The Lord appears as He is, whereas the living entity appears because material nature forces him to accept different forms. When the living entity receives these different forms, he identifies with them, and not with his original, spiritual form. As soon as the living entity returns to his original, spiritual form and understanding, he immediately surrenders to the supreme form, the Personality of Godhead. This is explained in Bhagavad-gītā (7.19). Bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate. When the living entity, after many, many births in different forms, returns to his original form of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he immediately surrenders unto the lotus feet of the supreme form, Kṛṣṇa. This is liberation. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (18.54):



brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām





"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me." Surrender unto the supreme form is the result of bhakti. This bhakti, or understanding of one's own position, is the complete liberation. As long as one is under an impersonal understanding of the Absolute Truth, he is not in pure knowledge, but must still struggle for pure knowledge. Kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām (Bg. 12.5). Although one may be spiritually advanced, if one is attached to the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth one must still work very hard, as indicated by the words kleśo 'dhikataraḥ, which mean "greater suffering." A devotee, however, easily attains his original position as a spiritual form and understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His original form.



Kṛṣṇa Himself explains the forms of the living entities in the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gītā, where He clearly says to Arjuna that He, Arjuna and all other living entities, who were previously in their original forms, are separate individual identities. They were individuals in the past, they are now situated in individuality, and in the future they will all continue to maintain their individual forms. The only difference is that the conditioned living entity appears in various material forms, whereas Kṛṣṇa appears in His original, spiritual form. Unfortunately, those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledge think that Kṛṣṇa is like one of them and that His form is like their material forms. Avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam (Bg. 9.11). Kṛṣṇa is never puffed up by material knowledge and is therefore called acyuta, whereas the living entities fall down and are agitated by material nature. This is the difference between the Supreme Lord and the living entities.



In this connection it is to be noted that Vasudeva, who was situated in a transcendental position, advised Kaṁsa not to commit further sinful activities. Kaṁsa, a representative of the demons, was always ready to kill Kṛṣṇa, or God, whereas Vasudeva represents a transcendentally situated person to whom Kṛṣṇa is born (Vāsudeva is the son of Vasudeva). Vasudeva wanted his brother-in-law Kaṁsa to refrain from the sinful act of killing his sister, since the result of being agitated by material nature would be that Kaṁsa would have to accept a body in which to suffer again and again. Elsewhere in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.4), Ṛṣabhadeva also says:



na sādhu manye yata ātmano 'yam

asann api kleśada āsa dehaḥ





As long as the living entity is entangled in the fruitive activities of so-called happiness and distress, he will receive a particular type of body in which to endure the three kinds of suffering due to material nature (tri-tāpa-yantraṇā). An intelligent person, therefore, must free himself from the influence of the three modes of material nature and revive his original, spiritual body by engaging in the service of the Supreme Person, Kṛṣṇa. As long as one is materially attached, one must accept the process of birth, death, old age and disease. One is therefore advised that an intelligent person, instead of being entangled in so-called good and bad fruitive activities, should engage his life in advancing in Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that instead of accepting another material body (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]), he will return home, back to Godhead.





TEXT 44



tasmān na kasyacid droham

ācaret sa tathā-vidhaḥ

ātmanaḥ kṣemam anvicchan

drogdhur vai parato bhayam

SYNONYMS



tasmāt-therefore; na-not; kasyacit-of anyone; droham-envy; ācaret-one should act; saḥ-a person (Kaṁsa); tathā-vidhaḥ-who has been advised in such a way (by Vasudeva); ātmanaḥ-his own; kṣemam-welfare; anvicchan-if he desires; drogdhuḥ-of one who is envious of others; vai-indeed; parataḥ-from others; bhayam-there is a cause of fear.





Therefore, since envious, impious activities cause a body in which one suffers in the next life, why should one act impiously? Considering one's welfare, one should not envy anyone, for an envious person must always fear harm from his enemies, either in this life or in the next.





Instead of being inimical toward other living entities, one should act piously by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord, thus avoiding a fearful situation both in this life and in the next. In this regard, the following moral instruction by the great politician Cāṇakya Paṇḍita is very meaningful:



tyaja durjana-saṁsargaṁ

bhaja sādhu-samāgamam

kuru puṇyam aho rātraṁ

smara nityam anityatām





One should give up the company of devils, demons and nondevotees and should always associate with devotees and saintly persons. One should always act piously, thinking that this life is temporary, and not be attached to temporary happiness and distress. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is teaching all of human society this principle of becoming Kṛṣṇa conscious and thus solving the problems of life forever (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so 'rjuna [Bg. 4.9]).





TEXT 45



eṣā tavānujā bālā

kṛpaṇā putrikopamā

hantuṁ nārhasi kalyāṇīm

imāṁ tvaṁ dīna-vatsalaḥ

SYNONYMS



eṣā-this; tava-your; anujā-younger sister; bālā-innocent woman; kṛpaṇā-completely dependent on you; putrikā-upamā-exactly like your own daughter; hantum-to kill her; na-not; arhasi-you deserve; kalyāṇīm-who is under your affection; imām-her; tvam-you; dīna-vatsalaḥ-very compassionate to the poor and innocent.





As your younger sister, this poor girl Devakī is like your own daughter and deserves to be affectionately maintained. You are merciful, and therefore you should not kill her. Indeed, she deserves your affection.





TEXT 46



śrī-śuka uvāca

evaṁ sa sāmabhir bhedair

bodhyamāno 'pi dāruṇaḥ

na nyavartata kauravya

puruṣādān anuvrataḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-in this way; saḥ-he (Kaṁsa); sāmabhiḥ-by attempts to pacify him (Kaṁsa); bhedaiḥ-by moral instructions that one should not be cruel to anyone else; bodhyamānaḥ api-even being pacified; dāruṇaḥ-he who was the most fiercely cruel; na nyavartata-could not be stopped (from the grievous act); kauravya-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; puruṣa-adān-the Rākṣasas, man-eaters; anuvrataḥ-following in their footsteps.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O best of the Kuru dynasty, Kaṁsa was fiercely cruel and was actually a follower of the Rākṣasas. Therefore he could be neither pacified nor terrified by the good instructions given by Vasudeva. He did not care about the results of sinful activities, either in this life or in the next.





TEXT 47



nirbandhaṁ tasya taṁ jñātvā

vicintyānakadundubhiḥ

prāptaṁ kālaṁ prativyoḍhum

idaṁ tatrānvapadyata

SYNONYMS



nirbandham-determination to do something; tasya-of him (Kaṁsa); tam-that (determination); jñātvā-understanding; vicintya-thinking deeply; ānakadundubhiḥ-Vasudeva; prāptam-had arrived; kālam-imminent danger of death; prativyoḍhum-to stop him from such activities; idam-this; tatra-thereupon; anvapadyata-thought of other ways.





When Vasudeva saw that Kaṁsa was determined to kill his sister Devakī, he thought to himself very deeply. Considering the imminent danger of death, he thought of another plan to stop Kaṁsa.





Although Vasudeva saw the imminent danger that his wife Devakī would be killed, he was convinced of his welfare because at his birth the demigods had played drums and kettledrums. He therefore attempted another way to save Devakī.





TEXT 48



mṛtyur buddhimatāpohyo

yāvad buddhi-balodayam

yady asau na nivarteta

nāparādho 'sti dehinaḥ

SYNONYMS



mṛtyuḥ-death; buddhi-matā-by an intelligent person; apohyaḥ-should be avoided; yāvat-as long as; buddhi-bala-udayam-intelligence and bodily strength are present; yadi-if; asau-that (death); na nivarteta-cannot be checked; na-not; aparādhaḥ-offense; asti-there is; dehinaḥ-of the person in danger of death.





As long as he has intelligence and bodily strength, an intelligent person must try to avoid death. This is the duty of every embodied person. But if death cannot be avoided in spite of one's endeavors, a person facing death commits no offense.





It is natural for a person facing untimely death to try his best to save himself. This is one's duty. Although death is sure, everyone should try to avoid it and not meet death without opposition because every living soul is by nature eternal. Because death is a punishment imposed in the condemned life of material existence, the Vedic culture is based on avoiding death (tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti [Bg. 4.9]). Everyone should try to avoid death and rebirth by cultivating spiritual life and should not submit to death without struggling to survive. One who is not trying to stop death is not an intelligent human being. Because Devakī was face to face with imminent death, it was Vasudeva's duty to save her, as he was trying his best to do. He therefore considered another way to approach Kaṁsa so that Devakī would be saved.





TEXTS 49–50



pradāya mṛtyave putrān

mocaye kṛpaṇām imām

sutā me yadi jāyeran

mṛtyur vā na mriyeta cet

viparyayo vā kiṁ na syād



gatir dhātur duratyayā

upasthito nivarteta

nivṛttaḥ punar āpatet

SYNONYMS



pradāya-promising to deliver; mṛtyave-unto Kaṁsa, who is death personified for Devakī; putrān-my sons; mocaye-I am releasing her from imminent danger; kṛpaṇām-innocent; imām-Devakī; sutāḥ-sons; me-my; yadi-whether; jāyeran-should take birth; mṛtyuḥ-Kaṁsa; vā-or; na-not; mriyeta-should die; cet-if; viparyayaḥ-just the opposite; vā-or; kim-whether; na-not; syāt-it may happen; gatiḥ-the movement; dhātuḥ-of providence; duratyayā-very difficult to understand; upasthitaḥ-that which is presently obtained; nivarteta-may stop; nivṛttaḥ-Devakī's death being stopped; punaḥ āpatet-in the future it may happen again (but what can I do).





Vasudeva considered: By delivering all my sons to Kaṁsa, who is death personified, I shall save the life of Devakī. Perhaps Kaṁsa will die before my sons take birth, or, since he is already destined to die at the hands of my son, one of my sons may kill him. For the time being, let me promise to hand over my sons so that Kaṁsa will give up this immediate threat, and if in due course of time Kaṁsa dies, I shall have nothing to fear.





Vasudeva wanted to save the life of Devakī by promising to deliver his sons to Kaṁsa. "In the future," he thought, "Kaṁsa may die, or I may not beget any sons. Even if a son is born and I deliver him to Kaṁsa, Kaṁsa may die at his hands, for by providence anything could happen. It is very difficult to understand how things are managed by providence." Thus Vasudeva decided that he would promise to deliver his sons to the hands of Kaṁsa in order to save Devakī from the imminent danger of death.





TEXT 51



agner yathā dāru-viyoga-yogayor

adṛṣṭato 'nyan na nimittam asti

evaṁ hi jantor api durvibhāvyaḥ

śarīra-saṁyoga-viyoga-hetuḥ

SYNONYMS



agneḥ-of a fire in the forest; yathā-as; dāru-of wood; viyoga-yogayoḥ-of both the escaping and the capturing; adṛṣṭataḥ-than unseen providence; anyat-some other reason or accident; na-not; nimittam-a cause; asti-there is; evam-in this way; hi-certainly; jantoḥ-of the living being; api-indeed; durvibhāvyaḥ-cannot be found out; śarīra-of the body; saṁyoga-of the accepting; viyoga-or of the giving up; hetuḥ-the cause.





When a fire, for some unseen reason, leaps over one piece of wood and sets fire to the next, the reason is destiny. Similarly, when a living being accepts one kind of body and leaves aside another, there is no other reason than unseen destiny.





When there is a fire in a village, the fire sometimes jumps over one house and burns another. Similarly, when there is a forest fire, the fire sometimes jumps over one tree and catches another. Why this happens, no one can say. One may set forth some imaginary reason why the nearest tree or house did not catch fire whereas a tree or house in a distant place did, but actually the reason is destiny. This reason also applies to the transmigration of the soul, by which a prime minister in one life may become a dog in the next. The work of unseen destiny cannot be ascertained by practical experimental knowledge, and therefore one must be satisfied by reasoning that everything is done by supreme providence.





TEXT 52



evaṁ vimṛśya taṁ pāpaṁ

yāvad-ātmani-darśanam

pūjayām āsa vai śaurir

bahu-māna-puraḥsaram

SYNONYMS



evam-in this way; vimṛśya-after contemplating; tam-unto Kaṁsa; pāpam-the most sinful; yāvat-as far as possible; ātmani-darśanam-with all the intelligence possible within himself; pūjayām āsa-praised; vai-indeed; śauriḥ-Vasudeva; bahu-māna-offering all respect; puraḥsaram-before him.





After thus considering the matter as far as his knowledge would allow, Vasudeva submitted his proposal to the sinful Kaṁsa with great respect.





TEXT 53



prasanna-vadanāmbhojo

nṛśaṁsaṁ nirapatrapam

manasā dūyamānena

vihasann idam abravīt

SYNONYMS



prasanna-vadana-ambhojaḥ-Vasudeva, who externally presented himself as if very happy; nṛśaṁsam-unto the most cruel; nirapatrapam-shameless Kaṁsa; manasā-with the mind; dūyamānena-which was full of anxiety and sorrow; vihasan-smiling externally; idam abravīt-and spoke as follows.





Vasudeva's mind was full of anxiety because his wife was facing danger, but in order to please the cruel, shameless and sinful Kaṁsa, he externally smiled and spoke to him as follows.





Sometimes one must act duplicitously in a dangerous position, as Vasudeva did to save his wife. The material world is complicated, and to execute one's duties, one cannot avoid adopting such diplomacy. Vasudeva did everything possible to save his wife for the sake of begetting Kṛṣṇa. This indicates that one may act duplicitously for the purpose of saving Kṛṣṇa and His interests. According to the arrangement already foretold, Kṛṣṇa was to appear through Vasudeva and Devakī to kill Kaṁsa. Vasudeva, therefore, had to do everything to save the situation. Although all the events were prearranged by Kṛṣṇa, a devotee must try his best to serve the purpose of Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa Himself is all-powerful, but it is not that a devotee should therefore sit idly and leave everything to Him. This instruction is also found in Bhagavad-gītā. Although Kṛṣṇa was doing everything for Arjuna, Arjuna never sat down idly as a nonviolent gentleman. Rather, he tried his best to fight the battle and be victorious.





TEXT 54



śrī-vasudeva uvāca

na hy asyās te bhayaṁ saumya

yad vai sāhāśarīra-vāk

putrān samarpayiṣye 'syā

yatas te bhayam utthitam

SYNONYMS



śrī-vasudevaḥ uvāca-Śrī Vasudeva said; na-not; hi-indeed; asyāḥ-from Devakī; te-of you; bhayam-fear; saumya-O most sober; yat-which; vai-indeed; sā-that omen; āha-dictated; a-śarīra-vāk-a vibration without a body; putrān-all my sons; samarpayiṣye-I shall deliver to you; asyāḥ-of her (Devakī); yataḥ-from whom; te-your; bhayam-fear; utthitam-has arisen.





Vasudeva said: O best of the sober, you have nothing to fear from your sister Devakī because of what you have heard from the unseen omen. The cause of death will be her sons. Therefore I promise that when she gives birth to the sons from whom your fear has arisen, I shall deliver them all unto your hands.





Kaṁsa feared Devakī's existence because after her eighth pregnancy she would give birth to a son who would kill him. Vasudeva, therefore, to assure his brother-in-law the utmost safety, promised to bring him all the sons. He would not wait for the eighth son, but from the very beginning would deliver to the hands of Kaṁsa all the sons to which Devakī would give birth. This was the most liberal proposition offered by Vasudeva to Kaṁsa.





TEXT 55



śrī-śuka uvāca

svasur vadhān nivavṛte

kaṁsas tad-vākya-sāra-vit

vasudevo 'pi taṁ prītaḥ

praśasya prāviśad gṛham

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; svasuḥ-of his sister (Devakī); vadhāt-from the act of killing; nivavṛte-stopped for the time being; kaṁsaḥ-Kaṁsa; tat-vākya-the words of Vasudeva; sāra-vit-knowing to be perfectly correct; vasudevaḥ-Vasudeva; api-also; tam-to him (Kaṁsa); prītaḥ-being satisfied; praśasya-pacifying more; prāviśat gṛham-entered his own house.





Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Kaṁsa agreed to the logical arguments of Vasudeva, and, having full faith in Vasudeva's words, he refrained from killing his sister. Vasudeva, being pleased with Kaṁsa, pacified him further and entered his own house.





Although Kaṁsa was a sinful demon, he believed that Vasudeva would never deviate from his word. The character of a pure devotee like Vasudeva is such that even so great a demon as Kaṁsa firmly believed in his words and was satisfied. Yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ (Bhāg. 5.18.12). All good attributes are present in a devotee, so much so that even Kaṁsa believed in Vasudeva's words without a doubt.





TEXT 56



atha kāla upāvṛtte

devakī sarva-devatā

putrān prasuṣuve cāṣṭau

kanyāṁ caivānuvatsaram

SYNONYMS



atha-thereafter; kāle-in due course of time; upāvṛtte-when it was ripe; devakī-Devakī, the wife of Vasudeva, Kṛṣṇa's father; sarva-devatā-Devakī, to whom all the demigods and God Himself appeared; putrān-sons; prasuṣuve-gave birth to; ca-and; aṣṭau-eight; kanyāṁ ca-and one daughter named Subhadrā; eva-indeed; anuvatsaram-year after year.





Each year thereafter, in due course of time, Devakī, the mother of God and all the demigods, gave birth to a child. Thus she bore eight sons, one after another, and a daughter named Subhadrā.





The spiritual master is sometimes glorified as sarva-devamayo guruḥ (Bhāg. 11.7.27). By the grace of the guru, the spiritual master, one can understand the different kinds of devas. The word deva refers to God, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the original source of all the demigods, who are also called devas. In Bhagavad-gītā (10.2) the Lord says, aham ādir hi devānām: "I am the source of all the devas." The Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, the Original person, expands in different forms. Tad aikṣata bahu syām (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.3). He alone has expanded into many. Advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam (Brahma-saṁhitā 5.33). There are different grades of forms, known as svāṁśa and vibhinnāṁśa. The svāṁśa expansions, or viṣṇu-tattva, are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whereas the vibhinnāṁśa are jīva-tattva, who are part and parcel of the Lord (mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ [Bg. 15.7]). If we accept Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and worship Him, all the parts and expansions of the Lord are automatically worshiped. Sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā (Bhāg. 4.31.14). Kṛṣṇa is known as Acyuta (senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me 'cyuta). By worshiping Acyuta, Kṛṣṇa, one automatically worships all the demigods. There is no need of separately worshiping either the viṣṇu-tattva or jīva-tattva. If one concentrates upon Kṛṣṇa, one worships everyone. Therefore, because mother Devakī gave birth to Kṛṣṇa, she is described here as sarva-devatā.





TEXT 57



kīrtimantaṁ prathamajaṁ

kaṁsāyānakadundubhiḥ

arpayām āsa kṛcchreṇa

so 'nṛtād ativihvalaḥ

SYNONYMS



kīrtimantam-by the name Kīrtimān; prathama-jam-the first-born baby; kaṁsāya-unto Kaṁsa; ānakadundubhiḥ-Vasudeva; arpayām āsa-delivered; kṛcchreṇa-with great pain; saḥ-he (Vasudeva); anṛtāt-from the breaking of the promise, or from fear of being a liar; ati-vihvalaḥ-was very much disturbed, being afraid.





Vasudeva was very much disturbed by fear of becoming a liar by breaking his promise. Thus with great pain he delivered his first-born son, named Kīrtimān, into the hands of Kaṁsa.





In the Vedic system, as soon as a child is born, especially a male child, the father calls for learned brāhmaṇas, and according to the description of the child's horoscope, the child is immediately given a name. This ceremony is called nāma-karaṇa. There are ten different saṁskāras, or reformatory methods, adopted in the system of varṇāśrama-dharma, and the name-giving ceremony is one of them. Although Vasudeva's first son was to be delivered into the hands of Kaṁsa, the nāma-karaṇa ceremony was performed, and thus the child was named Kīrtimān. Such names are given immediately after birth.





TEXT 58



kiṁ duḥsahaṁ nu sādhūnāṁ

viduṣāṁ kim apekṣitam

kim akāryaṁ kadaryāṇāṁ

dustyajaṁ kiṁ dhṛtātmanām

SYNONYMS



kim-what is; duḥsaham-painful; nu-indeed; sādhūnām-for saintly persons; viduṣām-of learned persons; kim apekṣitam-what is dependence; kim akāryam-what is forbidden work; kadaryāṇām-of persons in the lowest grade; dustyajam-very difficult to give up; kim-what is; dhṛta-ātmanām-of persons who are self-realized.





What is painful for saintly persons who strictly adhere to the truth? How could there not be independence for pure devotees who know the Supreme Lord as the substance? What deeds are forbidden for persons of the lowest character? And what cannot be given up for the sake of Lord Kṛṣṇa by those who have fully surrendered at His lotus feet?





Since the eighth son of Devakī was to kill Kaṁsa, one might ask what the need was for Vasudeva to deliver the first-born child. The answer is that Vasudeva had promised Kaṁsa that he would deliver all the children born of Devakī. Kaṁsa, being an asura, did not believe that the eighth child would kill him; he took it for granted that he might be killed by any of the children of Devakī. Vasudeva, therefore, to save Devakī, promised to give Kaṁsa every child, whether male or female. From another point of view, Vasudeva and Devakī were very pleased when they understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, would come as their eighth son. Vasudeva, a pure devotee of the Lord, was eager to see Kṛṣṇa appear as his child from the eighth pregnancy of Devakī. Therefore he wanted to deliver all the children quickly so that the eighth turn would come and Kṛṣṇa would appear. He begot one child every year so that Kṛṣṇa's turn to appear would come as soon as possible.





TEXT 59



dṛṣṭvā samatvaṁ tac chaureḥ

satye caiva vyavasthitim

kaṁsas tuṣṭa-manā rājan

prahasann idam abravīt

SYNONYMS



dṛṣṭvā-by seeing; samatvam-being equipoised, undisturbed in distress or happiness; tat-that; śaureḥ-of Vasudeva; satye-in truthfulness; ca-indeed; eva-certainly; vyavasthitim-the firm situation; kaṁsaḥ-Kaṁsa; tuṣṭa-manāḥ-being very satisfied (with Vasudeva's behavior in delivering the first child to keep his promise); rājan-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; prahasan-with a smiling face; idam-this; abravīt-said.





My dear King Parīkṣit, when Kaṁsa saw that Vasudeva, being situated in truthfulness, was completely equipoised in giving him the child, he was very happy. Therefore, with a smiling face, he spoke as follows.





The word samatvam is very significant in this verse. Samatvam refers to one who is always equipoised, unaffected by either happiness or distress. Vasudeva was so steadily equipoised that he did not seem in the least agitated when delivering his first-born child into the hands of Kaṁsa to be killed. In Bhagavad-gītā (2.56) it is said, duḥkheṣv anudvigna-manāḥ sukheṣu vigata-spṛhaḥ. In the material world, one should not be very eager to be happy, nor should one be very much disturbed by material distress. Lord Kṛṣṇa advised Arjuna:



mātrā-sparśās tu kaunteya

śītoṣṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ

āgamāpāyino 'nityās

tāṁs titikṣasva bhārata





"O son of Kuntī, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." (Bg. 2.14) The self-realized soul is never disturbed by so-called distress or happiness, and this is especially true of an exalted devotee like Vasudeva, who showed this by his practical example. Vasudeva was not at all disturbed when delivering his first child to Kaṁsa to be killed.





TEXT 60



pratiyātu kumāro 'yaṁ

na hy asmād asti me bhayam

aṣṭamād yuvayor garbhān

mṛtyur me vihitaḥ kila

SYNONYMS



pratiyātu-my dear Vasudeva, take back your child and go home; kumāraḥ-newborn child; ayam-this; na-not; hi-indeed; asmāt-from him; asti-there is; me-my; bhayam-fear; aṣṭamāt-from the eighth; yuvayoḥ-of both you and your wife; garbhāt-from the pregnancy; mṛtyuḥ-death; me-my; vihitaḥ-has been ordained; kila-indeed.





O Vasudeva, you may take back your child and go home. I have no fear of your first child. It is the eighth child of you and Devakī I am concerned with because that is the child by whom I am destined to be killed.





TEXT 61



tatheti sutam ādāya

yayāv ānakadundubhiḥ

nābhyanandata tad-vākyam

asato 'vijitātmanaḥ

SYNONYMS



tathā-very well; iti-thus; sutam ādāya-taking back his child; yayau-left that place; ānakadundubhiḥ-Vasudeva; na abhyanandata-did not very much value; tat-vākyam-the words (of Kaṁsa); asataḥ-who was without character; avijita-ātmanaḥ-and without self-control.





Vasudeva agreed and took his child back home, but because Kaṁsa had no character and no self-control, Vasudeva knew that he could not rely on Kaṁsa's word.





TEXTS 62–63



nandādyā ye vraje gopā

yāś cāmīṣāṁ ca yoṣitaḥ

vṛṣṇayo vasudevādyā

devaky-ādyā yadu-striyaḥ

sarve vai devatā-prāyā



ubhayor api bhārata

jñātayo bandhu-suhṛdo

ye ca kaṁsam anuvratāḥ

SYNONYMS



nanda-ādyāḥ-beginning from Nanda Mahārāja; ye-all of which persons; vraje-in Vṛndāvana; gopāḥ-the cowherd men; yāḥ-which; ca-and; amīṣām-of all those (inhabitants of Vṛndāvana); ca-as well as; yoṣitaḥ-the women; vṛṣṇayaḥ-members of the Vṛṣṇi family; vasudeva-ādyāḥ-headed by Vasudeva; devakī-ādyāḥ-headed by Devakī; yadu-striyaḥ-all the women of the Yadu dynasty; sarve-all of them; vai-indeed; devatā-prāyāḥ-were inhabitants of heaven; ubhayoḥ-of both Nanda Mahārāja and Vasudeva; api-indeed; bhārata-O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; jñātayaḥ-the relatives; bandhu-friends; suhṛdaḥ-well-wishers; ye-all of whom; ca-and; kaṁsam anuvratāḥ-even though apparently followers of Kaṁsa.





The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, headed by Nanda Mahārāja and including his associate cowherd men and their wives, were none but denizens of the heavenly planets, O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the descendants of Bharata, and so too were the descendants of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, headed by Vasudeva, and Devakī and the other women of the dynasty of Yadu. The friends, relatives and well-wishers of both Nanda Mahārāja and Vasudeva and even those who externally appeared to be followers of Kaṁsa were all demigods.





As previously discussed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, informed Lord Brahmā that Lord Kṛṣṇa would personally descend to mitigate the suffering on the earth. The Lord ordered all the denizens of the heavenly planets to take birth in different families of the Yadu and Vṛṣṇi dynasties and in Vṛndāvana. Now this verse informs us that all the family and friends of the Yadu dynasty, the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, Nanda Mahārāja and the gopas descended from the heavenly planets to see the pastimes of the Lord. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8), the Lord's pastimes consist of paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām-saving the devotees and killing the demons. To demonstrate these activities, the Lord called for devotees from different parts of the universe.



There are many devotees who are elevated to the higher planetary systems.



prāpya puṇya-kṛtāṁ lokān

uṣitvā śāśvatīḥ samāḥ

śucīnāṁ śrīmatāṁ gehe

yoga-bhraṣṭo 'bhijāyate





"The unsuccessful yogī, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy." (Bg. 6.41) Some devotees, having failed to complete the process of devotional service, are promoted to the heavenly planets, to which the pious are elevated, and after enjoying there they may be directly promoted to the place where the Lord's pastimes are going on. When Lord Kṛṣṇa was to appear, the denizens of the heavenly planets were invited to see the pastimes of the Lord, and thus it is stated here that the members of the Yadu and Vṛṣṇi dynasties and the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana were demigods or almost as good as demigods. Even those who externally helped the activities of Kaṁsa belonged to the higher planetary systems. The imprisonment and release of Vasudeva and the killing of various demons were all manifestations of the pastimes of the Lord, and because the devotees would be pleased to see these activities personally, they were all invited to take birth as friends and relatives of these families. As confirmed in the prayers of Kuntī (Bhāg. 1.8.19), nato nāṭya-dharo yathā. The Lord was to play the part of a demon-killer, and a friend, son and brother to His devotees, and thus these devotees were all summoned.





TEXT 64



etat kaṁsāya bhagavāñ

chaśaṁsābhyetya nāradaḥ

bhūmer bhārāyamāṇānāṁ

daityānāṁ ca vadhodyamam

SYNONYMS



etat-all these words about the Yadu family and Vṛṣṇi family; kaṁsāya-unto King Kaṁsa; bhagavān-the most powerful representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śaśaṁsa-informed (Kaṁsa, who was in doubt); abhyetya-after approaching him; nāradaḥ-the great sage Nārada; bhūmeḥ-on the surface of the earth; bhārāyamāṇānām-of those who were a burden; daityānām ca-and of the demons; vadha-udyamam-the endeavor to kill.





Once the great saint Nārada approached Kaṁsa and informed him of how the demoniac persons who were a great burden on the earth were going to be killed. Thus Kaṁsa was placed into great fear and doubt.





It has already been discussed that mother earth implored Lord Brahmā to give her relief from the distress created by the burdensome demons and that Lord Brahmā informed her that Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself was going to appear. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8):



paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge





Whenever there is a burden created by the demons and whenever the innocent devotees are distressed by demoniac rulers, the Lord appears in due course of time to kill the demons with the assistance of His real representatives, who are technically called demigods. In the Upaniṣads it is stated that the demigods are different parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is the duty of the parts of the body to serve the whole, it is the duty of Kṛṣṇa's devotees to serve Kṛṣṇa as He wants. Kṛṣṇa's business is to kill the demons, and therefore this should be a devotee's business also. Because the people of Kali-yuga are fallen, however, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, out of kindness for them, did not bring any weapon to kill them. Rather, by spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness, love of Kṛṣṇa, He wanted to kill their nefarious, demoniac activities. This is the purpose of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Unless the demoniac activities on the surface of the world are diminished or vanquished, no one can be happy. The program for the conditioned soul is fully described in Bhagavad-gītā, and one simply has to follow these instructions to become happy. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has therefore prescribed:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

[Adi 17.21]





Let people chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra constantly. Then their demoniac tendencies will be killed, and they will become first-class devotees, happy in this life and in the next.





TEXTS 65–66



ṛṣer vinirgame kaṁso

yadūn matvā surān iti

devakyā garbha-sambhūtaṁ

viṣṇuṁ ca sva-vadhaṁ prati

devakīṁ vasudevaṁ ca



nigṛhya nigaḍair gṛhe

jātaṁ jātam ahan putraṁ

tayor ajana-śaṅkayā

SYNONYMS



ṛṣeḥ-of the great sage Nārada; vinirgame-on the departure (after giving information); kaṁsaḥ-Kaṁsa; yadūn-all the members of the Yadu dynasty; matvā-thinking of; surān-as demigods; iti-thus; devakyāḥ-of Devakī; garbha-sambhūtam-the children born from the womb; viṣṇum-(accepting) as Viṣṇu; ca-and; sva-vadham prati-fearing his own death from Viṣṇu; devakīm-Devakī; vasudevam ca-and her husband, Vasudeva; nigṛhya-arresting; nigaḍaiḥ-by iron shackles; gṛhe-confined at home; jātam jātam-each one who was born, one after another; ahan-killed; putram-the sons; tayoḥ-of Vasudeva and Devakī; ajana-śaṅkayā-with the doubt that they would be Viṣṇu.





After the departure of the great saint Nārada, Kaṁsa thought that all the members of the Yadu dynasty were demigods and that any of the children born from the womb of Devakī might be Viṣṇu. Fearing his death, Kaṁsa arrested Vasudeva and Devakī and chained them with iron shackles. Suspecting each of the children to be Viṣṇu, Kaṁsa killed them one after another because of the prophecy that Viṣṇu would kill him.





Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, in his notes on this verse, has mentioned how Nārada Muni gave Kaṁsa this information. This incident is described in the Hari-vaṁśa. Nārada Muni went to see Kaṁsa by providence, and Kaṁsa received him very well. Nārada, therefore, informed him that any one of the sons of Devakī might be Viṣṇu. Because Viṣṇu was to kill him, Kaṁsa should not spare any of Devakī's children, Nārada Muni advised. Nārada's intention was that Kaṁsa, by killing the children, would increase his sinful activities so that Kṛṣṇa would soon appear to kill him. Upon receiving the instructions of Nārada Muni, Kaṁsa killed all the children of Devakī one after another.



The word ajana-śaṅkayā indicates that Lord Viṣṇu never takes birth (ajana) and that He therefore appeared as Kṛṣṇa, taking birth just like a human being (mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam). Kaṁsa attempted to kill all the babies born of Devakī and Vasudeva, although he knew that if Viṣṇu were born, He would not be killed. Actually it came to pass that when Viṣṇu appeared as Kṛṣṇa, Kaṁsa could not kill Him; rather, as foretold, it was He who killed Kaṁsa. One should know in truth how Kṛṣṇa, who takes His birth transcendentally, acts to kill the demons but is never killed. When one perfectly understands Kṛṣṇa in this way, through the medium of śāstra, one becomes immortal. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gītā (4.9):



janma karma ca me divyam

evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ

tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma

naiti mām eti so 'rjuna





"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."





TEXT 67



mātaraṁ pitaraṁ bhrātṝn

sarvāṁś ca suhṛdas tathā

ghnanti hy asutṛpo lubdhā

rājānaḥ prāyaśo bhuvi

SYNONYMS



mātaram-unto the mother; pitaram-unto the father; bhrātṝn-unto brothers; sarvān ca-and anyone else; suhṛdaḥ-friends; tathā-as well as; ghnanti-they kill (as it is practically seen); hi-indeed; asu-tṛpaḥ-those who envy the lives of others for their personal sense gratification; lubdhāḥ-greedy; rājānaḥ-such kings; prāyaśaḥ-almost always; bhuvi-on the earth.





Kings greedy for sense gratification on this earth almost always kill their enemies indiscriminately. To satisfy their own whims, they may kill anyone, even their mothers, fathers, brothers or friends.





We have seen in the history of India that Aurangzeb killed his brother and nephews and imprisoned his father to fulfill political ambitions. There have been many similar instances, and Kaṁsa was the same type of king. Kaṁsa did not hesitate to kill his nephews and imprison his sister and his father. For demons to do such things is not astonishing. Nonetheless, although Kaṁsa was a demon, he was aware that Lord Viṣṇu cannot be killed, and thus he attained salvation. Even partial understanding of the activities of Lord Viṣṇu makes one eligible for salvation. Kaṁsa knew a little about Kṛṣṇa-that He could not be killed-and therefore he attained salvation although he thought of Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, as an enemy. What then is to be said of one who knows Kṛṣṇa perfectly from the descriptions of śāstras like Bhagavad-gītā? It is therefore the duty of everyone to read Bhagavad-gītā and understand Kṛṣṇa perfectly. This will make one's life successful.





TEXT 68



ātmānam iha sañjātaṁ

jānan prāg viṣṇunā hatam

mahāsuraṁ kālanemiṁ

yadubhiḥ sa vyarudhyata

SYNONYMS



ātmānam-personally; iha-in this world; sañjātam-born again; jānan-understanding well; prāk-previously, before this birth; viṣṇunā-by Lord Viṣṇu; hatam-was killed; mahā-asuram-a great demon; kālanemim-by the name Kālanemi; yadubhiḥ-with the members of the Yadu dynasty; saḥ-he (Kaṁsa); vyarudhyata-acted inimically.





In his previous birth, Kaṁsa had been a great demon named Kālanemi and been killed by Viṣṇu. Upon learning this information from Nārada, Kaṁsa became envious of everyone connected with the Yadu dynasty.





Persons who are demons, enemies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are called asuras. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, the asuras, because of their enmity toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, take birth after birth in asura families and therefore glide down to the darkest hellish regions.





TEXT 69



ugrasenaṁ ca pitaraṁ

yadu-bhojāndhakādhipam

svayaṁ nigṛhya bubhuje

śūrasenān mahā-balaḥ

SYNONYMS



ugrasenam-unto Ugrasena; ca-and; pitaram-who was his own father; yadu-of the Yadu dynasty; bhoja-of the Bhoja dynasty; andhaka-of the Andhaka dynasty; adhipam-the king; svayam-personally; nigṛhya-subduing; bubhuje-enjoyed; śūrasenān-all the states known as Śūrasena; mahā-balaḥ-the extremely powerful Kaṁsa.





Kaṁsa, the most powerful son of Ugrasena, even imprisoned his own father, the King of the Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka dynasties, and personally ruled the states known as Śūrasena.





The state known as Mathurā was also included within the states known as Śūrasena.



ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR THIS CHAPTER





Regarding transmigration of the soul, Śrīla Madhvācārya gives the following notes. When one is awake, whatever one sees or hears is impressed upon the mind, which later works in dreams to show one different experiences, although in dreams one appears to accept a different body. For example, when one is awake one does business and talks with customers, and similarly in dreams one meets various customers, talks about business and gives quotations. Madhvācārya says, therefore, that dreams take place according to what one sees, hears and remembers. When one reawakens, of course, one forgets the body of the dream. This forgetfulness is called apasmṛti. Thus we are changing bodies because we are sometimes dreaming, sometimes awake and sometimes forgetful. Forgetfulness of our previously created body is called death, and our work in the present body is called life. After death, one cannot remember the activities of one's previous body, whether imaginary or factual.



The agitated mind is compared to agitated water reflecting the sun and the moon. Actually the sun and moon reflected on the water do not exist there; nonetheless, they are reflected according to the movements of the water. Similarly, when our minds are agitated, we wander in different material atmospheres and receive different types of bodies. This is described in Bhagavad-gītā as guṇa-saṅga. Kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo 'sya. Madhvācārya says, guṇa-nubaddhaḥ san. And Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva (Cc. Madhya 19.151). The living entity rotates up and down throughout the universe, sometimes in the upper planetary system, sometimes in the middle and lower planetary systems, sometimes as a man, sometimes a god, a dog, a tree and so on. This is all due to the agitation of the mind. The mind must therefore be steadily fixed. As it is said, sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayoḥ. One should fix one's mind at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and then one will become free from agitation. This is the instruction of the Garuḍa Purāṇa, and in the Nāradīya Purāṇa the same process is described. As stated in Bhagavad-gītā, yānti deva-vratā devān [Bg. 9.25]. The agitated mind goes to different planetary systems because it is attached to different kinds of demigods, but one does not go to the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by worshiping the demigods, for this is not supported by any Vedic literature. Man is the architect of his own fortune. In this human life one has the facility with which to understand one's real situation, and one can decide whether to wander around the universe forever or return home, back to Godhead. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (aprāpya māṁ nivartante mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani).



There is no such thing as chance. When a tree is burning in a forest fire and although the nearest tree is spared a distant tree catches fire, this may appear to be chance. Similarly, one may seem to get different types of bodies by chance, but actually one receives these bodies because of the mind. The mind flickers between accepting and rejecting, and according to the acceptance and rejection of the mind, we receive different types of bodies, although we superficially seem to obtain these bodies by chance. Even if we accept the theory of chance, the immediate cause for the change of body is the agitation of the mind.



Notes on aṁśa. This chapter describes that Kṛṣṇa appeared aṁśena, with His parts and parcels or His partial manifestation. In this connection, Śrīdhara Svāmī says that Kṛṣṇa is one hundred percent Bhagavān (kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam). Because of our imperfections, however, we cannot appreciate Kṛṣṇa in fullness, and therefore whatever Kṛṣṇa exhibited when present on earth was but a partial manifestation of His opulence. Again, Kṛṣṇa appeared with His plenary expansion Baladeva. Kṛṣṇa, however, is full; there is no question of His appearing partially. In the Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī says that to accept that Kṛṣṇa was partially manifested would contradict the statement kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that the word aṁśena means that Kṛṣṇa appeared with all His plenary expansions. The words aṁśena viṣṇoḥ do not mean that Kṛṣṇa is a partial representative of Viṣṇu. Rather, Kṛṣṇa appeared in fullness, and He manifests Himself partially in the Vaikuṇṭhalokas. In other words, Lord Viṣṇu is a partial representation of Kṛṣṇa; Kṛṣṇa is not a partial representation of Viṣṇu. In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapter Four, this subject matter is explained very clearly. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura also notes that no one can describe Kṛṣṇa in fullness. Whatever descriptions we find in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are partial explanations of Kṛṣṇa. In conclusion, therefore, the word aṁśena indicates that Lord Viṣṇu is a partial representation of Kṛṣṇa, not that Kṛṣṇa is a partial representation of Viṣṇu.



Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī's Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī has explained the word dharma-śīlasya. The exact meaning of dharma-śīla is "an unadulterated devotee." Real dharma consists of full surrender to Kṛṣṇa (sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja [Bg. 18.66]). One who has fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa is actually religious. One such religious person was Mahārāja Parīkṣit. Anyone who accepts the principle of surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord, giving up all other systems of religion, is actually dharma-śīla, perfectly religious.



The word nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ refers to one who no longer has any material desires (sarvopādhi-vinirmuktam [Cc. Madhya 19.170]). One may have many material desires because of contamination in this material world, but when one is completely free from all material desires, he is called nivṛtta-tṛṣṇa, which indicates that he no longer has any thirst for material enjoyment. Svāmin kṛtārtho 'smi varaṁ na yāce (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya). Materialistic persons want some material profit from executing devotional service, but this is not the purpose of service. The perfection of devotional service lies in complete surrender unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, with no material desires. One who surrenders in this way is already liberated. Jīvan-muktaḥ sa ucyate. One who is always busy serving Kṛṣṇa, in whatever condition he may live, is understood to be liberated even in this life. Such a person, who is a pure devotee, does not need to change his body; indeed, he does not possess a material body, for his body has already been spiritualized. An iron rod kept constantly within a fire will ultimately become fire, and whatever it touches will burn. Similarly, the pure devotee is in the fire of spiritual existence, and therefore his body is cin-maya; that is, it is spiritual, not material, because the pure devotee has no desire but the transcendental desire to serve the Lord. In text four the word upagīyamānāt is used: nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānāt. Who will chant the glories of the Lord unless he is a devotee? Therefore the word nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ indicates the devotee, and no one else. These are the remarks of ācāryas like Vīrarāghava Ācārya and Vijayadhvaja. To desire anything other than devotional service will diminish one's freedom from material desires, but when one is free from all such desires one is called nivṛtta-tarṣaiḥ.



Vinā paśu-ghnāt. The word paśu means "animal." An animal killer, paśu-ghna, cannot enter into Kṛṣṇa consciousness. In our Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, therefore, animal killing is completely prohibited.



Uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt. The word uttamaśloka means "one who is famous as the best of those who are good." The Lord is good in all circumstances. That is His natural reputation. His goodness is unlimited, and He uses it unlimitedly. A devotee is also sometimes described as uttamaśloka, meaning that he is eager to glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the Lord's devotees. Glorifying the Lord and glorifying the Lord's devotees are the same. Or, rather, glorifying the devotee is more important than glorifying the Lord directly. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura explains this fact: chāḍiyā vaiṣṇava-sevā, nistāra pāyeche kebā. One cannot be liberated from material contamination without sincerely serving a devotee of Kṛṣṇa.



Bhavauṣadhāt means "from the universal remedy." Chanting the holy name and glorifying the Supreme Lord are the universal remedy for all the miseries of materialistic life. Persons who desire to be freed from this material world are called mumukṣu. Such persons can understand the miseries of materialistic life, and by glorifying the activities of the Lord they can be released from all these miseries. The transcendental sound vibrations concerning the Lord's name, fame, form, qualities and paraphernalia are all nondifferent from the Lord. Therefore the very sound vibration of the Lord's glorification and name are pleasing to the ears, and by understanding the absolute nature of the Lord's name, form and qualities the devotee becomes joyful. Even those who are not devotees, however, enjoy the pleasing narrations of the Lord's transcendental activities. Even ordinary persons not very much advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness take pleasure in describing the narrations depicted in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. When a materialistic person is purified in this way, he engages in hearing and chanting the glories of the Lord. Because glorification of the Lord's pastimes is very pleasing to the ear and heart of the devotee, it is simultaneously his subject and object.



In this world there are three kinds of men: those who are liberated, those trying to be liberated, and those entangled in sense enjoyment. Of these three, those who are already liberated chant and hear the holy name of the Lord, knowing perfectly that to glorify the Lord is the only way to keep oneself in a transcendental position. Those who are trying to be liberated, the second class, may regard the chanting and hearing of the Lord's holy name as a process of liberation, and they too will feel the transcendental pleasure of this chanting. As for karmīs and persons engaged in sense gratification, they also may take pleasure in hearing the pastimes of the Lord, like His fighting on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra and His dancing in Vṛndāvana with the gopīs.



The word uttamaśloka-guṇānuvāda refers to the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Lord, such as His affection for mother Yaśodā and His friends the cowherd boys and His loving attitude toward the gopīs. The Lord's devotees like Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira are also described by the qualification uttamaśloka-guṇānuvāda. The word anuvāda refers to describing the qualities of the Supreme Lord or His devotees. When these qualities are described, other devotees are interested in hearing them. The more one is interested in hearing about these transcendental qualities, the more one transcendentally enjoys. Everyone, therefore, including the mumukṣus, the vimuktas and the karmīs, should chant and hear the glories of the Lord, and in this way everyone will benefit.



Although the sound vibration of the transcendental qualities of the Lord is equally beneficial to all, for those who are muktas, liberated, it is especially pleasing. As described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Eighth Canto, Third Chapter, verse twenty, because pure devotees, who no longer have any material desires, surrender fully to the lotus feet of the Lord, they always merge in the ocean of bliss by chanting and hearing the Lord's holy name. According to this verse, devotees like Nārada and other residents of Śvetadvīpa are seen always engaged in chanting the holy name of the Lord because by such chanting they are always externally and internally blissful. The mumukṣus, persons desiring to be liberated, do not depend on the pleasures of the senses; instead, they concentrate fully on becoming liberated by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Karmīs like to create something pleasing to their ears and hearts, and although they sometimes like to chant or hear the glories of the Lord, they do not do it openly. Devotees, however, always spontaneously hear, chant about and remember the activities of the Lord, and by this process they are fully satisfied, even though these may seem like topics of sense gratification. Simply by hearing the transcendental narrations of the Lord's activities, Parīkṣit Mahārāja was liberated. He was therefore śrotramano-'bhirāma; that is, he glorified the process of hearing. This process should be accepted by all living entities.



To distinguish persons who are bereft of these transcendental pleasures, Parīkṣit Mahārāja has used the words virajyeta pumān. The word pumān refers to any person, whether man, woman or in-between. Because of the bodily conception of life, we are subject to lamentation, but one who has no such bodily conceptions can take pleasure in transcendental hearing and chanting. Therefore a person fully absorbed in the bodily concept of life is surely killing himself by not making spiritual progress. Such a person is called paśu-ghna. Especially excluded from spiritual life are the animal hunters, who are not interested in hearing and chanting the holy name of the Lord. Such hunters are always unhappy, both in this life and in the next. It is therefore said that a hunter should neither die nor live because for such persons both living and dying are troublesome. Animal hunters are completely different from ordinary karmīs, and thus they have been excluded from the process of hearing and chanting. Vinā paśu-ghnāt. They cannot enter into the transcendental pleasure of chanting and hearing the holy name of the Lord.



The word mahā-ratha refers to a great hero who can fight alone against eleven thousand other heroes, and the word atiratha, as found in text five, refers to one who can fight against an unlimited number. This is mentioned in the Mahābhārata as follows:



ekādaśa-sahasrāṇi

yodhayed yas tu dhanvinām

astra-śastra-pravīṇaś ca

mahā-ratha iti smṛtaḥ

amitān yodhayed yas tu

samprokto 'tirathas tu saḥ





This is the description given in the Bṛhad-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.



Māyā-manuṣyasya (10.1.17). Because of being covered by yogamāyā (nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yogamāyā-samāvṛtaḥ [Bg. 7.25]), Kṛṣṇa is sometimes called māyā-manuṣya, indicating that although He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He appears like an ordinary person. A misunderstanding arises because yogamāyā covers the vision of the general public. The Lord's position is actually different from that of an ordinary person, for although He appears to act like an ordinary man, He is always transcendental. The word māyā also indicates "mercy," and sometimes it also means "knowledge." The Lord is always full of all transcendental knowledge, and therefore although He acts like a human being, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full of knowledge. In His original identity, the Lord is the controller of māyā (mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram [Bg. 9.10]). Therefore the Lord may be called māyā-manuṣya, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing like an ordinary human being, although He is the controller of both the material and spiritual energies. The Lord is the Supreme Person, Puruṣottama, but because we are deluded by yogamāyā, He appears to be an ordinary person. Ultimately, however, yogamāyā induces even a nondevotee to understand the Lord as the Supreme Person, Puruṣottama. In Bhagavad-gītā we find two statements given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the devotees, the Lord says:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam

dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te





"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) Thus for the willing devotee the Lord gives intelligence by which to understand Him and return home, back to Godhead. For others, for nondevotees, the Lord says, mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham: "I am all-plundering, inevitable death." A devotee like Prahlāda enjoys the activities of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, whereas nondevotees like Prahlāda's father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, meet death before Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. The Lord therefore acts in two ways, by sending some onto the path of repeated birth and death and sending others back home, back to Godhead.



The word kāla, meaning "black," indicates the color of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāmacandra, who both look blackish, give liberation and transcendental bliss to Their devotees. Among persons possessing material bodies, sometimes someone is able to subject death to his own will. For such a person, death is almost impossible because no one wants to die. But although Bhīṣmadeva possessed this power, Bhīṣma, by the supreme will of the Lord, died very easily in the Lord's presence. There have also been many demons who had no hope of salvation, yet Kaṁsa attained salvation by the supreme will of the Lord. Not to speak of Kaṁsa, even Pūtanā attained salvation and reached the level of the Lord's mother. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, therefore, was very eager to hear about the Lord, who has inconceivable qualities by which to give liberation to anyone. Parīkṣit Mahārāja, at the point of his death, was certainly interested in his liberation. When such a great and exalted personality as the Lord behaves like an ordinary human being although possessing inconceivable qualities, His behavior is called māyā. Therefore the Lord is described as māyā-manuṣya. This is the opinion of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. Mu refers to mukti, or salvation, and ku refers to that which is bad or very obnoxious. Thus muku refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who saves one from the bad condition of material existence. The Lord is called mukunda because He not only saves the devotee from material existence but offers him transcendental bliss in love and service.



As for Keśava, ka means Brahmā, and īśa means Lord Śiva. The personality of Godhead captivates both Lord Brahmā and Lord Mahādeva, or Śiva, by His transcendental qualities. Therefore He is called Keśava. This opinion is given by Sanātana Gosvāmī in his Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī commentary.



It is said that all the demigods, accompanied by Tri-nayana, Lord Śiva, went to the shore of the ocean of milk and offered their prayers through the mantra known as puruṣa-sūkta. From this statement it is understood that the demigods cannot directly approach Lord Viṣṇu, who lies on the ocean of milk, or enter His abode. This is also clearly stated in the Mahābhārata, Mokṣa-dharma, and the next chapter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has His abode in Goloka (goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya [Bs. 5.43]). From Lord Kṛṣṇa come the catur-vyūha, the quadruple expansions Saṅkarṣaṇa, Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Vāsudeva. There are innumerable brahmāṇḍas, all of which emanate from the pores of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and in every brahmāṇḍa there is a Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who is a partial expansion of Aniruddha. This Aniruddha is a partial expansion of Pradyumna, who is partially represented as Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, the Supersoul of all living entities. These Viṣṇu expansions are different from Kṛṣṇa, who resides in Goloka Vṛndāvana. When it is said that the demigods offered prayers to the Lord by chanting the puruṣa-sūkta, this indicates that they pleased the Lord by enunciating prayers of bhakti.



The word vṛṣākapi refers to one who satisfies His devotee in every way and frees His devotee from all material anxieties. Vṛṣa refers to religious performances like sacrifices. Even without the execution of sacrifices, the Lord can still enjoy the supermost comforts of the heavenly planets. The statement that Puruṣottama, Jagannātha, would appear in the house of Vasudeva distinguishes the Supreme Personality of Godhead from ordinary persons. The statement that He personally appeared indicates that He did not send His plenary expansion. The word priyārtham indicates that the Lord appeared to please Rukmiṇī and Rādhārāṇī. Priyā means "the most beloved."



In the commentary of Śrī Vīrarāghava Ācārya, the following extra verse is accepted after text twenty-three:



ṛṣayo 'pi tad-ādeśāt

kalpyantāṁ paśu-rūpiṇaḥ

payo-dāna-mukhenāpi

viṣṇuṁ tarpayituṁ surāḥ





"O demigods, even great sages, following the order of Viṣṇu, appeared in the forms of cows and calves to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead by delivering milk."



Rāmānujācārya sometimes accepts Baladeva as a śaktyāveśa-avatāra, but Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has explained that Baladeva is an expansion of Kṛṣṇa and that a part of Baladeva is Saṅkarṣaṇa. Although Baladeva is identical with Saṅkarṣaṇa, He is the origin of Saṅkarṣaṇa. Therefore the word svarāṭ has been used to indicate that Baladeva always exists in His own independence. The word svarāṭ also indicates that Baladeva is beyond the material conception of existence. Māyā cannot attract Him, but because He is fully independent, He can appear by His spiritual potency wherever He likes. Māyā is fully under the control of Viṣṇu. Because the material potency and yogamāyā mingle in the Lord's appearance, they are described as ekānaṁśā. Sometimes ekānaṁśā is interpreted to mean "without differentiation." Saṅkarṣaṇa and Śeṣa-nāga are identical. As stated by Yamunādevī, "O Rāma, O great-armed master of the world, who have extended Yourself throughout the entire universe by one plenary expansion, it is not possible to understand You fully." Therefore ekāṁśā refers to Śeṣa-nāga. In other words, Baladeva, merely by His partial expansion, sustains the entire universe.



The word kāryārthe refers to one who attracted the pregnancy of Devakī and bewildered mother Yaśodā. These pastimes are very confidential. The Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered yogamāyā to bewilder His associates in His pastimes and bewilder demons like Kaṁsa. As stated previously, yogamāyāṁ samādiśat. To give service to the Lord, yogamāyā appeared along with mahāmāyā. Mahāmāyā refers to yayā sammohitaṁ jagat, "one who bewilders the entire material world." From this statement it is to be understood that yogamāyā, in her partial expansion, becomes mahāmāyā and bewilders the conditioned souls. In other words, the entire creation has two divisions-transcendental, or spiritual, and material. Yogamāyā manages the spiritual world, and by her partial expansion as mahāmāyā she manages the material world. As stated in the Nārada-pañcarātra, mahāmāyā is a partial expansion of yogamāyā. The Nārada-pañcarātra clearly states that the Supreme Personality has one potency, which is sometimes described as Durgā. The Brahma-saṁhitā says, chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā [Bs. 5.44]. Durgā is not different from yogamāyā. When one understands Durgā properly, he is immediately liberated, for Durgā is originally the spiritual potency, hlādinī-śakti, by whose mercy one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily. Rādhā kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī-śaktir asmād [Adi 1.5]. The mahāmāyā-śakti, however, is a covering of yogamāyā, and she is therefore called the covering potency. By this covering potency, the entire material world is bewildered (yayā sammohitaṁ jagat). In conclusion, bewildering the conditioned souls and liberating the devotees are both functions belonging to yogamāyā. Transferring the pregnancy of Devakī and keeping mother Yaśodā in deep sleep were both done by yogamāyā; mahāmāyā cannot act upon such devotees, for they are always liberated. But although it is not possible for mahāmāyā to control liberated souls or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, she did bewilder Kaṁsa. The action of yogamāyā in presenting herself before Kaṁsa was the action of mahāmāyā, not yogamāyā. Yogamāyā cannot even see or touch such polluted persons as Kaṁsa. In Caṇḍī, in the Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa, Eleventh Chapter, Mahāmāyā says, "During the twenty-eighth yuga in the period of Vaivasvata Manu, I shall take birth as the daughter of Yaśodā and be known as Vindhyācala-vāsinī."



The distinction between the two māyās-yogamāyā and mahā-māyā-is described as follows. Kṛṣṇa's rāsa-līlā with the gopīs and the gopīs' bewilderment in respect to their husbands, fathers-in-law and other such relatives were arrangements of yogamāyā in which mahāmāyā had no influence. The Bhāgavatam gives sufficient evidence of this when it clearly says, yogamāyām upāśritaḥ. On the other hand, there were asuras headed by Śālva and kṣatriyas like Duryodhana who were bereft of devotional service in spite of seeing Kṛṣṇa's carrier Garuḍa and the universal form, and who could not understand Kṛṣṇa to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This was also bewilderment, but this bewilderment was due to mahāmāyā. Therefore it is to be concluded that the māyā which drags a person from the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called jaḍamāyā, and the māyā which acts on the transcendental platform is called yogamāyā. When Nanda Mahārāja was taken away by Varuṇa, he saw Kṛṣṇa's opulence, but nonetheless he thought of Kṛṣṇa as his son. Such feelings of parental love in the spiritual world are acts of yogamāyā, not of jaḍamāyā, or mahāmāyā. This is the opinion of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.



Śūrasenāṁś ca. The son of Kārtavīryārjuna was Śūrasena, and the countries he ruled were also called Śūrasena. This is noted by Sanātana Gosvāmī in his Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī commentary.



In regard to Mathurā, we find this quotation:



mathyate tu jagat sarvaṁ

brahma-jñānena yena vā

tat-sāra-bhūtaṁ yad yasyāṁ

mathurā sā nigadyate





When a self-realized soul acts in his transcendental position, his situation is called Mathurā. In other words, when one acts in the process of bhakti-yoga, he may live anywhere, but actually he lives in Mathurā, Vṛndāvana. Devotion to Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, is the essence of all knowledge, and wherever such knowledge is manifested is called Mathurā. Also, when one establishes bhakti-yoga, excluding all other methods, one's situation is called Mathurā. Yatra nityaṁ sannihito hariḥ: the place where Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, lives eternally is called Mathurā. The word nitya indicates eternality. The Supreme Lord is eternal, and His abode is also eternal. Goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūtaḥ [Bs. 5.37]. Although the Lord is always stationed in His abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana, He is present everywhere in fullness. This means that when the Supreme Lord descends on the surface of the world, His original abode is not vacant, for He can remain in His original abode and simultaneously descend upon Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, Ayodhyā and other places. He does not need to descend, since He is already present there; He simply manifests Himself.



Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has addressed Mahārāja Parīkṣit as tāta, or "beloved son." This is due to parental love in the heart of Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Because Kṛṣṇa was soon coming as the son of Vasudeva and Devakī, out of parental affection Śukadeva Gosvāmī addressed Mahārāja Parīkṣit as tāta, "my dear son."



In the Viśva-kośa dictionary, the word garbha is explained: garbho bhrūṇe arbhake kukṣāv ity ādi. When Kaṁsa was about to kill Devakī, Vasudeva wanted to dissuade him by the diplomacy of sāma and bheda. Sāma means "pacifying." Vasudeva wanted to pacify Kaṁsa by indicating relations, gain, welfare, identity and glorification. Reference to these five concerns constitutes sāma, and Vasudeva's presentation of fear in two situations-in this life and the next-is called bheda. Thus Vasudeva used both sāma and bheda to pacify Kaṁsa. praising Kaṁsa's qualifications was glorification, and praising him as a descendant of the bhoja-vaṁśa appealed to sambandha, relationship. Speaking of "your sister" was an appeal to identity. Speaking about killing a woman raises questions about fame and welfare, and arousing fear of the sinful act of killing one's sister during her marriage ceremony is an aspect of bheda. The Bhoja dynasty refers to those who were simply interested in sense gratification and were therefore not very aristocratic. Another meaning of bhoja is "fighting." These were indications of defamation for Kaṁsa. When Vasudeva addressed Kaṁsa as dīna-vatsala, this was excessive praise. Kaṁsa would accept calves as a form of revenue from his poor constituents, and therefore he was called dīna-vatsala. Vasudeva knew very well that he could not by force rescue Devakī from the imminent danger. Devakī was actually the daughter of Kaṁsa's uncle, and therefore she is described as suhṛt, meaning "relative." It is stated that Kaṁsa refrained from killing his close relation Devakī because if he had killed her, a great fight would have ensued among the other members of the family. Kaṁsa refrained from provoking this great danger of a family fight, for it would have caused many persons to lose their lives.



Formerly an asura named Kālanemi had six sons, named Haṁsa, Suvikrama, Krātha, Damana, Ripurmardana and Krodhahantā. They were known as the ṣaḍ-garbhas, or six garbhas, and they were all equally powerful and expert in military affairs. These ṣaḍ-garbhas gave up the association of Hiraṇyakaśipu, their grandfather, and underwent great austerities to satisfy Lord Brahmā, who, upon being satisfied, agreed to give them whatever benediction they might desire. When asked by Lord Brahmā to state what they wanted, the ṣāḍ-garbhas replied, "Dear Lord Brahmā, if you want to give us a benediction, give us the blessing that we will not be killed by any demigod, mahā-roga, Yakṣa, Gandharva-pati, Siddha, Cāraṇa or human being, nor by great sages who are perfect in their penances and austerities." Brahmā understood their purpose and fulfilled their desire. But when Hiraṇyakaśipu came to know of these events, he was very angry at his grandsons. "You have given up my association and have gone to worship Lord Brahmā," he said, "and therefore I no longer have any affection for you. You have tried to save yourselves from the hands of the demigods, but I curse you in this way: Your father will take birth as Kaṁsa and kill all of you because you will take birth as sons of Devakī." Because of this curse, the grandsons of Hiraṇyakaśipu had to take birth from the womb of Devakī and be killed by Kaṁsa, although he was previously their father. This description is mentioned in the Hari-vaṁśa, Viṣṇu-parva, Second Chapter. According to the comments of the Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī, the son of Devakī known as Kīrtimān was the third incarnation. In his first incarnation he was known as Smara and was the son of Marīci, and later he became the son of Kālanemi. This is mentioned in the histories.



An additional verse in this chapter of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is accepted by the Madhvācārya-sampradāya, represented by Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha. The verse is as follows:



atha kaṁsam upāgamya

nārado brahma-nandanaḥ

ekāntam upasaṅgamya

vākyam etad uvāca ha





atha-in this way; kaṁsam-unto Kaṁsa; upāgamya-after going; nāradaḥ-the great sage Nārada; brahma-nandanaḥ-who is the son of Brahmā; ekāntam upasaṅgamya-after going to a very solitary place; vākyam-the following instruction; etat-this; uvāca-said; ha-in the past.



Translation: "Thereafter, Nārada, the mental son of Lord Brahmā, approached Kaṁsa and, in a very solitary place, informed him of the following news."





The great saint Nārada descended from the heavenly planets to the forest of Mathurā and sent his messenger to Kaṁsa. When the messenger approached Kaṁsa and informed him of Nārada's arrival, Kaṁsa, the leader of the asuras, was very happy and immediately came out of his palace to receive Nārada, who was as bright as the sun, as powerful as fire, and free from all tinges of sinful activities. Kaṁsa accepted Nārada as his guest, offered him respectful obeisances and gave him a golden seat, brilliant like the sun. Nārada was a friend of the King of heaven, and thus he told Kaṁsa, the son of Ugrasena, "My dear hero, you have satisfied me with a proper reception, and therefore I shall tell you something secret and confidential. While I was coming here from Nandakānana through the Caitraratha forest, I saw a great meeting of the demigods, who followed me to Sumeru Parvata. We traveled through many holy places, and finally we saw the holy Ganges. While Lord Brahmā was consulting the other demigods at the top of Sumeru Hill, I was also present with my stringed instrument, the vīṇā. I shall tell you confidentially that the meeting was held just to plan to kill the asuras, headed by you. You have a younger sister named Devakī, and it is a fact that her eighth son will kill you." (reference: Hari-vaṁśa, Viṣṇu-parva 1.2–16)



No one can blame Nāradajī for encouraging Kaṁsa to kill the sons of Devakī. The saint Nārada is always a well-wisher for human society, and he wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, to descend to this world as soon as possible so that the society of demigods would be pleased and would see Kaṁsa and his friends killed by Kṛṣṇa. Kaṁsa would also attain salvation from his nefarious activities, and this too would very much please the demigods and their followers. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks in this connection that Nārada Muni sometimes did things that were beneficial to the demigods and the demons simultaneously. Śrī Vīrarāghava Ācārya, in his commentary, has included the following half-verse in this regard: asurāḥ sarva evaita lokopadrava-kāriṇaḥ. Asuras are always disturbing elements for human society.





Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, First Chapter, of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, entitled "The Advent of Lord Kṛṣṇa: Introduction."



Chapter Two



Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kṛṣṇa in the Womb





As described in this chapter, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead entered the womb of Devakī to kill Kaṁsa, all the demigods understood that the Lord was living within Devakī's womb, and therefore in veneration they offered Him the Garbha-stuti prayers.





Kaṁsa, under the protection of his father-in-law, Jarāsandha, and with the help of his demoniac friends like Pralamba, Baka, Cāṇūra, Tṛṇāvarta, Aghāsura, Muṣṭika, Bāṇa and Bhaumāsura, began oppressing the members of the Yadu dynasty. Therefore, the members of the Yadu dynasty left their homes and sought shelter in such states as Kuru, Pañcāla, Kekaya, Śālva and Vidarbha. Only some of them stayed with Kaṁsa, as nominal friends.





After Kaṁsa killed the ṣaḍ-garbhas, the six sons of Devakī, one after another, Anantadeva entered Devakī's womb and was transferred to the womb of Rohiṇī by the manipulation of Yogamāyā, who was following the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself, who was soon to appear as the eighth son of Devakī, ordered Yogamāyā to take birth from the womb of Yaśodādevī. Because Kṛṣṇa and His potency, Yogamāyā, appeared simultaneously as brother and sister, the world is full of Vaiṣṇavas and śāktas, and there is certainly some rivalry between them. Vaiṣṇavas worship the Supreme Lord, whereas śāktas, according to their desires, worship Yogamāyā in forms like Durgā, Bhadrakālī and Caṇḍikā. Following the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yogamāyā transferred Baladeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, the seventh child of Devakī, from the womb of Devakī to the womb of Rohiṇī. Because Saṅkarṣaṇa appears in order to increase love of Kṛṣṇa, He is known as Baladeva. One may take auspicious strength from Him to become a devotee of the Lord, and therefore He is also known as Balabhadra.





After Yogamāyā transferred the seventh child of Devakī to the womb of Rohiṇī, the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared within the heart of Vasudeva and transferred Himself into the heart of Devakī. Because the Lord was present in her heart, Devakī, as her pregnancy continued, appeared effulgent. Upon seeing this effulgence, Kaṁsa was full of anxiety, but he could not harm Devakī because of their family relationship. Thus he began indirectly thinking of Kṛṣṇa and became fully Kṛṣṇa conscious.





Meanwhile, because of the Lord's presence within the womb of Devakī, all the demigods came to offer the Lord their prayers. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, they said, is eternally the Absolute Truth. The spiritual soul is more important than the gross body, and the Supersoul, Paramātmā, is still more important than the soul. The Supreme Godhead is absolutely independent, and His incarnations are transcendental. The prayers of the demigods glorify and exalt devotees and explain the fate of persons who superficially consider themselves liberated from the conditions of material nature. A devotee is always safe. When a devotee fully surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord, he is completely liberated from the fear of material existence. By explaining why the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends, the prayers of the demigods clearly confirm the Lord's statement in Bhagavad-gītā (4.7):





yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham



"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself."





TEXTS 1–2



śrī-śuka uvāca

pralamba-baka-cāṇūra-

tṛṇāvarta-mahāśanaiḥ

muṣṭikāriṣṭa-dvivida-

pūtanā-keśī-dhenukaiḥ

anyaiś cāsura-bhūpālair



bāṇa-bhaumādibhir yutaḥ

yadūnāṁ kadanaṁ cakre

balī māgadha-saṁśrayaḥ

SYNONYMS



śrī-śukaḥ uvāca-Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pralamba-by the asura named Pralamba; baka-by the asura named Baka; cāṇūra-by the asura named Cāṇūra; tṛṇāvarta-by the asura named Tṛṇāvarta; mahāśanaiḥ-by Aghāsura; muṣṭika-by the asura named Muṣṭika; ariṣṭa-by the asura Ariṣṭa; dvivida-by the asura named Dvivida; pūtanā-by Pūtanā; keśī-by Keśī; dhenukaiḥ-by Dhenuka; anyaiḥ ca-and by many others; asura-bhūpālaiḥ-by demoniac kings on the surface of the globe; bāṇa-by King Bāṇa; bhauma-by Bhaumāsura; ādibhiḥ-and by others as well; yutaḥ-being assisted; yadūnām-of the kings of the Yadu dynasty; kadanam-persecution; cakre-regularly performed; balī-very powerful; māgadha-saṁśrayaḥ-under the protection of Jarāsandha, the King of Magadha.





Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Under the protection of Magadharāja, Jarāsandha, the powerful Kaṁsa began persecuting the kings of the Yadu dynasty. In this he had the cooperation of demons like Pralamba, Baka, Cāṇūra, Tṛṇāvarta, Aghāsura, Muṣṭika, Ariṣṭa, Dvivida, Pūtanā, Keśī, Dhenuka, Bāṇāsura, Narakāsura and many other demoniac kings on the surface of the earth.





This verse supports the following statement given by the Lord in Bhagavad-gītā (4.7–8):



yadā yadā hi dharmasya

glānir bhavati bhārata

abhyutthānam adharmasya

tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham





paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ

vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām

dharma-saṁsthāpanārthāya

sambhavāmi yuge yuge





"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself. To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium."



The Lord's purpose in maintaining this material world is to give everyone a chance to go back home, back to Godhead, but kings and political leaders unfortunately try to hinder the purpose of the Lord, and therefore the Lord appears, either personally or with His plenary portions, to set things right. It is therefore said:



garbhaṁ sañcārya rohiṇyāṁ

devakyā yogamāyayā

tasyāḥ kukṣiṁ gataḥ kṛṣṇo

dvitīyo vibudhaiḥ stutaḥ





"Kṛṣṇa appeared in the womb of Devakī after transferring Baladeva to the womb of Rohiṇī by the power of Yogamāyā." Yadubhiḥ sa vyarudhyata. The kings of the Yadu dynasty were all devotees, but there were many powerful demons, such as Śālva, who began to persecute them. At that time, Jarāsandha, who was Kaṁsa's father-in-law, was extremely powerful, and therefore Kaṁsa took advantage of his protection and the help of the demons in persecuting the kings of the Yadu dynasty. The demons naturally appeared more powerful than the demigods, but ultimately, because of help received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demons were defeated and the demigods triumphant.
